HOBART, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-9-2021
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2024-01
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER XIII, SECTIONS 135.27 THROUGH SECTIONS 135.34,
SECTION 135.45, SECTION 135.46, SECTION 135.60, AND SECTION 135.99 OF THE CODE
OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART, OKLAHOMA, TO INCLUDE NICOTINE AND VAPOR
PRODUCTS; AND UPDATE THE AGE REQUIREMENT FOR PURCHASING TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND
VAPOR PRODUCTS FROM 18 YEARS TO 21 YEARS OF AGE AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
 
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Hobart, Oklahoma that Chapter
XIII, Sections 135.27 through 135.34, Section 135.45, Section 135.46, Section
135.60, and Section 135.99 of the Code of Ordinances shall be amended as
follows:
SECTIONS INCLUDE NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS AND UPDATE AGE FROM 18 YEARS TO 21
YEARS OF AGE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART.
 
PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
 
§ 135.27 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
 NICOTINE PRODUCT. Any product that contains nicotine extracted or isolated
from plants, vegetables, fruit, herbs, weeds, genetically modified organic
matter, or that is synthetic in origin and is intended for human consumption;
provided however, this term shall not include products approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for smoking cessation.    
PERSON. Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 21
years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the
individual and appears on its face to be valid.
   SAMPLE. A tobacco, nicotine or vapor product distributed to members of the
public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product.
   SAMPLING. The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller checks, by means of a
transaction scan device, the validity of a driver’s license or other
government-issued photo identification.
   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of devices
used at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s license or other government-issued photo identification.
VAPOR PRODUCT. Any noncombustible products, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. “Vapor products” shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic device. “Vapor products”
do not include any products regulated by the United States Food and Drug
Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.    
(Prior Code, § 10-432) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
§ 135.28 FURNISHING, GIVING, OR SALE OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS TO
PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any manner
any tobacco, nicotine and vapor product to another person who is under 21 years
of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco, nicotine, and vapor product on
behalf of any such person. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for
an employee under the age of 21 years of age to handle tobacco, nicotine and
vapor products when required in the performance of the employee’s duties.
   (B)   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco, nicotine, and
vapor products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or
recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that
the prospective purchaser might be less than 21 years of age.
   (C)   If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco,
nicotine, and vapor products has demanded proof of age from a prospective
purchaser or recipient who is not less than 21 years of age, the failure to
subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a violation of division
(B) above.
   (D) (1)   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably
relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to
this section. A person cited for violating this section shall be deemed to have
reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not be found guilty
of such violation, if such person proves that:
         (a)   The individual who purchased or received the tobacco, nicotine,
and vapor product presented a driver’s license or other government-issued photo
identification purporting to establish that such individual was 21 years of age
or older; and
         (b)   The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the
driver’s license or other government-issued photo identification presented by
such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan
device.
      (2)   Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any
person cited for a violation of this section if such person failed to exercise
reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture
appearing on the driver’s license or other government-issued photo
identification was that of the individual who presented it. The availability of
the defense described in this subsection does not affect the availability of
any other defense under any other provision of law.
   (E)   If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which
tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products are sold at retail, the employee shall be
guilty of the violation and shall be subject to fine as set forth in § 135.99.
Each violation by any employee of an owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco,
nicotine, and vapor products shall be deemed a violation against the owner for
purposes of a license suspension pursuant to division (B) above. An owner of a
store licensed to sell tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products shall not be
deemed to be in violation of this section for any acts constituting a violation
by any person, when the violation occurs prior to actual employment of the
person by the store owner, or the violation occurs at a location other than the
owner’s retail store. For purposes of determining the liability of a person
controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations, for any
violations of divisions (A) or (B) above, each individual franchise or business
location shall be deemed a separate entity.
(Prior Code, § 10-433) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 
§ 135.29 RECEIPT OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER 21
YEARS OF AGE
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person who is less than 21 years of age to
purchase, receive, or accept receipt of, or have in their possession, a
tobacco, nicotine, and vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any
purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent, or not actually his or her
own, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco, nicotine, and
vapor product. Provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for an employee who
is less than 21 years of age to handle such tobacco nicotine, and vapor,
products when required in the performance of such employee’s duties.
   (B)   When a person violates division (A) above, he or she shall be guilty
of an offense and subject to the provisions of § 135.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-434) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 
§ 135.30 PROPER SIGNAGE REQUIRED.
   Every person who sells or displays tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products at
retail shall post conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a
sign, as specified by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE)
Commission, stating the following: “IT’S THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL TOBACCO,
NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.” The sign shall
also provide the toll-free number operated by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement (ABLE) Commission for the purpose of reporting violations of the
Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act. The notice required by this section
shall be the only notice required to be posted or maintained in any store that
sells tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products at retail.
(Prior Code, § 10-435) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.31 NOTICE TO RETAIL EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of selling tobacco, nicotine, and
vapor products at a retail store shall notify each individual employed by that
person as a retail salesclerk that state and local law:
      (1)   Prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco, nicotine, and vapor
products to any person under 21 years of age and the purchase or receipt of
tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products by any person under 21 years of age; and
      (2)   Requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser
or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance
that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be less than 21 years of age.
   (B)   This notice shall be provided before the individual commences work as
a retail sales clerk. The individual shall signify that he or she has received
the requisite notice by reading and signing a notice stating the following:
“I understand that state law prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco,
nicotine, and vapor products to persons less than 21 years of age and out-of-
package sales and requires proof of age of purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective
purchaser or recipient may be under 21 years of age. I promise, as a condition
of my employment, to obey the law. I understand that violations by me may be
punishable by fines, suspension, or non-issuance of my driver’s license. In
addition, I understand that violations by me may subject the store owner to
fines or license suspension.”
(Prior Code, § 10-436) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
§ 135.32 LIMITED ACCESS TO VENDING MACHINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco, nicotine, and vapor
products through a vending machine unless the vending machine is located:
   (A)   In areas of factories, businesses, offices, or other places that are
not open to the public; and
   (B)   In places that are open to the public, but to which persons under 21
years of age are not admitted.
(Prior Code, § 10-437) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 
§ 135.33 DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCT SAMPLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute tobacco,
nicotine, and vapor products or product samples to any person under 21 years of
age.
   (B)   No person shall distribute tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products or
product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is within
300 feet of any playground, school, or other facility when the facility is
being used primarily by persons under 21 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 10-438) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 
§ 135.34 TRANSFER OF ANY MATERIAL OR DEVICE USED IN SMOKING, CHEWING OR
CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any manner to
another person who is under 21 years of age any material or device used in the
smoking, chewing, or other method of consumption of tobacco, nicotine, and
vapor products including cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials
of all types, and other items designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion
of tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products.
(Prior Code, § 10-442) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 
SALE AND ACCESS TO TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
§ 135.45 SALE OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL SEALED
PACKAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell tobacco, nicotine and vapor products
except in the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the
manufacturer.
(Prior Code, § 10-439) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 § 135.46 NO PUBLIC ACCESS OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE AND VAPOR PRODUCTS.
   It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for sale
tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products in any manner that allows public access
to the tobacco, nicotine, and vapor product without assistance from the person
displaying the tobacco, nicotine, and vapor product or an employee or the owner
of the store. The provisions of this section shall not apply to retail stores
which do not admit into the store persons under 21 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 10-440) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see § 135.99
 
ENFORCEMENT
§ 135.60 RESTRICTIONS ON MANNER OF ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any conviction for a violation of any section within §§ 135.25 through
135.34, 135.45, and 135.46, and any negative results from compliance checks
performed by a police officer pursuant to division (C) below, shall be reported
in writing to the ABLE Commission within 30 days of such conviction or
compliance check. Such reports shall be compiled in the manner prescribed by
the ABLE Commission.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining second or subsequent violations, both
the offenses penalized by the ABLE Commission as administrative fines and the
offenses penalized by the Municipality and reported to the ABLE Commission
shall be considered together in such determination.
   (C)   Persons under 21 years of age may be enlisted by the city to assist in
conducting compliance checks and enforcement; provided, such persons may be
used to test compliance only if written parental consent has been provided and
the testing is conducted under the direct supervision of the ABLE Commission or
conducted by another law enforcement agency if such agency has given written
notice to the ABLE Commission in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
This division (C) shall not apply to the use of persons under 21 years of age
to test compliance if the test is being conducted by or on behalf of a retailer
of tobacco, nicotine and vapor products, as defined in 68 O.S. § 301, at any
location the retailer of tobacco, nicotine and vapor products is authorized to
sell tobacco, nicotine and vapor products. Use of persons under 21 years of age
to test compliance shall be unlawful and punishable by assessment of an
administrative fine of $100.
(Prior Code, § 10-441) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
 
 
 
 § 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly violates any provision of §§ 135.01 through
135.10, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 10-421)
   (B) (1)   When a person violates § 135.28(A) or (B), he or she shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine as
follows:
         (a)   Not more than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not more than $200 for the second offense within a two-year
period following the first offense;
         (c)   Not more than $300 for a third offense within a two-year period
following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty, the store’s
license to sell tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products may be suspended for a
period not exceeding 30 days; or
         (d)   Not more than $300 for a fourth or subsequent offense within a
two-year period following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty,
the store’s license to sell tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products may be
suspended for a period not exceeding 60 days.
      (2)   Pursuant to state law, when it has been determined by a Municipal
Court that a penalty shall include a license suspension, the ABLE Commission
will notify the Oklahoma Tax Commission, and the Tax Commission will suspend
the store’s license to sell tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products at the
location where the offense occurred for the period of time prescribed by the
ABLE Commission.
      (3)   Upon failure to pay fines within 90 days of the assessment of such
fine, the following actions shall occur:
         (a)   Upon failure of the employee to pay the fine within 90 days of
the day of the assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall notify
the Department of Public Safety and the Department will, pursuant to state law,
suspend or not issue a driver’s license to the employee until proof of payment
has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
         (b)   Upon failure of a store owner to pay the administrative fine
within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall
notify the Oklahoma Tax Commission and the Tax Commission shall suspend the
store’s license to sell tobacco, nicotine, and vapor products until proof of
payment has been furnished to the Oklahoma Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 10-433)
 
   (C) (1)   When a person violates § 135.29, he or she shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of:
         (a)   Not to exceed $100 for a first offense; and
         (b)   Not to exceed $200 for a second or subsequent offense within a
one-year period following the first offense.
      (2)   Upon failure of the individual to pay such fine within 90 days of
the day of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall notify the Department of
Public Safety, and, by operation of state law, the Department shall suspend or
not issue a driver’s license to the individual until proof of payment has been
furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 10-434)
   (D)   When a person violates § 135.30, he or she shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50
for each day a violation occurs. Each day a violation is continuing shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-435)
   (E) (1)   When a person violates any provision of § 135.33, he or she shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of:
         (a)   Not more than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not more than $200 for the second offense; and
         (c)   Not more than $300 for a third or subsequent offense.
      (2)   Upon failure of any individual to pay an administrative fine within
90 days of the assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall notify
the Department of Public Safety, and the Department, pursuant to state law,
shall suspend or not issue a driver’s license to the individual until proof of
payment has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 10-438)
   (F)   When a person violates § 135.34, an administrative fine of not more
than $100 for each offense may be imposed upon the person.
(Prior Code, § 10-442)
   (G)   When a person violates § 135.45, the Municipal Court Clerk shall
assess such person an administrative fine of not more than $200 for each
offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-439)
 
 
   (H)   When a person violates § 135.46, he or she shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200
for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-440)
(Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010; Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010)
 
 
 
EMERGENCY CLAUSE
 
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health, and safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof
this ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage,
approval and publication as required by the state laws of Oklahoma.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by 3/4 th majority of the members of the City Council of
the City of Hobart, Oklahoma, this 12 th day of September 2023.
 
 
   SEAL                            
   ATTEST:         
                                                          Jeff Allen, Mayor
_______________________________
Charlotte Giddens, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2024-03
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE V, CHAPTER 50, SECTIONS 50.01 THROUGH SECTIONS
50.03, OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART, OKLAHOMA, ESTABLISHING
THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS, INCLUDING MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM, MUNICIPAL
SEWER SYSTEM, MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE SYSTEM AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
 
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Hobart, Oklahoma that Title
V, Chapter 50, Sections 50.01 through 50.03 of the Code of Ordinances shall be
amended as follows:
CHAPTER AND SECTIONS ESTABLISH THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS TO INCLUDE
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM, MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM AND MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE SYSTEM
OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART.
CHAPTER 50
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS
 
50.01 MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS.
 
1. The city provides water, sewer, and solid waste services for the residents
of said municipality.
 
2. Water, sewer, and solid waste services are operated through the Hobart
Public Works Authority, a municipal trust of which the city is the beneficiary.
Said trust shall have control over the operation, maintenance, and
administration of said systems and services.
 
50.02 USE OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS.
 
   Every residential inhabitant within the corporate limits of the city and
every commercial or business entity or enterprise who may practically do so,
shall secure all of its potable water requirements from the water system owned
by said city and leased to the Hobart Public Works Authority; connect to the
sanitary sewer system owned by said city and leased to said Authority, and not
otherwise dispose of sewage, unless it is impossible or not feasible to do so;
and utilize the municipal solid waste collection and disposal system, unless it
is impossible or not feasible to do so.
50.03 OPERATION OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS.
 
1.   The operations of the municipal water, sewer and solid waste systems shall
be the responsibility of the Hobart Public Works Authority; said Authority
shall have the power to establish fees, rates, charges and such other rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the efficient operation of these systems.
 
   2.   Administrative processes for all systems may be combined for more
efficient operation, at the discretion of the City Council and the Hobart
Public Works Authority Board.
3.   Ordinances relating to these municipal utility systems shall be
applicable, whenever possible, to all municipal utility systems, including
those operated by the Public Works Authority.
 
50.04 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.
 
All customers using any municipal utility service shall keep their service
pipes and other apparatus in good repair and in proper operation, and shall not
unnecessarily waste water nor contribute to unsanitary conditions.
 
50.05 NONLIABILITY OF CITY FOR UTILITY INTERRUPTION.
 
In all cases where the city’s water supply fails, whether from natural causes
or accidents of any kind, the city shall not be held liable for any damage of
any kind by reason of such failure.
 
50.06 RIGHTS RESERVED.
 
The city reserves the right to shut off the water supply without notice for
repairs or extensions and no liability shall attach therefrom.
 
50.07 INTERFERENCE WITH HYDRANTS; DAMAGING UTILITY SYSTEM.
 
  1.   Fire Hydrants: see 131.15.
 
   2.   Tampering with Equipment of Utility Systems: see 131.06.
 
50.08 ACCESS TO CITY AND AUTHORITY AGENTS.
 
   1. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to obstruct or deny access
to, or prevent the reading of water meters in the city by the city, its agents,
employees, or officers by parking any vehicle or place any obstruction over, or
on top of, the water meter covers or to permit any vehicle to be parked or
located above or on top of the water meters. Each day’s continuation of any
such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
 
   2. It is unlawful to make threats of any type to officers, agents, or
employees of the city in the performance of their duties or to prevent the
officers, agents, or employees from performing their official duties in reading
the water meters or by limiting the access to water meters in any other manner
not limited to those mentioned above.
(Prior Code, § 17-102) Penalty, see §10.99.
 
50.09 PENALTY.
 
Every person who violates any provision of this title or maintains or permits
to continue any situation defined by this title as unlawful, shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any amount not to
exceed the limits established in section § 10.99 of this code. Every day upon
which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
 
 
 
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
 
50.10 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make a connection
to the municipal water system without first complying with all applicable
provisions of this code.
 
50.11 MANDATORY USE OF WATER SYSTEM.
 
   1.   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, education, recreation or other purposes situated within
the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is
now located, or may in the future be located, a city water line, are hereby
required, at their expense, to connect their facility with the proper city
water line (in accordance with all city requirements) and pay all city fees and
use charges therefor, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of
official city notice to do so; provided, that the city water line is within
three hundred feet (300') of the property line.
a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any structure designed or
built for human occupancy without an active water service to it.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any structure, designed or
built for human occupancy to allow the occupancy of that structure by any
person unless there is active water service to the structure.
         c.   Active water service means water service to the structure itself
and does not mean the temporary disruption of water service due to temporary
repairs being made to the owner’s water line or the city’s water line.
 
   2.   Private Water Wells:
 
     a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or establish a
private water well to serve any residence or facility of any kind, unless he
shall first be connected to the municipal water system and pay the monthly
water fees and charges; provided, that he meets all the requirements for
mandatory hookup established in subsection 1 above.
 
        b.   Exception: Where a city water line does not lie within three
hundred feet (300') of the property line, or is not scheduled to be placed
within three hundred feet (300') of the property line in the near future (1 to
5 years), an individual may utilize or establish a private water well without
connection to the municipal water system and therefore, without payment of the
municipal water system fees and charges.
 
   3.   No unauthorized person shall make any connections with any city water
line without first having made an application therefore to the city clerk-
treasurer, and without first having paid the established fee.
 
   4.   Rural Water District: The requirements of this section shall not apply
to persons currently being served directly by an existing rural water district.
 
 
 
50.12 WATER RATES, FEES, AND CHARGES; PAYMENT OF BILLS.
 
   1.   Water rates, fees, and charges shall be set by Motion or Resolution
approved by the Hobart Public Works Authority.
 
   2.   Water service payments shall be due on the fifteenth (15th) of the
month. On the sixteenth (16th) a ten percent (10%) penalty fee will be added to
the account and final notices mailed out on the same day. If overdue accounts
are not paid before 8:00 a.m. on the twenty-sixth (26th), a twenty-five-dollar
($25.00) service fee will be added to the account and service will be
disconnected. Before the service can be reconnected, all charges and fees must
be paid in full.
 
50.13 WATER AND WATER SERVICE PROVIDED BY CITY.
 
The city provides potable water to all water utility customers. Water service
may be denied or terminated at the city's sole discretion to any customer and
any premises:
 
      a.   Until all delinquent bill(s) or charges for prior or current city
utility services are paid.
 
     b.   Who fails to comply with any provision of this code.
 
c.   Who uses an alias, trade name, business name, the name of a relative or
another
person as a device to escape payment of an unpaid obligation for prior service
or for current service.
 
d.   If a customer provides false information or refuses to provide any legally
requested
information concerning utility services or use.
 
50.14 APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT FOR SERVICE.
 
   1.  Every utility customer desiring to have a property or properties
connected with the water system shall make application to utility customer
service and shall sign a contract therefor upon a printed form to be furnished
for that purpose and shall make a deposit in an amount as set by council to be
held by the city as security for the payment of the water bill. No water shall
be turned on unless the deposit has been paid.
 
   2.  An application for service is not transferable from one utility customer
to another unless written authorization is obtained from utility customer
service. Service can be transferred and connected for the same utility customer
moving from one address to another by paying the required fee. The utility
customer service department may require an update to the utility customer
account history.
 
   3. Service will begin in the name of the utility customer effective on the
date the service is turned on by the public works department.
 
  4.  A legible copy of any written lease in the case of a renter/tenant
applying for service shall be attached to the application.
 
   5.  A separate application is required for each service connection to the
main. If one service connection serves multiple users (such as in an office
complex and/or apartment complex, duplex, triplex, etc.), the applicant is
responsible for the water usage, monthly bill, deposit, etc., for that
connection.
  
   6. Each utility customer shall be liable to the city to pay for all water
used. Water used is based on meter readings.
 
   7.  City reserves the right to apply meter deposits toward delinquent water,
sewer, and sanitation service bills. If the meter deposit is adjusted towards
delinquent and/or unpaid bills, it is the responsibility of the utility
customer to pay a new deposit for water service.
 
   8. Authority to Increase Deposit Amount:
 
         a. The city reserves the right to require a higher deposit amount if a
customer has received utility service in the past and had utility service
disconnected for nonpayment. An existing customer's deposit may be increased if
any of the following conditions occur a) utility service is disconnected for
failure to pay; b) check returned for insufficient funds; c) use of service
without proper written city authorization.
 
      b. If the customer service department receives sufficient evidence to
indicate that a customer has provided false information to establish service at
a new location to avoid the payment of charges owing at a previous location,
the city shall transfer the charges owed to the current account, and the
charges will become a part of the customer's utility bill at which time the
entire bill becomes subject to the city's payment policy.
 
      c.   If the city leaves a water service connected to vacant premises, it
shall not constitute consent by the city for any new occupant of such premises
to use the service without making proper application for water service.
Occupants using water service without deposit and/or application shall be
liable to the city for the deposit amount, as well as payment for all water
received, which will be billed at the prevailing rates for all services
available at the premises. Said occupant will be required to show a lease or
other document specifying when occupancy began and will be billed back to the
reading nearest to the date of the lease. Failure to make an application and/or
deposit may result in immediate termination of service.
 
50.15 INJURING WATER SYSTEM.
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or deface, or in any way tamper
with, any portion of the municipal water system, or to turn the water off or on
from any main at any time or place, unless he is duly authorized so to do by
the city.
 
50.16 RIGHTS RESERVED.
 
The city reserves the right to shut off the water supply without notice for
repairs or extensions and no liability shall attach therefrom.
 
50.17 PENALTY.
 
See section 50.08 of this title for penalty provisions.
 
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM
50.18 USE OF MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM.
 
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any
connection to the municipal sewer system without first complying with all
applicable provisions of this code of ordinances and all requirements of the
Hobart Public Works Authority.
 
50.19 MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS.
 
   1.   The owners of all houses, buildings or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the
corporate limits of the city and abutting on any street or alley or right-of-
way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city, are hereby
required, at their own expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to have such facilities connected directly with the proper public sewer
within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of official municipal
notice to do so; provided that such public sewer is within three hundred (300’)
feet of the property line.
 
   2.   Said notice (above) shall be served by any designated agent of the city
by delivering a true and correct copy to the property owner or leaving the same
at said person’s usual place of residence with a member of the family over the
age of 15 years, or if such owner cannot be found, by posting a copy of such
notice at the front entrance of the building involved.
 
   3.   Any person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the terms
of this section after having been notified so to do, as provided herein, shall
be guilty of an offense. In the event of a continuous violation of this section
by any property owner, the city may discontinue the furnishing of water to such
property owner, until such time as a proper sewer connection has been made.
 
50.20 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
 
   1.   Except as hereinafter provided in this code of ordinances, it shall be
unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended to be used for the disposal of
sewage, within the corporate limits of the city.
 
   2.   Where a connection to a public sanitary sewer line is not required
under the provisions of 50.19, a private septic tank facility for sewage
disposal maybe constructed and maintained, provided it is constructed and
maintained under the rules and regulations of the Local and County Health
Officer, and in compliance with the recommendations and requirements of the
State Department of Health. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to
any public sewer or natural outlet.
 
   3.   The owners of private septic tanks shall operate and maintain the same
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city, and no statement
contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Local, County or State Health Officers.
 
   4.   At such times as, a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a septic tank, a direct connection shall be made to such public sewer in
compliance with 50.19, and the septic tank shall immediately be abandoned and
filled with suitable material.
 
50.21 SEWER RATES AND FEES.
 
   1.   Sewer rates shall be based on water usage, and rates and fees shall be
set by Motion or Resolution approved by the Hobart Public Works Authority.
 
2.   The assessments referred to above shall be billed to each user monthly
and, in the event of the failure of any user to pay said assessment when due,
the city shall have the right to have the Hobart Public Works Authority
discontinue furnishing water to said user.
 
 
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE SYSTEM
 
50.22 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL DECLARED TO BE A MUNICIPAL FUNCTION.
 
   1.   The collection and disposal of garbage, trash and refuse and other
solid waste is hereby declared to be a municipal function of the city through
the Hobart Public Works Authority. The use of the city’s solid waste collection
and disposal system is required of all houses, buildings or property used for
human occupancy within the city limits. As a protection of the public health,
the police powers of said city shall be invoked when necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter. In addition, the city may collect and dispose of
refuse, as it deems necessary, provided that such disposal shall be an approved
method of incineration (not open burning) or by landfill and daily cover.
 
   2.   Only those persons that are regular customers of the solid waste system
for the city shall utilize the refuse collection services provided. It shall be
unlawful and an offense for any person not an authorized customer of the solid
waste to deposit, cause to be deposited or assist in depositing refuse, trash,
or solid waste in the containers of an authorized customer for its disposal by
the solid waste system. Any person violating subsection 2. shall be subject to
the maximum fine that may be imposed by the city.
 
3.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, except under contract
as hereinafter provided for, to remove or cause to be removed any solid waste
materials from any garbage receptacle used for the deposit of same, or to
transport or haul, carry, or otherwise move over any of the streets, alleys, or
other public ways any solid waste material.
50.23 PURPOSE.
 
   It is the purpose of this article and it is hereby declared to be the policy
of the city, pursuant to the authority of the State Solid Waste Management Act
(27A O.S. §§ 2-10-101 et seq. inclusive and as amended), to regulate the
collection and disposal of solid wastes in a manner that will protect the
public health and welfare, prevent air and water pollution, prevent the spread
of disease and the creation of nuisances, conserve the natural resources, and
enhance and preserve the beauty and quality of the community’s environment.
 
 
50.24 DEFINITIONS.
 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
 
   REFUSE: Tree trimmings, junked building and roofing materials, manufacturing
waste, rocks, dirt, and other waste material not defined as SOLID WASTE or
TRASH.
 
   SOLID WASTE: Includes all putrescible and nonputrescible refuse in solid or
semi-solid form, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, rubbish, ashes
or incinerator residue, street refuse, dead animals, demolition wastes,
construction wastes, solid or semi-solid commercial and industrial wastes and
hazardous wastes (including explosives, pathological wastes, chemical wastes,
herbicide, and pesticide wastes).
 
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: The entire process of storage, collection,
transportation, processing and burying solid waste at or in a site approved by
the State Department of Environmental Quality.
 
   TRASH: Paper, rags, containers of paper, tin cans, yard and house sweepings
and all other household waste, but not tree trimmings, building and
manufacturing waste, sewage and rocks, raw dirt, rainwater, and other liquid
refuse properly disposable through the sanitary sewers of the city.
 
50.25 ADMINISTRATION.
 
   The contractor hired by the city shall have charge of the collection and
disposal of garbage and other refuse under the contract with the city, under
the direction of the city manager.
 
50.26 CHARGES FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSITION.
 
   1.   For the purpose of paying the indebtedness of the Hobart Public Works
Authority, of which the city is a part, pursuant to the authority of the
Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act of 1970, and to pay the costs of operating
and maintaining the system, there is hereby levied and assessed rates and
charges against every owner, occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit,
business, motel, hotel, boarding house, industrial or institutional user unit
within or without the city limits as they currently exist, or as they might
from time to time be changed according to law.
 
   2.   Rates for solid waste collection and disposition shall be set by Motion
or Resolution approved by the city through the Hobart Public Works Authority.
 
50.27 ACCUMULATION; CONTAINERS; DUMPSTERS.
 
  1. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any lot or piece of
ground to allow solid waste to accumulate thereon so as to cause an offensive
odor to be emitted therefrom or to become injurious or dangerous to the health
of the neighborhood or any inhabitant thereof.
Any such condition is hereby declared a violation of this chapter and
punishable as such, and, in addition, is declared to be a nuisance and may be
abated as such.
 
  2.  Any person constructing any structure within the City shall, prior to
construction on any premises, furnish and place on said premises a container of
suitable size and design to contain all solid waste which might, by the winds
or elements, be distributed and blown from the premises. Said container shall
be used by the person concerned at all times to keep the premises from becoming
unsightly with solid waste and shall always be kept covered. Removal and
disposal of all construction debris shall be the responsibility of the
individual holding the building permit.
 
 3.  Any person who fails to keep the premises on which any structure is being
built or installed free from solid waste and who allows said waste to blow or
be carried from the premises to adjoining or other property or into the streets
shall be deemed guilty of causing a nuisance and shall be subject to the
penalties in this code prescribed therefor.
 
50.28 BULKY WASTE COLLECTION.
 
The contractor will provide curbside bulky waste and limb pick up once a month
per Residential Unit.
 
1. The resident shall call the contractor to schedule a bulky waste or limb
pick up at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance.
   
2. Collection of bulk items and limbs will be at the discretion of the
contractor.
    
   3.   Bulk items or limbs shall not be placed curbside until the weekend
prior to pick up and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
 
4.   Contractor will pick up as much as three (3) cubic yards of bulk items and
limbs. Bulky items over the three (3) cubic yards will not be collected and
shall be removed from curbside within twenty-four (24) hours of scheduled pick
up. Such bulky items remaining curbside after twenty-four hours of the
scheduled pickup shall be a violation of this section.
 
5.   List of requirements (including items allowed and items not allowed) by
the contractor for Bulky Waste Pick Up will be maintained at city hall. Items
not allowed to be picked up are the absolute responsibility and expense of the
owner or person having the same to properly dispose of those items.
 
6.   Limbs shall be securely tied in bundles not over four (4’) feet in length
and stacked at the curb. Bundles shall not exceed fifty (50lbs) pounds in
weight. Limbs which are not bundled or exceed the weight or length limit will
not be collected.
 
7.   Yard clippings and dead leaves shall be placed at the curb in suitable
disposal bags and shall not exceed 35 pounds in weight.
 
 
 
 
 
 
50.29 BURNING OF SOLID WASTE.
 
   1.   It shall be an offense for any person to start or maintain any fire or
cause any fire to be started or maintained for the purpose of unlawfully
burning or incinerating any solid waste.
   2.   It shall be an offense to construct or install, within any building in
the city, an unlawful incinerator designed to burn solid waste.
 
50.30 PENALTY.
 
See section 50.08 of this title for penalty provisions.
 
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the City Council of Hobart on the 11th day of June 2024.
 
                  _________________________________
                  Jeff Allen, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
________________________________
Charlotte Giddens, City Clerk
 
 
EMERGENCY CLAUSE
 
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health, and safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof
this ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage,
approval and publication as required by the state laws of Oklahoma.
PASSED AND APPROVED by 3/4 th majority of the members of the City Council of
the City of Hobart, Oklahoma, this 11 th day of June 2024.
 
                                                              Jeff Allen, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
 
_______________________________
Charlotte Giddens, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2025-01
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE IX, CHAPTER 95, SECTION 95.20 (A) AND (B)OF THE
CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART, OKLAHOMA, CHANGING THE NUMBER OF
MEMBERS OF THE LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS FROM NINE MEMBERS TO FIVE MEMBERS AND
STAGGERING OF THE APPOINTMENTS OF THE DIRECTORS AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF HOBART, KIOWA COUNTY,
OKLAHOMA THAT TITLE IX, CHAPTER 95, SECTION 95.20 (A) AND (B) OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART SHALL BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS:
CHAPTER AND SECTION OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HOBART
ESTABLISHING THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS FOR THE LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS TO BE
FIVE MEMBERS AND STAGGERED APPOINTMENTS OF THE DIRECTORS.
CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC LIBRARY
 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 SECTION 95.20 CREATION: MEMBERS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Directors for the government and
control of the Public Library, to consist of five members, appointed by the
Mayor by and with the consent of the Council.
   (B)   The Directors shall hold office for a term of three years and
appointments of Directors shall be staggered with two Directors terms of office
expiring one year; two Directors terms of office expiring the next year; and
one Director term of office expiring the next year; the terms of office shall
expire on May 1 st of each year. Before May 1 st each year the Mayor with the
approval of the Council shall either reappoint or replace the Directors whose
terms are expiring.
(Prior Code, Section 11-203)
   Passed and approved by the City Council of the City of Hobart on the 14 th
day of January, 2025.
SEAL
ATTEST:
                                  
                  JEFF ALLEN, Mayor
 
__________________________                               
CHARLOTTE GIDDENS, City Clerk   Approved: THOMAS W. TALLEY
                  City Attorney
 
 
EMERGENCY CLAUSE
 
It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health, and safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof
this ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage,
approval and publication as required by the state laws of Oklahoma.
PASSED AND APPROVED by 3/4 th majority of the members of the City Council of
the City of Hobart, Oklahoma, this 14 th day of January 2025.
 
                                                              Jeff Allen, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
 
_______________________________
Charlotte Giddens, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CORPORATE AND WARD BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions and notes
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to statutes
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Reference to offices
   
10.11   Errors and omissions
   
10.12   Official time
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.20   Fines recoverable by civil action
   
10.21   Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of city
 
   
10.99   General penalty
Statutory reference:
   City ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-101 et seq.
   General powers, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-101 et seq.
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This code may be cited as the “Hobart City Code” or other properly
identifying description. When a change or changes have been prepared and
inserted in the code as provided herein below, the words “as amended” may be
added to the citation or title when referring to the code as amended.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption and revision of codes of ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-
109
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS AND NOTES.
   (A)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (B)   Notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or
referring to statutes or to other parts of the code are inserted in the code,
and may be inserted in changes to the code, for the convenience of persons
using the code, and shall have no legal effect.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, THIS CITY, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Hobart.
      COUNTY. Kiowa County, Oklahoma.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the
persons or officers.
      LAW. Applicable federal law, provisions of the state constitution and
state statutes, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the city.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OTHER OFFICIALS or OFFICERS AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made to
officers, agencies, or departments by title only, such as “Clerk,” “City
Clerk,” “City Attorney,” “Fire Chief,” “Police Chief,” and the like, they shall
mean the officers, agencies, or departments of the city.
      PERSON. Includes natural persons, corporations (private and public),
partnerships, and all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates, and
government agencies, except when a contrary intention plainly appears.
      PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
      STATUTORY REFERENCES. References to the statutes of the state as they now
are or as they may be amended.
      STREET. Street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct, highway,
court, place, square, curb, or any other public way in the city which is
dedicated and open to public use.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WEEK. Seven days.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender. Words used in the masculine gender in this code or in other
ordinances of the city include the feminine and neuter.
   (D)   Singular and plural. Words used in the singular number in this code or
in other ordinances of the city include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   (E)   Tenses. The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
   (F)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If a part of this code or of any ordinance passed by the City Council after
this code goes into effect is invalid, all valid parts which are severable from
the invalid parts remain in effect. If a part of this code or of any ordinance
passed hereinafter is invalid in one or more of its applications, the part
remains in effect in all valid applications which are severable from the
invalid applications.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO STATUTES.
   Reference to the statutes of the state means the statutes as they are now or
as they may be amended, and a reference to the Oklahoma Statutes for a certain
year also means the comparable provision when included in future codifications.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words were clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and the word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.12 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature
passed prior to and in effect at the time the code is adopted but not included
in the code are hereby repealed as of the time when the code goes into effect.
Ordinances passed on or after that date shall not be repealed or amended by the
adoption of the code.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature
passed or adopted on and after the most recent ordinance included in this code
of ordinances may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to this
code of ordinances or without specific reference to the code, but in either
case, all ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the
code, and all of the substantive permanent and general parts of the ordinances
and changes made thereby in the code shall be inserted and made in the code
whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution, or ordinance of the City
Council, as provided hereinafter.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and any and all amendments, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (11 O.S. § 1-402) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see 51
O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city and subsequently amended, the Prior Code section number
shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, § 50.01).”
§ 10.20 FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION.
   All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-109)
§ 10.21 ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING TERRITORY OF CITY.
   All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended
to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside
the corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar
as they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect
in the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries
of all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in
any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited
to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also
the outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-110)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this code or in
any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $500. Each day or any portion of a day during which any
violation of this code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who shall aid, abet, or assist in the violation of any
provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 1-108) (Ord. 1079, passed 11-8-1983; Ord. 1090, passed 6-9-1987;
Ord. 95-1114, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 09-05, passed 9-8-2008)
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-111
CHAPTER 11: CORPORATE AND WARD BOUNDARIES
Section
   
11.01   Map of city designated as official map
   
11.02   Ward boundaries
§ 11.01 MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP.
   The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as
the official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all
annexations made to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-201) (Ord. 05-05, passed 10-29-2004)
§ 11.02 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The four wards of the city shall consist of the following areas, and
as amended from time to time.
      (1)   First ward (Ward One) consists of all that land or area lying
within the limits of the city, and within the following boundaries: Beginning
at the Hobart City limit on north Broadway Street, following the city limit
eastward to the half-section line of Section 35, T7N, R18 W.I.M.; thence south
on the said half-section line to Iris Street (Section Line EW 1370); thence
east on Iris Street to the east boundary of city limit; thence south on city
limit to First Street; thence west on First Street to Blaine Street; thence
south on Blaine to Third Street; thence west on Third Street to the west track
of the St. Louis and San Francisco RR; south on the track to Fourth Street;
thence west on Fourth Street to Broadway; thence north on Broadway to Elm
Street; thence west on Elm Street to Hill Street; thence north on Hill Street
to Forest Street; thence east on Forest Street to Broadway Street.
      (2)   Second ward (Ward Two) consists of all that land or area lying
within the limits of the city and within the following described boundaries:
From the northwest corner of Hobart City limit follows the city limit eastward
to Broadway Street; thence south on Broadway Street to Forest Street; west on
Forest Street to Hill Street; thence south on Hill Street to Elm Street; east
on Elm Street to Broadway Street; thence south on Broadway to First Street;
thence west on First Street to Lowe Street; north on Lowe Street to Ash Street;
thence west on Ash Street to Park Street; south on Park Street to Iris Street;
thence west on Iris Street to city limit; thence north on Ohio Street to Ash
Street; thence west to city limit; thence north to the point of beginning.
      (3)   Third ward (Ward Three) consists of all that land or area lying
within the limits of the city, which includes the areas as described as
follows: From the beginning point of Hobart City limit on west Iris Street;
east on Iris Street to Park Street; thence north on Park to Ash Street; thence
east on Ash Street to Lowe Street; thence south on Lowe to First Street; thence
east on First Street to Broadway; thence south on Broadway to Fourth Street;
thence west on Fourth to Hitchcock Street; thence south on Hitchcock Street to
Fifth Street; thence west on Fifth Street to the west boundary of Hobart City
limit.
      (4)   Fourth ward (Ward Four) consists of all that land or area lying
within the limits of the city and within the following described boundaries:
Including all the areas south of Ward One and Ward Three.
   (B)   References to streets, avenues, highways, roads, and rights-of-way in
division (A) above shall mean the centerlines thereof, and reference to the
boundary of the city limits shall mean the boundary or limits of the city as it
now exists or as it may hereafter exist.
(Prior Code, § 1-202) (Ord. passed 12-10-2001, eff. retroactive to 11-19-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal limits, see 11 O.S. §§ 20-101 through 20-106
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   PUBLIC SAFETY
      
33.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
35.   FEES AND CHARGES
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Council-Manager form of government
   
30.02   Elections
   
30.03   Departments
City Council
   
30.15   Governing body of the city
   
30.16   Qualifications of Council members
   
30.17   Council duties and powers
   
30.18   Limitation of Council authority to act through City Manager
   
30.19   Council meetings
   
30.20   Quorum, rules, and voting
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   The city is governed by the statutory Council-Manager form of
government. The city shall have all the powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises, and immunities granted, or which may be granted, to cities.
   (B)   Such powers shall be exercised in accordance with the statutory
Council-Manager form of government.
(Prior Code, § 2-101)
Statutory reference:
   Council-Manager form, see 11 O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq.
§ 30.02 ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Officers to be elected; terms.
      (1)   In statutory Council-Manager city, the terms of the elected
officers shall be staggered so that at any one general municipal election, the
following officers are to be elected for four-year terms: Council members from
Wards One and Two.
      (2)   At the next general municipal election, the following officers are
to be elected for four-year terms:
         (a)   Council members from Wards Three and Four; and
         (b)   The Council member at large.
   (B)   Non-partisan elections; residency requirements. All elections for city
office are non-partisan. General elections are held on the first Tuesday in
April of each odd-numbered year. Residency requirements in state law shall
apply; including, but not limited to, the requirement That Council members
shall be residents of their respective wards. Municipal elected officials,
including those from wards as well as at large, shall be elected at large by
the registered voters of the entire municipality.
   (C)   At general municipal elections, the successors of the officers whose
terms are expiring shall be elected for four-year terms.
(Prior Code, § 2-102)
Statutory reference:
   Elections in Council-Manager cities, see 11 O.S. §§ 16-104, 16-208
   Non-partisan elections, see 11 O.S. § 16-105.1
   Residency requirements, see 11 O.S. §§ 10-103, 16-110
§ 30.03 DEPARTMENTS.
   The city shall have a Police Department, a Fire Department, a Department of
Law headed by a City Attorney, and other administrative departments, offices,
and agencies as the Council may establish.
(Prior Code, § 2-201) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Departments in Council-Manager government, see 11 O.S. § 10-119
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.15 GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY.
   The governing body of the city shall consist of one Council member from each
ward of the city and One Council member At Large.
(Prior Code, § 2-202) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Governing body, see 11 O.S. § 10-102
§ 30.16 QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The Council members shall be residents and registered voters of the city.
The Council members from wards shall be actual residents of their respective
wards at the time of their candidacy and election; but removal of a Council
member from one ward to another within the city after his or her election, or a
change in ward boundaries, shall not disqualify him or her from completing the
term for which he or she was elected. Any person that has reached the age of 18
is eligible to serve as a Council member, provided that such person has not
been convicted of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 2-203) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Qualification of Council, see 11 O.S. § 10-103
§ 30.17 COUNCIL DUTIES AND POWERS.
   All powers of the city, including the determination of matters of policy,
shall be vested in the Council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the
Council may:
   (A)   Appoint and remove the City Manager as provided by law;
   (B)   Enact a municipal legislation subject to limitations as may now or
hereafter be imposed by the state constitution and law;
   (C)   Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate salaries and wages, and
all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to such limitations as may now or
hereafter be imposed by the state constitution and law;
   (D)   Inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the
city, and investigate municipal affairs, or authorize and provide for such
inquiries;
   (E)   Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, members of
commissions and boards, and other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial officers
as provided by law, or prescribe the method of appointing or electing and
removing them;
   (F)   Create, change, and abolish offices, departments, and agencies other
than those established by law, and assign additional functions and duties to
offices, departments, and agencies established by this code; and
   (G)   Grant pardons for violations of municipal ordinances, including the
remission of fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the Municipal Judge.
(Prior Code, § 2-204) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Powers vested in Council, see 11 O.S. § 10-106
§ 30.18 LIMITATION OF COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO ACT THROUGH CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Council and its members shall
deal with the administrative service of the city solely through the City
Manager.
   (B)   The Council and its members may not:
      (1)   Direct or request the City Manager or other authority to appoint or
remove officers or employees;
      (2)   Participate in any manner in the appointment or removal of officers
and employees of the city, except as provided by law; or
      (3)   Give orders on ordinary administrative matters to any subordinate
of the City Manager either publicly or privately.
(Prior Code, § 2-205) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 11 O.S. § 10-107
§ 30.19 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Council shall meet regularly on the second Monday of every month at
5:00 p.m. The Mayor or any three Council members may call special meetings.
(Prior Code, § 2-206) (Ord. 99-12, passed 5-25-1999)
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 11 O.S. § 10-108
§ 30.20 QUORUM, RULES, AND VOTING.
    A majority of all the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. The Council shall determine its
own rules.
(Prior Code, § 2-207) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 11 O.S. § 10-109
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Compensation of elective officials
   
31.02   Compensation of other officers and employees
   
31.03   Appointments and removals
   
31.04   Suspension, removal, succession
   
31.05   Certain personnel to be bonded
   
31.06   Residency requirements
Provisions Concerning Specific Officials
   
31.20   Mayor and Vice Mayor
   
31.21   City Manager
   
31.22   City Clerk
   
31.23   City Treasurer
   
31.24   City Attorney
   
31.25   Health Department Director
   
31.26   Public Works Director
Social Security
   
31.40   Declaration of policy to come under coverage
   
31.41   Execution of agreement with state agency
   
31.42   Withholdings
   
31.43   Contributions
   
31.44   Records and reports
   
31.45   Exclusions
Retirement and Pensions
   
31.60   Fire pension system
   
31.61   Police pension system
   
31.62   Employee retirement system
Cross-reference:
   Duties of the Fire Chief, see §
32.002
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 COMPENSATION OF ELECTIVE OFFICIALS.
   The compensation of all elective city officers shall be fixed by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-208) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 11 O.S. § 10-111
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION OF OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The compensation of officers and employees may be determined by motion
or resolution adopted by the City Council and may be changed at any time in the
same manner.
   (B)   The salary or emoluments of any officer elected or appointed for a
definite term shall not be changed after his or her election or appointment or
during his or her term of office unless by operation of an ordinance passed
prior to such election or appointment. This section shall not apply to officers
chosen for indefinite terms, nor to employees.
(Prior Code, § 2-223) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Oklahoma constitution, article 23, section 10
§ 31.03 APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS.
   Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely
on the basis of merit and fitness. Removals, demotions, and layoffs shall be
made solely for the good of the service.
(Prior Code, § 2-219) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 10-120
§ 31.04 SUSPENSION, REMOVAL, SUCCESSION.
   An officer or employee may be suspended, demoted, laid off, or removed by
the City Manager or other authority which has the power to appoint or elect the
officer or employee. The City Manager or other authority which has the power to
appoint or elect the successor of an officer or employee may appoint or elect a
person to act during the temporary absence, disability, or suspension of such
officer or employee, or, in the case of a vacancy, until a successor is
appointed or elected or qualified. The Council may ordain that a particular
superior or subordinate or deputy of such officer or employee shall act in such
cases.
(Prior Code, § 2-220) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 10-121
§ 31.05 CERTAIN PERSONNEL TO BE BONDED.
   (A)   Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of
the city government shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their
official duties, payable to the city, with a surety company authorized to
operate within the state in such amount as the Council may prescribe:
      (1)   City Treasurer; and
      (2)   City Clerk.
   (B)   The Council, by motion or resolution, may require officers and
employees in such positions as it may designate to be bonded. The city shall
pay the premiums on such bonds.
(Prior Code, § 2-224) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 8-105
§ 31.06 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All full-time city officers and employees of the city shall reside
within the corporate city limits of the city except as noted below:
      (1)   Any full-time officer or employee that is a permanent employee on
May 23, 1989, who resides outside the city shall not be required to move within
the corporate city limits of the city; and
      (2)   Temporary officers or employees of the city may not reside in the
city on the date of their hiring, but must relocate within the corporate city
limits of the city within six months of their hiring as a temporary employee.
   (B)   The requirement of residency of any city employee may be waived by
action of the City Manager when it appears it will be for the best interest of
the city, and that the waiver of residency requirement will be on a case by
case basis only, and after written authority in favor of waiving the
requirement of residency by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 2-225) (Ord. 1096, passed 5-23-1989; Ord. 05-01, passed 7-26-
2004)
PROVISIONS CONCERNING SPECIFIC OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR.
   (A)   Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council, and shall
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by
the Council. The Mayor of the city shall be recognized as the head of city
government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor of the state for
purposes of military law. He or she shall have no regular administrative duties
with the exception that he or she shall sign all conveyances and other written
obligations of the city as the Council may require.
(Prior Code, § 2-209)
   (B)   Vice Mayor, duties. The Vice Mayor shall act as Mayor during the
absence, disability, or suspension of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-210)
   (C)   Elections. The Council shall elect from among its members a Mayor and
a Vice Mayor. The Mayor and Vice Mayor shall be elected in each odd-numbered
year at the first Council meeting held after Council terms begin, or as soon
thereafter as practicable, and they shall serve until their respective
successors have been elected and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-211)
(Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 10-104, 10-105
§ 31.21 CITY MANAGER.
   (A)    Duties.
      (1)   The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of
the administrative branch of the city government. He or she shall execute the
laws and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible
therefor to the Council.
      (2)   The City Manager shall:
         (a)   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove,
demote, layoff, or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided
by law. The City Manager, or the Council by ordinance, may authorize the head
of a department, office, or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in
such department, office, or agency;
         (b)   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers,
and agencies;
         (c)   Prepare a budget annually and submit said budget to the Council
and be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into
effect; and recommend to the Council any changes in the budget which he or she
deems desirable;
         (d)   Submit to the Council a report after the end of the fiscal year
on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding
year;
         (e)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the city, and make recommendations as he or she deems desirable; and
         (f)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-212)
   (B)   Appointment by Council. The Council shall appoint a City Manager for
an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose
him or her solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative
qualifications with special reference to his or her actual experience in, or
his or her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or
her office. At the time of his or her appointment, the City Manager need not be
a resident of the city or state; but during the tenure of his or her office he
or she shall reside within the city. The City Manager may appoint himself or
herself, or the Council or other authority may appoint or elect him or her, to
other offices and positions in the city government, subject to regulations
prescribed by ordinance; but he or she may not receive compensation for service
in such other offices or positions. Neither the Mayor nor any members of the
City Council may be appointed City Manager during the term for which he or she
shall have been elected nor within two years after the expiration of his or her
term. The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by a majority vote of all
members of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-213)
   (C)   Suspension or removal by Council. The Council may suspend or remove
the City Manager or acting City Manager, at any time by a vote of a majority of
all its members at a public meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-214)
   (D)   Designation of Acting City Manager. The City Manager, by letter filed
with the City Clerk, may appoint a qualified administrative officer of the city
to be Acting City Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the
City Manager. The Council may appoint an Acting City Manager whenever:
      (1)   The City Manager fails to make such designation;
      (2)   The Council suspends the City Manager; or
      (3)   There is a vacancy in the office of City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 2-215)
   (E)   Purchases and sales by City Manager; competitive bidding; transfer of
City Manager’s powers.
      (1)   The City Manager shall contract for, purchase, or issue purchase
authorizations for all supplies, materials, and equipment for offices,
departments, and agencies of the city government, subject to any regulations
which the Council may prescribe. Every contract or purchase exceeding an amount
to be established by the Council shall require the prior approval of the
Council. The City Manager may also sell or transfer to or between offices,
departments, and agencies, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and
equipment, subject to regulations the Council may prescribe.
      (2)   The Council may prescribe requirements and procedures for
competitive bidding. Notice and opportunity for competitive bidding shall be
given before a purchase or contract for supplies, materials, or equipment is
made, and before a sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or
equipment is made, in accordance with regulations the Council may prescribe.
The Council shall not exempt a particular contract, purchase, or sale from the
requirement of competitive bidding.
      (3)   The Council may transfer some or all of the power granted to the
City Manager pursuant to the provisions of this section to an employee
appointed by, and subordinate to, the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 2-216)
(Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
§ 31.22 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be an officer of the city, appointed by the City
Manager for an indefinite term. The City Clerk shall serve as Clerk for the
Council.
   (B)   Subject to regulations the Council may prescribe, the City Clerk
shall:
      (1)   Keep the journal of proceedings of the Council;
      (2)   Enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council in a
book or set of books kept for that purpose;
      (3)   Have custody of documents, records, and archives, as may be
provided for by law or by ordinance, and have custody of the seal of the city;
      (4)   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by
law or by ordinance;
      (5)   Have the duty of collecting an obligation owed to the city or money
receivable by the city; and
      (6)   Have such other powers, duties, and functions related to his or her
statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance. The person who
serves as City Clerk may be employed by the city to perform duties not related
to his or her position as City Clerk.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall not be subject to Oklahoma constitution, article
23, section 10 which prohibits the changing of the salary or emoluments of
public officials after appointment. The salary of the City Clerk shall be fixed
by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-217) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 10-117, 11-113
§ 31.23 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be an officer of the city. The same person
shall hold both the office of City Clerk and the office of City Treasurer.
Subject to such regulations as the Council may prescribe, the City Treasurer
shall deposit daily funds received for the city in depositories as the Council
may designate. The City Treasurer shall have such other powers, duties, and
functions related to his or her statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or
by ordinance. The person who serves as City Treasurer may be employed by the
city to perform duties not related to his or her position as City Treasurer.
The salary, if any, for said unrelated duties shall be provided for separately
by ordinance.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall not be subject to Oklahoma constitution,
article 23, section 10 which prohibits the changing of the salary or emoluments
of public officials after appointment.
(Prior Code, § 2-218) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
§ 31.24 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Manager and confirmed
by the Council. He or she shall have such qualifications, powers, and duties as
are prescribed by law by the governing body for city attorneys. It shall be his
or her duty to advise the City Manager and Council and all city officials, upon
all law questions, and he or she shall give opinions in writing when requested,
shall represent the city as counsel in all litigation, in all courts, for or
against the city, and shall perform such other legal service on behalf of the
city, its officers or employees, as may be required.
   (B)   Compensation of the City Attorney shall be established by the City
Manager with the approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-221) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
§ 31.25 HEALTH DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR.
   The City-County Department of the County and its Director shall have the
powers of a City Health Department and City Health Officer respectively for the
city, unless another person is designated by the City Manager. References to
Health Department and Health Officer or Director of the Health Department in
this code and in other ordinances of the city mean the Cooperative Health
Department and its Director, unless the context clearly indicates another
meaning.
(Prior Code, § 2-222) (Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-1999)
§ 31.26 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby created the position of Public Works Director, appointed by
the City Manager. The duties of the Public Works Director will include, but not
be limited to, activities of the Street Department, solid waste, cemetery,
parks and recreation, fleet management, and water and sewer facilities of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 2-222.1) (Ord. 99-13, passed 9-13-1999)
SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 31.40 DECLARATION OF POLICY TO COME UNDER COVERAGE.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at
the earliest date, to the eligible employees and officials of the city the
benefits of the system of federal old-age and survivors insurance as authorized
by the federal social security act and all amendments thereto, and 51 O.S. §§
121 et seq. In pursuance of this policy, the officers and employees of the city
shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws
or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-501)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 51 O.S. § 125
§ 31.41 EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH STATE AGENCY.
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments with the State Department of Human Services to accomplish the
provisions of §
31.40.
(Prior Code, § 2-502)
§ 31.42 WITHHOLDINGS.
   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purposes provided in §
31.40 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may
be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be
paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-503)
§ 31.43 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these
purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in
accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-504)
§ 31.44 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The city shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required
by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-505)
§ 31.45 EXCLUSIONS.
   Excluded from this subchapter authorizing the extension of Social Security
benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
   (A)   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee, or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
   (B)   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee, or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any
position, employee, or official not authorized to be covered by applicable
state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-506)
RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
§ 31.60 FIRE PENSION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Local Fire Pension and Retirement Board. There is hereby created a
Local Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board composed of the Mayor, the
Clerk, the Treasurer and three members from the Fire Department. The Board
shall have the membership, organization, powers, duties, and functions as
prescribed by 11 O.S. §§ 49-103 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 2-601)
   (B)   Fund to be operated in accordance with law. The city’s Firefighters’
Pension and Retirement System and Fund shall be operated in accordance with
state law relating to the fund and system.
(Prior Code, § 2-602)
   (C)   Contributions to Fund.
      (1)   The Clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid
member of the Fire Department the amounts which are required by applicable
state law. If the members of the Fire Department, by a majority vote of its
paid members, vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts
authorized by this division (C) shall be increased to reflect the amounts
approved by the majority vote. The deductions shall be set forth in the payroll
so that each member may be able to ascertain the exact amount which he or she
is contributing.
      (2)   For each volunteer member of the Fire Department, the City
Treasurer shall deposit yearly with the State Firefighters’ Pension and
Retirement Board the amounts of money which are required by applicable state
law. These amounts may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as
set by the State Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board.
      (3)   All assets of the City Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Fund
shall be transferred to the State Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board.
Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities, and
such other specific assets as permitted by the State Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-603)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 49-101 et seq.
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 49-122
§ 31.61 POLICE PENSION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Police pension system. There is hereby created the Police Pension and
Retirement System of the city for the purpose of providing pension benefits for
retired and disabled police personnel, their widows and children, in accordance
with state law governing police retirement.
(Prior Code, § 2-610)
   (B)   Board of Trustees. A Board of Trustees of the Police Pension and
Retirement System shall be formed according to law and it shall administer such
system and carry out any and all duties assigned to or granted it by law,
including the distribution of money received by it from the state or from other
sources.
(Prior Code, § 2-611)
   (C)   State laws adopted. The provisions of state law, and amendments made
thereto, are hereby adopted by reference as a part of this section as though
literally rewritten and restated herein, insofar as such statutes pertain to
police retirement.
(Prior Code, § 2-612)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 50-101 et seq.
§ 31.62 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   Employee retirement system created. Pursuant to the authority
conferred by the laws of the state, and for the purpose of encouraging
continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby
promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized, created, established,
and approved and adopted, effective as of October 1, 2007, the funded pension
plan designated Employee Retirement System of City of Hobart, Oklahoma, Defined
Contribution Plan, (hereinafter called system), an executed counterpart of
which is marked exhibit A and exhibit B and attached to the ordinance codified
herein and made a part hereof.
(Prior Code, § 2-620)
   (B)   Administration. For the purpose of administration of the system, there
is hereby established a Retirement Committee, which shall be the members of the
City Council, as now existing or as from time to time duly elected or appointed
and constituted. The powers and duties of the Committee shall be as set forth
in the system instrument marked as exhibit A as mentioned in division (A)
above.
(Prior Code, § 2-621)
   (C)   Fund. A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of
the persons entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such
fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the City
Treasurer, who shall be the treasurer of the system. Such fund shall be pooled
for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other
incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the state as a part of the
Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund in accordance with the trust agreement of
the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, a public trust. The City Treasurer
shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay
over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, as duly
authorized and directed by the Board of Trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal
and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is
made to the County Excise Board.
(Prior Code, § 2-622)
   (D)   Appropriations. The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary
expenses for the establishment, operation, and administration of the system,
and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized
to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee
contributions to maintain the system and the fund in accordance with the
provisions of the defined contribution plan. Any appropriation so made to
maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for
the payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration to be
transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund for such
purposes and shall be paid into the Fund when available, through the City
Treasurer, to be by him or her duly transferred to the Oklahoma Municipal
Retirement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-623)
   (E)   Contributions. The plan contains provisions which are intended to
constitute a pick up program by the employer which satisfies the requirements
of 26 U.S.C. § 414(h)(2); and the plan, be, and it is, approved and adopted as
of the date therein stated; and required contributions described in section 4
of the joinder are designated as “picked up” by the employer so as to not be
included in plan participants’ gross income for federal income tax purposes as
provided in 26 U.S.C. § 414(h)(2). All such required contributions are to be
paid by the employer in lieu of contributions by the plan participant. No
participant in the plan shall have the option of choosing to receive the
amounts of required contributions directly in lieu of having such amounts paid
by the employer to the trustees of the plan.
(Prior Code, § 2-624)
   (F)   Execution.
      (1)   The Mayor and City Clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and
directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an
original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary,
advisable, and proper to put said system and related trust into full force and
effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the
same under 26 U.S.C. §§ 401(a) and 501(a). The counterpart attached as exhibit
A, which has been duly executed as aforesaid in division (A) above and made a
part hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects.
      (2)   This committee is hereby authorized and directed to proceed
immediately on behalf of the city to pool and combine the fund into the
Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of
such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment.
(Prior Code, § 2-625)
(Ord. 08-01, passed 10-9-2007)
CHAPTER 32: PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Fire Department
   
32.001   Establishment and duties
   
32.002   Duties of Fire Chief; Assistant Chief
   
32.003   Company officers
   
32.004   New members
   
32.005   Bylaws
   
32.006   Rules and regulations
   
32.007   Use of fire equipment; inventory and repair
   
32.008   Contracts authorized outside city limits
   
32.009   Authority to answer calls
   
32.010   Firefighters serving in regular line of duty
   
32.011   Department considered agent of state
Fire Prevention Code
   
32.025   Adoption of fire prevention code
   
32.026   Enforcement
   
32.027   Definition
   
32.028   Limits for storage of flammable liquids, bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gases, explosives, and blasting agents
   
32.029   Modifications
   
32.030   Appeals
Police Department Creation and Duties
   
32.045   Police Chief; Assistant Chief
   
32.046   Duties
   
32.047   Police officers
   
32.048   Emergency duties in other cities
Reserve Police Force
   
32.060   Creation; appointments
   
32.061   Applications, qualifications
   
32.062   Training requirements
Unclaimed Property
   
32.075   Complete record required
   
32.076   Disposition of unclaimed property
   
32.077   Property found by private person
   
32.078   Recovery by owner
Civil Defense Organization
   
32.090   Purpose
   
32.091   Department established
   
32.092   Duties of Director
   
32.093   Powers of Director in emergency
   
32.094   Compensation of members
Civil Emergencies
   
32.105   Definitions
   
32.106   Proclamation of emergency
   
32.107   Invocation of curfew
   
32.108   Closing of streets
   
32.109   Closing certain businesses, prohibiting sale of certain products
   
32.110   Notice of orders affecting business establishments
   
32.111   Termination or extension of emergency proclamation
   
32.112   Failure to disperse from scene of riot or unlawful assembly during
emergency
   
32.113   Violations
   
32.114   Provisions supplemental to other ordinances
   
32.999   Penalty
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.001 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   There is a Fire Department, the head of which is the Chief of the Fire
Department, appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish
fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer
first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in
case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise
provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and
safety of persons from fire in public and private buildings.
   (C)   The term VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER means one who is enrolled as a member
of the Volunteer Fire Department of the city and who serves in that capacity
without receiving a regular salary. The size of the Volunteer Fire Department
of the city is composed of not less than 12 nor more than 20 members.
(Prior Code, § 13-201)
Statutory reference:
   Fire departments generally, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-101 et seq.
   Volunteer fire departments, provisions and requirements, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-
201 et seq.
§ 32.002 DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF; ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   (A)   Duties of the Chief. The Chief is the administrative head of the
Department, subject to the laws of the state, ordinances of the city, and the
rules and regulations adopted in this subchapter. The Chief shall have the
following powers and duties, and he or she may assign duties to other members
of the Department:
      (1)   The Chief is responsible for the general condition and efficient
operation of the Department, the training of members, and the performance of
all other duties imposed upon him or her. He or she shall have supervision and
control of the Fire Department, subject to the supervision and control of the
city;
      (2)   The Chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
Department, the fire hydrants, cistern, and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year;
      (3)   The Chief may maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members;
      (4)   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct
the officers and members in the performance of their duties;
      (5)   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department;
      (6)   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson,
shall notify proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence
for future use in the case;
      (7)   The Chief is authorized to enter any building or premise in the
city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice on persons for any violations that may be found; and
      (8)   The Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the
Department and shall make reports to the City Council as it may require. The
Chief shall keep the City Council informed regarding the Fire Department and
its needs.
(Prior Code, § 13-202)
   (B)   Duties of the Assistant Chief. In the absence of the Chief, the
Assistant Chief on duty shall command the Department and be held responsible
therefor in all respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the
Chief.
(Prior Code, 13-203)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Fire Chief generally, see 11 O.S. § 29-102
   Investigations of fires, report to State Fire Marshal, see 74 O.S. § 314
§ 32.003 COMPANY OFFICERS.
   (A)   Company officers of the Volunteer Department are selected by the Chief
based upon the following criteria:
      (1)   Knowledge of fire fighting;
      (2)   Leadership ability; and
      (3)   Knowledge of firefighting equipment.
(Prior Code, § 13-204)
   (B)   One member elected by the members of the Volunteer Fire Department is
a Secretary-Treasurer. His or her duties shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      (2)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      (3)   Collecting any money due the Department by the members.
(Prior Code, § 13-205)
§ 32.004 NEW MEMBERS.
   New members of the Volunteer Department are on probation for one year after
their appointment. Upon completion of their probation period, New volunteer
members must be approved by the majority of the other members of the Fire
Department and the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-206)
§ 32.005 BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Volunteer Department shall include the following:
   (A)   All Volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
   (B)   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings, and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters;
   (C)   At least one regular business meeting of the members is held each
month;
   (D)   Any member having two unexcused absences in succession or three
unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from the Fire
Department rolls;
   (E)   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Chief;
   (F)   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the Department will be dropped; and
   (G)   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls for
the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department;
      (5)   Conviction of a felony; or
      (6)   By majority vote of the members of the company and approval of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-207)
§ 32.006 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council by motion or resolution may adopt and change regulations
relating to the Fire Department, its organization, operation, and compensation.
(Prior Code, § 13-208)
§ 32.007 USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; INVENTORY AND REPAIR.
   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose,
nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away or
conceal any article used in any way by the Department. No person shall enter
any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment
belonging to the Department unless accompanied by, or having the special
permission of, an officer or authorized member of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-209) Penalty, see § 32.999
§ 32.008 CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or
agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or
political subdivisions of the state for fire protection outside the corporate
limits of the city, and to contract to provide fire protection jointly with
other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state.
(Prior Code, § 13-210)
   (B)   Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner, firm,
private corporation, or association, for outside aid, or mutual aid for fire
protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private
corporation, or association, or political subdivision to the city for such fire
apparatus and personnel at the rate per call as set by the City Council. All
moneys received from the calls shall go into the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 13-211)
§ 32.009 AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS.
   The Fire Department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to answer
all outside calls outside the corporate city limits in the discretion of the
Fire Chief. The Fire Department may not answer such outside calls if, in the
opinion of the Fire Chief, it is inexpedient to do so on account of another
fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous highways, or other
physical conditions.
(Prior Code, § 13-212)
§ 32.010 FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY.
   All volunteer firefighters of the Fire Department of the city attending and
serving at fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of
the city, as herein provided, are considered as serving in their regular line
of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the
city. The firefighters are entitled to all the benefits of any fire pension and
relief fund in the same manner as if the fire fighting or fire prevention work
was being done within the corporate limits of the city. Compensation of
firefighters is as provided by the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-213)
§ 32.011 DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE.
   The Fire Department of the city answering any fire alarm, or call, or
performing any fire prevention services outside the corporate limits of the
city is considered as an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone in a
governmental capacity, and the municipality shall not be liable in damages for
any act of commission, omission, or negligence while answering or returning
from any fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by
virtue of §§ 32.008 through 32.011.
(Prior Code, § 13-214)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 32.025 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, recommended by
the National Fire Protection Association, being particularly the current
edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended. Not less than one copy of the code
has been filed in the office of the City Clerk and the same is hereby adopted
and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions of the
Fire Prevention Code are controlling within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-101)
§ 32.026 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted is enforced by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
(Prior Code, § 13-102)
§ 32.027 DEFINITION.
   Wherever the word  MUNICIPALITY is used in the Fire Prevention Code hereby
adopted, it is held to mean the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-103)
§ 32.028 LIMITS FOR STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GASES, EXPLOSIVES, AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited, are the city’s
fire limits. The limits referred to in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits in which storage of explosives and
blasting agents is prohibited, are the city’s fire limits.
(Prior Code, § 13-104)
Cross-reference:
   Liquified petroleum gas, see §
150.097
§ 32.029 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Code hereby adopted in his or her own discretion or upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
letter of the Code, provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such
modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire
Department thereon is entered upon the records of the Department and for
applications requesting change, a signed copy is furnished the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 13-105)
§ 32.030 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the City Council within 30 days
from the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 13-106)
POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATION AND DUTIES
§ 32.045 POLICE CHIEF; ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   (A)   There is a Police Department, the head of which is the Chief of
Police, or Police Chief. The Chief of Police is an officer of the city, and has
supervision and control of the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council. All police officers are
officers of the city.
   (B)   In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall command
the Department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 13-301) (Ord. 1101, passed 7-9-1991; Ord. 92-1105, passed 1-14-
1992)
Statutory reference:
   Police department and duties, 11 O.S. §§ 34-101 et seq.
§ 32.046 DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the Police Department to apprehend and arrest on view or
on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies which may come to its
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs,
executions, and other processes properly directed and delivered to it; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or fate law as provided by law,
and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all
duties pertaining to the offices of police officers.
(Prior Code, § 13-302)
§ 32.047 POLICE OFFICERS.
   Police officers are appointed subject to approval of the City Council who
shall perform such duties as are required of them by the Chief of Police, city
ordinances, federal, state, and county regulations and any other actions
required in the maintenance of good order and public peace.
(Prior Code, § 13-303)
§ 32.048 EMERGENCY DUTIES IN OTHER CITIES.
   (A)   Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular Police
Department of this city as police officers of any other city or town, in an
emergency situation, in the state, not more than 100 miles distant from this
city, when such service is requested by the Mayor or Chief of Police of the
city or town.
   (B)   Requests for service under this section are made by writing or by
telephone, or other means of communications, to the Mayor who, if he or she
determines that the request can be granted consistently with the continuance of
the proper police protection to the inhabitants of this city, and after
consultation with the Marshal, shall direct the Chief of Police to furnish the
number of officers requested and to arrange their transportation to the
requesting municipality.
(Prior Code, § 13-304)
RESERVE POLICE FORCE
§ 32.060 CREATION; APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   A reserve police force is hereby created for the city.
   (B)   The rules to be prescribed for the appointment of a reserve officer
are as follows:
      (1)   Reserve officers are appointed by the Chief of Police under the
provisions of 11 O.S. § 34-101; and
      (2)   Reserve officers serve at the pleasure of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 13-320) (Ord. 1080, passed 4-10-1984)
§ 32.061 APPLICATIONS, QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for appointment as a reserve officer may be obtained from
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   All applicants for appointment must:
      (1)   Be at least 21 years of age;
      (2)   Not have been convicted of a felony or of a crime involving moral
turpitude unless the applicant has been granted a full pardon by the proper
authority;
      (3)   Have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued by the State
of Oklahoma;
      (4)   Be willing to subject themselves to a complete background
investigation, including military records, by the Police Department;
      (5)   Be a resident of the city or residing contiguous to an area where a
reserve officer is needed;
      (6)   Not have, except for minor traffic violations where the
accumulation of fines is $100 or less, a record of arrests leading to a
conviction or guilty plea;
      (7)   Possess the high degree of emotional stability, personality, and
tact required of a peace officer; and
       (8)   Maintain a condition of mental and physical health appropriate for
the performance of peace officer duties and responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 13-321) (Ord. 1080, passed 4-10-1984)
§ 32.062 TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Reserve officers, not previously so qualified, within the first 12
months after their appointment, shall complete a basic police course of 120
hours that has been approved by the State Council of Law Enforcement Education
and Training.
   (B)   Each reserve officer may be required to pay for his or her own
training expenses.
   (C)   Reserve officers who have been appointed, but not yet completed the
required training, must be accompanied by another officer who has been so
certified, while performing law enforcement duties.
(Prior Code, § 13-322) (Ord. 1080, passed 4-10-1984)
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 32.075 COMPLETE RECORD REQUIRED.
   All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer,
which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession
of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a criminal, and
which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, is, by the
officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the Chief of
Police. The Chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose, make
a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and circumstances
of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was taken, and the
place where it was found; and the record shall also disclose the subsequent
disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the purchaser,
and the amount for which it was sold.
(Prior Code, § 13-501)
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic beverages seized in violation of law, see 37A O.S. § 6-127
   Disposal of liquor and gambling equipment seized by police officers, see 22
O.S. §§ 1261 et seq.
   Disposal of stolen or embezzled property, see 22 O.S. §§ 1321 et seq.
   Disposition of seasonal property by Police Chief, procedures, see 11 O.S. §
34-104
   Finders of lost goods, see 15 O.S. §§ 511 et seq.
   Uniform Unclaimed Property Disposition Act, see 60 O.S. § 655
§ 32.076 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains in the
possession of the Chief of Police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which is not
to him or her satisfactorily established, for a period of more than 30 days,
shall be sold, or disposed of in the manner required by law, except such
personal property as in the opinion of the Mayor can be more advantageously
used by some department or office of the city government.
(Prior Code, § 13-502)
§ 32.077 PROPERTY FOUND BY PRIVATE PERSON.
   Any personal property found by a person other than a public official or
employee, which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if not
claimed or identified within 30 days, shall, within ten additional days
thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him or her, and a record
of such disposal made thereof. If the finder does not request return of the
property to him or her within such additional ten days, then the Chief of
Police shall sell the property in the manner required by law as if it had been
found by a public official or employee, or on instruction by the Mayor deliver
it to some department or office of the city government for its use.
(Prior Code, § 13-503)
§ 32.078 RECOVERY BY OWNER.
   If any property is sold as herein provided, and the owner thereof takes and
recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor is
returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim being submitted and approved by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-504)
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
§ 32.090 PURPOSE.
   A Civil Defense Organization is created for the city to carry out
preparations for, and to function, in the event of emergencies endangering the
lives and property of the people of the city. The duties of the Civil Defense
Organization are the protection of the lives and health of the citizens and of
property and property rights, both private and public, and performance of all
functions necessary and incident thereto.
(Prior Code, § 13-401)
Statutory reference:
   Local civil defense organizations, see 63 O.S. § 683.11
§ 32.091 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government a
Department of Civil Defense which shall consist of:
   (A)   A Director of Civil Defense who is appointed by the Mayor; and
   (B)   A Civil Defense Advisory Committee. This Committee shall consist of
the Mayor as Chairperson and the members of the City Council as the members of
the Advisory Committee. The Committee shall select from its members a Vice-
Chairperson and Secretary. It shall hold such meetings as are directed by the
Mayor and its function is to act in an advisory capacity as needed or requested
by the Mayor or the Director of Civil Defense.
(Prior Code, § 13-402)
§ 32.092 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The Director of Civil Defense is the executive head of the Department of
Civil Defense and is responsible for carrying out the civil defense program of
the city. He or she shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties. It is the duty of
the Director of Civil Defense as soon as practicable after his or her
appointment to perfect an organization to carry out the purposes set forth in
this subchapter and he or she shall have all necessary power and authority to
form committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate the chairperson or
chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such an
organization. He or she shall have further duty and responsibility to cooperate
with all civil defense agencies of other governmental units, including the
state and the federal government. The Director of Civil Defense is further
authorized to formulate written plans and gather information and keep written
record thereof to govern the functions of the Civil Defense Organization.
(Prior Code, § 13-403)
§ 32.093 POWERS OF DIRECTOR IN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In the event of an enemy-caused emergency, or emergency resulting from
natural causes, the Director of Civil Defense, after due authorization from the
Mayor, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations
relating to civil defense and, if necessary, take control of transportation,
communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and public utilities
for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. He or she shall
cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies of
civil defense organizations. If required by the Mayor, the Director shall have
control over any and all funds allocated from any source for the purpose of
alleviating distress conditions in the city.
   (B)   The Director of Civil Defense and other members of the Civil Defense
Organization created by him or her shall have the power and authority to
enforce the laws of the state and ordinances of the city during the period of
emergency and shall at such time have the further power to make arrests for
violations of such laws or ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 13-404)
§ 32.094 COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Director shall serve without compensation, but he or she may be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in performance of his or her duties and if
approved by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   All members of the Civil Defense Organization created in this
subchapter shall serve without compensation. The city shall not be liable for
any personal or bodily injury received by any member of such Organization while
acting in the line of duty.
(Prior Code, § 13-405)
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 32.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. Means any of the following:
      (1)   A riot. Any use of force or violence, or any threat to use force or
violence, if accompanied by the immediate power of execution, which threatens
to result in acts described in division (4) below by three or more persons
acting together, and without authority of law, which cannot be controlled or
stopped under existing conditions and authority, is a RIOT;
      (2)   An unlawful assembly consisting of three or more persons assembling
together with intent to do any unlawful act described in division (4) below
with force or violence against the person or property of another, and who make
any overt act to carry out such unlawful purpose, or who do a lawful act in an
unlawful, violent, or tumultuous manner, which cannot be controlled or stopped
under existing conditions or authority;
      (3)   A natural disaster or a man-made calamity, including but not
limited to flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion
occurring within or affecting property within the city limits, which endangers
life and property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens; or
      (4)   Unlawful activities, such as looting, arson, fire bombing, sniping,
interference with emergency vehicles, widespread criminal damage to property,
which in the opinion of the Mayor, based upon consultation with the Chief of
Police, cannot be controlled or stopped under existing conditions and authority
without unduly further endangering life or property.
   CURFEW. The period of time, as declared by the Mayor, during which no person
is upon the public streets, sidewalks, grounds, or semipublic property, either
on foot or in vehicles of any type, within the city, except, however, that
persons authorized by the Mayor, by administrative order, shall not be subject
to the curfew.
(Prior Code, § 13-420)
Statutory reference:
   City ordinance powers, see 21 O.S. § 1321.9
   Oklahoma Riot Control Act, see 21 O.S. § 1321.1
§ 32.106 PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Mayor, after consultation with the Chief of Police, finds that
a civil emergency exists and that invocation of the extraordinary powers
conferred by this subchapter is necessary to ensure or to restore the public
peace, he or she shall forthwith proclaim, in writing, the existence of such
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 13-421)
§ 32.107 INVOCATION OF CURFEW.
   After the proclamation of the existence of a civil emergency, as authorized
in §
32.106, the Mayor may order the invocation of a curfew. Such order shall
declare the hours of curfew in all or any portion of the city, thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks, or other public or
semipublic places. The curfew is declared by proclamation which is delivered to
the Chief of Police, who shall see that copies thereof are delivered to all
news media within the city and who shall also use public address systems to
notify the public of the proclamation and curfew hours and warn the public that
violation of the curfew constitutes a misdemeanor and violators are subject to
arrest.
(Prior Code, § 13-422) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.108 CLOSING OF STREETS.
   After the proclamation of the existence of a civil emergency, as authorized
in §
32.106, the Mayor may close any and all streets, alleys, and other public ways
in the city to the public whenever it is necessary for the preservation of life
and property and the maintenance of law and order.
(Prior Code, § 13-423)
§ 32.109 CLOSING CERTAIN BUSINESSES, PROHIBITING SALE OF CERTAIN PRODUCTS.
   After the declaration of the existence of a civil emergency, as authorized
in §
32.106, the Mayor may:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail package liquor stores and outlets;
   (B)   Order the closing of all bars and other establishments selling
intoxicating liquor or beer by the drink;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away
gasoline or other flammable or combustible products in any container other than
a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle, such sale to be limited to
not more than one gallon per motor vehicle, or in the alternative, order the
closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of
which is the sale, distribution, or dispensing of flammable liquids or
combustible products;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever, or in
the alternative, order the closing of all establishments or portions thereof
where firearms or ammunition are kept for sale or distribution; and
   (E)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(Prior Code, § 13-424)
§ 32.110 NOTICE OF ORDERS AFFECTING BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All orders issued pursuant to the authority contained in §
32.109 regulating or prohibiting the conduct of business are delivered to the
Police Department, which shall forthwith inform the operator or person in
charge of the business affected, advising him or her that failure to comply
with the order constitutes a violation of this subchapter, for which he or she
may be arrested.
(Prior Code, § 13-425) Penalty, see § 32.999
§ 32.111 TERMINATION OR EXTENSION OF EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION.
   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance of the
proclamation, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency
no longer exists, whichever occurs first. However, such emergency may be
terminated by the City Council prior to the termination of 48 hours or may be
extended for such additional periods of time as deemed necessary by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 13-426)
§ 32.112 FAILURE TO DISPERSE FROM SCENE OF RIOT OR UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY DURING
EMERGENCY.
   During the existence of an emergency proclaimed in accord with this
subchapter, every person remaining present at the place of any riot or unlawful
assembly, after having been ordered to disperse by the police or any other
lawful authority, except those public officers and persons assisting them in
attempting to disperse the same, is deemed guilty of a violation of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 13-427)
§ 32.113 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person convicted of a violation of this subchapter or any order issued
pursuant to this subchapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor
(Prior Code, § 13-428) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.114 PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to repeal, replace,
or limit any other ordinance of this city or limit the authority and power
vested in the City Council and the Mayor. It is the intent of the City Council
that this article supplement the other ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-429)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 13-107)
CHAPTER 33: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Organization of Municipal Court
   
33.002   Definitions
   
33.003   Jurisdiction of Court
Judge
   
33.015   Qualifications of Judge
   
33.016   Term of Judge
   
33.017   Alternate Judge
   
33.018   Acting Judge
   
33.019   Appointment of Judge and Alternate Judge
   
33.020   Salary and payments to judges
   
33.021   Removal of Judge
   
33.022   Vacancy in office of Judge
   
33.023   Disqualification of Judge
Other Court Officers and Rules
   
33.035   Chief of Police as principal officer
   
33.036   Clerk of the Court; duties; bond
   
33.037   Prosecuting Attorney
   
33.038   Rules of Court; enforcement of rules
Traffic Violations
   
33.050   Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation;
custody; arrest
   
33.051   Traffic bail bond procedures
   
33.052   Creation of Traffic Violations Bureau
Court Procedures
   
33.065   Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations
   
33.066   Summons for arrest
   
33.067   Form of arrest warrant
   
33.068   Procedures for bail or bond
   
33.069   Arraignment and pleadings by defendant
   
33.070   Trials and judgments
   
33.071   Suspension of sentence
   
33.072   Imprisonment, work by prisoners
   
33.073   Fines and costs
   
33.074   Penalty and assessment
   
33.075   Filing of complaints and fees
   
33.076   Appeals
   
Appendix A:   Schedule of Fines and Costs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal
Criminal Court of the city, as put into operation by resolution, duly passed
and filed in accordance with law, as authorized by 11 O.S. §§ 27-101 and 27-
102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any ordinances of this city, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. The Court shall become operative on and after January 31, 1969.
(Prior Code, § 6-101)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 OS §§ 27-101 through 27-131
§ 33.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
municipality.
   CLERK. The Clerk of this municipality, including any Deputy or member of the
office staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk’s office.
   COURT. The Municipal Court of the city.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council.
   JUDGE. The Judge of the Municipal Court, including any Acting Judge or
Alternate Judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this
chapter.
   MUNICIPALITY or THIS MUNICIPALITY. The City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
   THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The District Court Judicial District of the State of
Oklahoma wherein the government of this municipality is situated.
(Prior Code, § 6-102)
§ 33.003 JURISDICTION OF COURT.
   The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this municipality is
charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance
with applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 6-103)
JUDGE
§ 33.015 QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGE.
   There shall be one Judge of the Court. A Judge may be an attorney licensed
to practice law in the state or a resident of this municipality, of the age of
21 years or older, possessed of good moral character. A Judge who is a licensed
attorney may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he or she shall
not accept employment inconsistent with his or her duties as Judge, or arising
out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the
jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the subject of
proceedings therein. He or she must be a resident of this county or maintain a
law office therein or reside in an adjacent county. He or she may serve as
Judge of other municipal courts, if such service may be accomplished
consistently with his duties as Judge of this Court, with the consent of the
Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-104)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-104
§ 33.016 TERM OF JUDGE.
   The official term of the Judge shall be two years expiring on April 30 of
each odd-numbered year. Each Judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause,
shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 6-105)
§ 33.017 ALTERNATE JUDGE.
   There shall be appointed for each Judge of the Court an Alternate Judge
possessed of the same qualifications required of the Judge in this chapter. His
or her appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as
the Judge. He or she shall sit as Acting Judge of the Court in any case if the
Judge is:
   (A)   Absent from the court;
   (B)   Unable to act as judge; or
   (C)   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case.
(Prior Code, § 6-106)
§ 33.018 ACTING JUDGE.
   If at any time there is no Judge or Alternate Judge, duly appointed and
qualified, available to sit as Judge, the Mayor shall appoint some person,
possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the Judge, who shall
preside as Acting Judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters
until such time as a Judge or Alternate Judge shall be available.
(Prior Code, § 6-107)
§ 33.019 APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND ALTERNATE JUDGE.
   Judges and Alternate Judges shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the governing body. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to
the governing body at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to
the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon
at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The governing body may decide upon the
proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure
of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a
later regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body unless the Mayor, in
writing, withdraws the proposed appointment.
(Prior Code, § 6-108)
§ 33.020 SALARY AND PAYMENTS TO JUDGES.
   (A)   A Judge, other than an Alternate Judge or an Acting Judge, shall
receive compensation as set by the governing body by motion or resolution.
   (B)   An Alternate Judge or an Acting Judge shall be paid an amount as set
by motion or resolution of the governing body, however payments to an Acting or
Alternate Judge shall not exceed the salary set for a Judge in whose stead he
or she sits.
(Prior Code, § 6-109)
§ 33.021 REMOVAL OF JUDGE.
   (A)   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the governing body
for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the
removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by:
      (1)   The Mayor; or
      (2)   Twenty five or more qualified electors of this municipality.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
   (B)   The governing body shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the Judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing,
the Judge shall be entitled to:
      (1)   Representation by counsel;
      (2)   Present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him or
her; and
      (3)   Have all evidence against him or her presented in open hearing.
   (C)   So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma
Administrative Procedures Act, being 75 O.S. §§ 250 et seq., governing
individual proceedings shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of
removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all
members of the governing body, in favor of such removal.
(Prior Code, § 6-110)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-104
§ 33.022 VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE.
   (A)   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      (1)   Dies;
      (2)   Resigns;
      (3)   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      (4)   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally
in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
   (B)   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Judge, the Mayor
shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as
an original appointment is made.
(Prior Code, § 6-111)
§ 33.023 DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE.
   In prosecutions before the Court, no change of venue shall be allowed; but
the Judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her
disqualification or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms,
conditions, and procedures provided by law for courts of record. If a Judge is
disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an Alternate or Acting Judge
appointed as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-112)
OTHER COURT OFFICERS AND RULES
§ 33.035 CHIEF OF POLICE AS PRINCIPAL OFFICER.
   All writs or process of the Court shall be directed, in his or her official
title, to the Chief of Police of this municipality, who shall be the principal
officer of the Court, or some appropriate peace officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-113)
§ 33.036 CLERK OF THE COURT; DUTIES; BOND.
   (A)   The Incumbent City Clerk is empowered to designate a Deputy City Clerk
to act as Clerk of the Municipal Court, who shall, as Clerk of the Court have
the authority to carry out the duties of the position as required by law;
provided, that the person who serves as Court Clerk may separately perform
other duties for the municipality.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Court shall:
      (1)   Assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of the Court,
preparation of writs, processes, or other papers;
      (2)   Administer oaths required in judicial or other proceedings before
the Court;
      (3)   Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes, and
proceedings in the dockets of the Court;
      (4)   Perform such other clerical duties in relation to the proceedings
of the Court as the Judge shall direct; and
      (5)   Receive and give receipt for and disburse or deliver to the City
Treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money properly
payable to the Municipal Court. Such funds and sums of money while in the
custody of the Clerk shall be deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as directed
by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-114)
   (C)   The Court Clerk of the Court shall give bond, in the form provided by
11 O.S. § 27-111. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the governing
body for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the City Clerk and
retained in the municipal archives.
(Prior Code, § 6-116)
(Ord. 01-30, passed 12-10-2001)
§ 33.037 PROSECUTING ATTORNEY.
   The Attorney for this municipality, or his or her duly designated assistant,
shall be the prosecuting officer of the Court. He or she may also prosecute all
alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He or she shall be
authorized, in his or her discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal,
proceedings in error, and review from this court to any other court of the
state, and to represent this municipality in all proceedings arising out of
matters in this Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-115)
§ 33.038 RULES OF COURT; ENFORCEMENT OF RULES.
   (A)   Rules of Court. The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the
laws of the state and with the ordinances of this municipality for the proper
conduct of the business of the Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-117)
   (B)   Enforcement of rules. Obedience to the orders, rules, and judgments
made by the Judge or by the Court may be enforced by the Judge, who may fine or
imprison for contempt committed as to him or her while holding court, or
committed against process issued by him or her, in the same manner and to the
same extent as the district courts of this state.
(Prior Code, § 6-118)
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
§ 33.050 TRAFFIC ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING CITATION;
CUSTODY; ARREST.
   (A)   If a police officer observes facts which he or she believes constitute
a violation of the traffic ordinances of this municipality, in lieu of
arresting such a person, he or she may release the person on personal
recognizance in accordance with §
33.051 of this chapter, or take his or her name, address, operator’s license
number, and registered license number of the motor vehicle involved and any
other pertinent and necessary information and may issue him or her in writing
in form prescribed by the Mayor or his duly designated delegate, a traffic
citation embracing the above information, and also stating the traffic
violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him or her to answer to the
charge against him or her at a time, not later than the date specified in the
citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator, endorsed on the citation to answer as specified, may then release the
person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer
as prescribed in the citation, complaint shall be filed and the case shall be
prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident or
resident of this municipality, the police officer may:
      (1)   Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set
out in division (A) above pending his or her appearance on a day certain in
court;
      (2)   Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense
charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or
      (3)   Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person
either shall be taken immediately before the judge for further proceedings
according to law or shall have bail fixed for his or her release in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon
giving his or her written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in
division (A) above, the person shall be released from custody.
   (C)   If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or
regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such
an ordinance, and the operator be not present, the police officer shall place
on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the
operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in divisions
(A) or (B) above, with such variation as the circumstances require, the
operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the
citation as if it had been issued to him or her personally under divisions (A)
or (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-120) (Ord. 564-A, passed 2-5-1980)
§ 33.051 TRAFFIC BAIL BOND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person,
whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law
enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law
or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon
personal recognizance if:
      (1)   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States, or any party jurisdiction of the Nonresident Violator Compact, being 47
O.S. § 790;
      (2)   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
      (3)   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation; and
      (4)   The violation does not constitute:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   Negligent homicide;
         (c)   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         (d)   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver’s license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial,
or cancellation;
         (f)   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         (g)   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in divisions
(A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(f) above;
         (h)   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         (i)   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   (B)   (1)   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided for in division (A) above, then the arresting officer
shall:
         (a)   Designate the traffic charge;
         (b)   Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license
on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state,
and expiration date;
         (c)   Record the motor vehicle make, model, and tag information;
         (d)   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
         (e)   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear
as provided for in the citation.
      (2)   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person’s driver’s license in this state, or in
the nonresident’s home state pursuant to the Nonresident Violator Compact.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Chief of
Police from exercising his or her sound and reasoned judgment to authorize
release on personal recognizance or temporary cash bond for any offense stated
in divisions (A)(4)(c) through (A)(4)(i) above and for which a municipal
citation was issued.
   (D)   Procedures for arraignment, continuances, and scheduling, timely
appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines
and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of driver’s
license, shall be required in state law, 22 O.S. §§ 1115.1 through 1115.5.
   (E)   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he or she is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the
copy of the citation furnished to him or her or on a legible copy thereof,
together with the date of the plea and his or her signature. The defendant
shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the
Court Clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the
defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in
this subsection, such plea shall be accepted by the court and the amount of the
fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or
as prescribed by the court.
   (F)   (1)   If, pursuant to the provisions of division (D) above, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant and the Municipal or District Court Clerk, within
120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting
officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that:
         (a)   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         (b)   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         (c)   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any
other arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and
         (d)   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      (2)   The Court Clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety
to either suspend the defendant’s driver’s license to operate a motor vehicle
in this state, or notify the defendant’s home state and request suspension of
the defendant’s driver’s license in accordance with the provisions of the
Nonresident Violator Compact: Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety. The Court Clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this division
(F)(2) if, with respect to such charges:
         (a)   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
         (b)   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         (c)   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous material;
or
         (d)   A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the date
the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   (G)   The Court Clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver’s
license suspension submitted to the State Department of Public Safety pursuant
to the provisions of this section. When the Court or Court Clerk receives
appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes
other arrangements with the defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the Court
Clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the defendant
personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at such other
address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the Court or Court
Clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the
citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of the Nonresident Violator Compact,
and shall in all other cases, notify the State Department of Public Safety of
the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for
notification shall be approved by the State Department of Public Safety.
Provided however, the Court or Court Clerk’s failure to furnish such proof or
notice in the manner provided for in this division (G) shall in no event create
any civil liability upon the Court, the Court Clerk, the state or any political
subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee thereof
but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon
request.
(Prior Code, § 6-121) (Ord. 98-05, passed 11-10-1998)
§ 33.052 CREATION OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   There may be established a Traffic Violations Bureau for the city. The
Judge may establish rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the
ordinances of this municipality, for the Traffic Violations Bureau.
   (B)   The Traffic Violations Bureau shall accept fines which may be paid in
lieu of a court appearance for such traffic offenses as may be designated by
the Judge under the Court’s rules. The schedule of fines shall be adopted by
the governing body from time to time by motion or resolution. A copy shall be
kept in the Clerk’s office.
   (C)   Payment of any fine to the Traffic Violations Bureau shall be deemed a
final determination of the cause against the defendant. In no event shall any
such payment be introduced as evidence in any civil cause arising out of the
offense charged.
(Prior Code, § 6-122)
COURT PROCEDURES
§ 33.065 WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of this municipality shall be
styled “The City of Hobart vs. (naming defendant or defendants):”. Except as
provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of written
complaint subscribed and verified by the person making the complaint and
setting forth concisely the offense charged and that those complaints requiring
trial before the Municipal Court shall be approved for prosecution by the City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 6-119) (Ord. 05-03, passed 8-9-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 22 O.S. § 303
§ 33.066 SUMMONS FOR ARREST.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance,
the Judge, unless he or she determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless
the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and
has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person
charged, specifying his or her address or place of residence, if known, stating
the offense with which he or she is charged, and giving him or her notice to
answer the charge in the court on a certain day as specified after the summons
is served upon him or her, and including such other pertinent information as
may be necessary.
   (B)   The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant
personally. If he or she fails to appear and to answer the summons within the
prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his or her arrest, as provided
by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-123)
§ 33.067 FORM OF ARREST WARRANT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality,
upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the City Attorney
or by the Judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially
the following form:
The City of Hobart to the Police Chief of Hobart, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been committed
and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor forthwith
to arrest the above named defendant and bring the above named (name of
defendant) before me, at the municipal courtroom,
Witness my hand this                   day of                  , 20        .
                                                                                          
                     Judge of the Municipal Court Hobart, Oklahoma
   (B)   It is the duty of the Police Chief, personally, or through a duly
constituted member of the police force of this municipality or through any
other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly as
possible.
(Prior Code, § 6-124)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 27-113
§ 33.068 PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND.
   (A)   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to a
citation or summons or at any time before trial before or after arraignment,
the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the Judge,
who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In the
case of arrests made at night or under other conditions or emergency, or when
the Judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the Chief of Police, or
his or her designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of not
less than $10 nor more than the maximum monetary penalty which is provided by
ordinance for the offense charged.
   (B)   A bail bond schedule may be adopted by the Judge or City Council and
be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 6-125)
§ 33.069 ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT.
   Upon making his or her appearance before the Court, the defendant shall be
arraigned. The Judge, or City Attorney, shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him or her of his or her legal rights, including the right of
trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him
or her whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads
guilty, the Court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the
matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is
not for jury trial, the Court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for
hearing at a later date.
(Prior Code, § 6-126)
§ 33.070 TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may
obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
   (B)   The defendant must be present in person at the trial or be represented
by counsel if permitted by the Judge.
   (C)   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the
statutes relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by
the Supreme Court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of
misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be
made effective.
   (D)   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the
Court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
   (E)   At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the
Judge who shall cause it to be entered in his or her docket.
   (F)   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained
for any other legal cause, he or she must be discharged at once.
   (G)   A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that he or
she be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied at the rate of one day
imprisonment for each $25 of fine. If the defendant is without means to pay the
fine or costs, the Municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to be
entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the District Court of the
County wherein the status of government is situated where it shall be entered
upon the District Court judgment docket and shall have the full force and
effect of a District Court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be
available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other
judgment creditor.
(Prior Code, § 6-127) (Ord. 1090, passed 6-9-1987; Ord. 15-05, passed 4-13-
2015)
§ 33.071 SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   After conviction and sentence, the Judge may suspend sentence, in accordance
with the provisions of, and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by
11 O.S. §§ 27-123 and 27-124.
(Prior Code, § 6-128)
§ 33.072 IMPRISONMENT, WORK BY PRISONERS.
   (A)   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the
Sheriff of the County or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
   (B)   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may
be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or property. For each day of
such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving one day of imprisonment
under his or her sentence.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the City Council,
shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in
charge of the place where the work is to be performed, himself or herself, or
by some person designated by him or her, shall oversee the work. If a guard is
necessary, the Chief of Police shall make provision therefor.
(Prior Code, § 6-129) (Ord. 1090, passed 6-9-1987)
§ 33.073 FINES AND COSTS.
   If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the Court shall tax the
costs to the defendant, which shall be the maximum amount authorized by state
law, plus the fees and mileage of witnesses and jurors, but the total amount of
fine may not exceed the amount set forth in §
10.99  of this Code and up to 30 days in jail.
(Prior Code, § 6-130) (Ord. 1079, passed 11-8-1983; Ord. 1090, passed 6-9-1987)
§ 33.074 PENALTY AND ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10 or more
or by incarceration, excluding parking and standing violations, or any person
forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense, shall be ordered by the
court to pay $4 as a separate penalty assessment, which shall be in addition to
and not in substitution for any and all fines and penalties otherwise provided
for by law for such offense. The court shall provide for separate bail for the
penalty assessment. A defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety
may include the amount of the penalty assessment in the undertaking.
   (B)   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the
penalty assessment and deposit it in an account created for that purpose. As an
administrative fee for handling funds collected as a penalty assessment, the
court is authorized to retain 2% of such monies and may also retain all
interest accrued thereon prior to the due date for deposits as provided in this
division (B). The remainder of such monies shall be forwarded quarterly by the
Court Clerk to the State Treasury. Deposits shall be due July 15 for the
preceding quarter ending June 30, October 15 for the preceding quarter ending
September 30, January 15 for the preceding quarter ending December 31, and
April 15 for the preceding quarter ending March 31.
   (C)   As used in this section, CONVICTED means any final adjudication of
guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or otherwise,
and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment.
(Prior Code, § 6-131)
§ 33.075 FILING OF COMPLAINTS AND FEES.
   (A)   All prosecutions for violation of ordinances of this city shall be
styled “The City of Hobart, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)”.
Except as provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing
of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making the
complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged.
   (B)   There is no duty on the part of the city or any of its officers or
employees to formally prosecute actions in the court. In the absence of a
Prosecuting Officer, the Judge shall proceed with the case and hear evidence
and examine witnesses in such manner as he may deem necessary to effect
justice.
   (C)   Any person, except a police officer or other employee of the city,
filing a criminal offense complaint in the Municipal Court shall deposit with
the Clerk of the Court, unless waived by order of the Court, the court cost fee
$25. The court costs so deposited by such a complainant shall be refunded to
the complainant or person depositing same upon conviction or acquittal of the
defendant; the court costs shall not be refunded if the charges are dismissed
at the request of the complainant who made the deposit because the complainant
fails or refuses to appear in Court to testify or aid in the prosecution of the
charge filed by such complainant.
   (D)   All defects in the form or substance apparent on the face of a
complaint charging a violation of an ordinance of this city, and being grounds
for motion or demur, may only be raised by an accused in writing and prior to
trial.
   (E)   A complaint may be amended in matter of substance or form at any time
before the defendant pleads, without leave, and may be amended after plea or
order of the Court where the same can be done without material prejudice to the
rights of the defendant. No amendment shall cause any delay of the trial,
unless good cause is shown by affidavit.
(Prior Code, § 6-133) (Ord. 00-24, passed 9-11-2000)
§ 33.076 APPEALS.
   Appeals may be taken from a final judgment of the Municipal Court in
accordance with 11 O.S. § 27-129 within ten days of the date of the final
judgment. The Municipal Judge shall require defendant/appellant to give an
appeals bond in cash or sureties for cash equal to twice the amount of the fine
but not more than $200. Any pledge or sureties must be approved by the
Municipal Judge.
(Prior Code, § 6-134) (Ord. 92-1107, passed 12-22-1992)
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND COSTS
Type Section Description Fine Court CLEET AFIS Forensic Bond Total
Type         Section          Description                                                       Fine Court CLEET AFIS Forensic Bond
                                                                                                                               Total
             111.10           Furnishing alcoholic beverage to minor                            $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             111.46           Operating club without a license                                  $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
Alcoholic    111.50           Sale or furnishing nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage to minor    $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
beverages    111.54           Drinking in public                                                $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             111.55           Operating club after hours                                        $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             111.56           Transporting open container                                       $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             90.002           Animal running at large 1st offense                               $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             90.002           Animal running at large 2nd offense                               $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             90.003           Turning animals at large unlawful                                 $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             90.007           Premises not clean                                                $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
Animal       90.009           Leashing animal                                                   $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
regulations  90.010           Operating kennel in city limits                                   $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             90.025           Dog or cat not vaccinated                                         $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             90.026           Dog or cat not registered                                         $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             90.029           Dangerous dog                                                     $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
             90.048           Breaking into animal control shelter                              $256 $30   $10   $10  $10      $316
             90.065           Cruelty to animals                                                $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
Building
regulations/ 150.004          Building permit required                                          $306 $30   $10   $10  $10      $366
codes
Court        33.038           Contempt of court                                                 $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             47 O.S. § 6-210 Operation under foreign license during suspension                 $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
Health and   93.007           Creating public nuisance                                          $181 $30   $10   $10  $10      $241
sanitation   93.061           Littering                                                         $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             93.063           Litter accumulated on property                                    $306 $30   $10   $10  $10      $366
             94.20            Animal not physically restrained (6 ft. leash)                    $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
Hunter Park  94.20            Boating on Hunter Park Lake prohibited                            $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             94.20            Camping and fires                                                 $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             94.20            Method of fishing prohibited                                      $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
Licensing    115.02           Vendors license required                                          $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
and business 115.12           Prohibited solicitation                                           $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
regulations  130.11           Contributing to delinquency of minor                              $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
                             All other criminal                                                $181 $30   $10   $10  $10      $241
             70.055           Violate license restriction                                       $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             71.020           Operate vehicle with more than 3 passengers in front seat         $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             130.04           Transporting loaded concealed firearm                             $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             131.01           Petit larceny                                                     $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
             131.03           Destroying, injuring, or molesting buildings or other property    $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             131.06           Tampering w/city utilities                                        $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             131.08           Illegal entrance                                                  $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             131.13           Trespassing                                                       $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             132.01           Disturbing the peace                                              $181 $30   $10   $10  $10      $241
             132.02           Discharge fireworks in city limits                                $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             132.04           Concealed weapon                                                  $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
             132.05           Reckless conduct w/firearm                                        $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
             132.06           Discharging firearm in city limits                                $306 $30   $10   $10  $10      $366
Offenses and 132.07           Loud noise or music (in vehicle)                                  $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
crimes       132.07           Loud noise or music (not in vehicle)                              $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             133.01           Assault and battery                                               $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             133.02           Public intoxication                                               $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             133.03           Possession of intoxicating beverage under 21                      $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             133.03           Possession of non-intoxicating beverage under 21                  $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             133.06           Possession of control substance (drugs)                           $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             133.06           Possession of paraphernalia                                       $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
             133.11           Indecent exposure                                                 $306 $30   $10   $10  $10      $366
             133.13           Disobeying curfew                                                 $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             134.01           Resisting arrest                                                  $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             134.03           Eluding police officer                                            $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             134.04           Assault or battery upon a police officer                          $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             134.05           Resisting public official                                         $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
             134.09           False alarm                                                       $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             134.10           False representation to officer                                   $306 $30   $10   $10  $10      $366
                             All other traffic                                                 $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.004           Failure to carry driver’s license                               $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.004           Fail to dim lights to oncoming traffic                            $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.004           Fail to obtain valid OK driver’s license w/30 days of residence $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
                              change
             70.004           Improper passing                                                  $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.004           No M endorsement on driver’s license                            $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
Traffic and  70.004           Operator MV at night w/o illuminated headlights                   $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
vehicles     70.004           Unlawful stopping in roadway                                      $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.008           Disobey posted road closed barricade                              $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             70.027           Following emergency vehicle prohibited within 500 ft.             $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             70.040           Leaving scene of accident                                         $82  $30   $10   $10  $10      $142
             70.055           Expired drivers license                                           $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.055           No drivers license in possession                                  $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             70.055           No drivers license issued                                         $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
             70.055           Restriction #9 (non-licensed 21 year old in front seat)           $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            70.055           Violation of driver’s license restriction (corrective lens)     $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            70.055           Violation of driver’s license restriction #9                    $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            70.056           Driving under suspension or revoked (DUS)(DUR)                    $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
            70.057           Failure to pay taxes due state                                    $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
            70.057           Improper vehicle on roadway                                       $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            70.057           No tag or improper display                                        $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            70.058           Permitting unlicensed driver to drive                             $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
            70.059           Failure to comply w/compulsory insurance law                      $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
            70.072           Defective vehicle equipment                                       $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            70.073           Modified exhaust                                                  $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.002           Following too close                                               $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.003           Passing in no passing zone                                        $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
            71.005           Improper backing                                                  $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            71.007           Required equip on motorcycle - no eye protection                  $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.008           Clinging to vehicle prohibited                                    $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.010           Reckless driving                                                  $306 $30   $10   $10  $10      $366
            71.011           Careless driving                                                  $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
            71.014           Driving under the influence of drugs (DUID)                       $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
            71.015           Driving under influence of alcohol (DUI)                          $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
            71.015           Driving while impaired (DWI)                                      $356 $30   $10   $10  $10      $416
            71.015           DUI/APC                                                           $456 $30   $10   $10  $10      $516
            71.022           Unlawful riding outside passenger area                            $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
            71.028           Failure to wear seat belt                                         $10  $10   $0    $0   $0       $20
            71.028           OK Mandatory Seat Belt Use Act (Passenger)                        $10  $10   $0    $0   $0       $20
            71.028           Improper use of seat belt                                         $10  $10   $0    $0   $0       $20
            71.029           Failure to have child in child restraint                          $50  $30   $10   $10  $10      $110
            71.029           Improper child restraint use                                      $50  $30   $10   $10  $10      $110
            71.030           Texting while driving                                             $100 $30   $10   $10  $10      $160
            71.045           Improper lane use (accident)                                      $131 $30   $10   $10  $10      $191
            71.045           Improper lane use (no accident)                                   $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.046           Driving left of center                                            $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.046           Fail to drive on right side of roadway                            $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            71.052           Meeting or overtaking school bus                                  $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
            71.052           Passing school bus while bus lights flashing                      $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
            71.089           Fail to yield to oncoming traffic                                 $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             71.090           Vehicle entering roadway from private road or driveway            $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
             71.105           Speeding (1 - 10 mph over speed limit)                            $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            71.105           Speeding (11 - 15 mph over speed limit)                           $76  $30   $10   $10  $10      $136
            71.105           Speeding (16 - 20 mph over speed limit)                           $116 $30   $10   $10  $10      $176
            71.105           Speeding (21 - 25 mph over speed limit)                           $116 $30   $10   $10  $10      $176
            71.105           Speeding (26 - 30 mph over speed limit)                           $136 $30   $10   $10  $10      $196
            71.105           Speeding (31 - 35 mph over speed limit)                           $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
            71.105           Speeding (36 mph + over speed limit)                              $206 $30   $10   $10  $10      $266
            71.123           Illegal U-turn                                                    $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            71.124           Improper turn                                                     $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            71.125           Fail to use turn signal                                           $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            72.03            Disobeying stop sign (accident)                                   $131 $30   $10   $10  $10      $191
            72.03            Disobeying stop sign (no accident)                                $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            72.05            Disobeying traffic signal (accident)                              $131 $30   $10   $10  $10      $191
            72.05            Disobeying traffic signal (no accident)                           $106 $30   $10   $10  $10      $166
            73.01            Illegal parking                                                   $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            73.17            Improperly parked upon posted private property                    $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            73.24            Improper parallel parking                                         $12  $30   $10   $10  $10      $72
            73.25            Parking in handicap zone                                          $56  $30   $10   $10  $10      $116
            47 O.S. § 4-107 Affix unauthorized plate to vehicle with intent to conceal        $156 $30   $10   $10  $10      $216
             (d)              identity
 
(Prior Code, § 6-132) (Ord. 18-01, passed 10-25-2017)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Finance and Budget Administration
   
34.001   Depositories designated; funds to be deposited
   
34.002   Funds secured by unit collateral system
   
34.003   Contractual services defined for purchasing
   
34.004   Purchases
   
34.005   Competitive bidding
   
34.006   Competitive bidding not required
Sales Tax
   
34.020   Citation
   
34.021   Definitions
   
34.022   Classification of taxpayers
   
34.023   Subsisting state permits
   
34.024   Effective date
   
34.025   Purpose of revenues
   
34.026   Tax rate - sales subject to tax
   
34.027   Exemptions; sales subject to other tax
   
34.028   Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities
   
34.029   Exemptions; general
   
34.030   Exemptions; agriculture
   
34.031   Exemptions; manufacturers
   
34.032   Exemptions; corporations and partnerships
   
34.033   When tax due and payable
   
34.034   Payment of tax; brackets
   
34.035   Tax constitutes debt
   
34.036   Vendor’s duty to collect tax
   
34.037   Returns and remittances; discounts
   
34.038   Interest and penalties; delinquency
   
34.039   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
34.040   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
34.041   Fraudulent returns
   
34.042   Records confidential
   
34.043   Amendments
   
34.044   Provisions cumulative
Telephone Exchange Fee
   
34.055   Fee levied on telephone exchanges
   
34.056   Fee to be in lieu of other fees or taxes
Utilities Tax
   
34.070   Fee levied; application
   
34.071   Tax is in lieu of other taxes
   
34.072   Tax to be paid monthly and deposited in General Revenue Fund
   
34.073   Failure to pay; action for collection
   
34.074   Tax lien
Excise Tax
   
34.085   Citation
   
34.086   Purposes of revenues
   
34.087   Definitions
   
34.088   Excise tax on storage, use, or other consumption of intangible
personal property
   
34.089   Exemptions
   
34.090   Time tax due; manner and payment
   
34.091   Tax constitutes debt
   
34.092   Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
   
34.093   Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining place of
business in state or both in and out of state
   
34.094   Revoking permits
   
34.095   Remunerative deductions
   
34.096   Classification of taxpayers
   
34.097   Subsisting state permits
   
34.098   Interest and penalties; delinquency
   
34.099   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
34.100   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
34.101   Fraudulent returns
   
34.102   Records confidential
   
34.103   Provisions cumulative
Hotel/Motel Room Tax
   
34.115   Citation
   
34.116   Definitions
   
34.117   Tax rate
   
34.118   Exemptions
   
34.119   Administration and collection of tax
   
34.120   Records confidential
   
34.121   Fraudulent returns
   
34.122   Amendments
   
34.123   Provisions cumulative
 
   
34.999   Penalty
FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION
§ 34.001 DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; FUNDS TO BE DEPOSITED.
   (A)   All banks and all savings and loan associations in this city which are
incorporated under federal or state law, and other institutions approved by the
Mayor and Council, are hereby designated as depositories for the funds of the
city.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds received by
him or her in such banks or savings and loan associations.
(Prior Code, § 7-101)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 11 O.S. § 12-110
§ 34.002 FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM.
   The deposits of the city shall be secured by the unit collateral system
provided by the Oklahoma Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 7-102)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 62 O.S. §§ 517.1 et seq.
§ 34.003 CONTRACTUAL SERVICES DEFINED FOR PURCHASING.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, CONTRACTUAL SERVICES means services
performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, and may
include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection
with the services under express or implied contract. CONTRACTUAL SERVICES shall
include: travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph;
utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations, and maintenance
of buildings, equipment, streets, and bridges, and other physical facilities of
the city; and other services performed for the city by persons not in the
employment of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-103)
§ 34.004 PURCHASES.
   All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services
for the offices, departments, and agencies of the city government, shall be
made by city personnel in accordance with purchase authorizations issued by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 7-104)
§ 34.005 COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   Follow the guidelines as set forth by the current state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 7-105) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-29-2001)
§ 34.006 COMPETITIVE BIDDING NOT REQUIRED.
   The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for competitive
bidding:
   (A)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services whose cost
does not exceed the limit set forth by the current state statutes;
   (B)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever
bought;
   (C)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services purchased from
another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from private
dealers, including government surplus;
   (D)   Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable
when the City Council declares the purchase an emergency;
   (E)   Contractual services, including, but not limited to, natural gas,
electricity, telephone service, purchased from a public utility at a price or
rate determined by the state corporation commission or other governmental
authority;
   (F)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services when purchased
at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing agency or
any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for things
purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; and
   (G)   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
architectural, legal, and medical services unless competitive bidding is
required by applicable law or regulations, such as certain federal grants
programs.
(Prior Code, § 7-106) (Ord. 01-26, passed 11-29-2001)
SALES TAX
§ 34.020 CITATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as City of Hobart Sales Tax
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 7-201)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy sales taxes for municipal purposes, see 68 O.S. § 2701
   State Sales Tax Code, see 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq.
§ 34.021 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1352, and in 68 O.S. § 1354.15, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS RECEIPTS. As defined in the State Sales Tax Code is hereby
augmented to contain the additional following words: “The total retail sale
price received for the sale, preparation, or service of mixed beverages, ice,
and non-alcoholic beverages to be mixed with alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where such sale, preparation, or service occurs
shall constitute the GROSS RECEIPTS from such transaction.
      SALE. Includes the SALE, preparation, or service of ice or nonalcoholic
beverages that are sold, prepared, or served for the purpose of being mixed
with alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where such SALE,
preparation, or otherwise occurs.
(Prior Code, § 7-202)
      TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the city or the official agency of the
state duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to
administer the collection of the tax levied in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-203)
§ 34.022 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-204)
§ 34.023 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax
Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 7-205)
§ 34.024 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter became effective as to each cent tax after approval of a
majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the ordinance in the
manner prescribed by 11 O.S. § 16-112.
(Prior Code, § 7-206)
§ 34.025 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   (A)   It is the purpose of the first and second cent sales taxes, levied by
Ordinances 1011 and 1047, to provide revenues for the support of the functions
of the municipal government of the city.
   (B)   It is the purpose of the revenues provided by the tax levied by
Ordinance 1076 to provide revenues for the making of capital improvements to
physical properties of the city, paying the costs and expenses of general and
special purposes of the municipal government of the city, improving the water
and sanitary sewer systems of the city, and the payment of the principal of and
interest on indebtedness incurred by the city or any duly constituted authority
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-207) (Ord. 1076, passed 7-26-1983)
Editor’s Note:
   Ordinance 1011, adopted May 28, 1968, levied the first one-cent tax
effective July 1, 1968;
   Ordinance 1047, adopted May 25, 1976, levied a second one-cent tax;
Ordinance 1076, adopted July 26, 1983, levied a third one-cent tax, ear-marked
as provided herein.
§ 34.026 TAX RATE - SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 4% upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code
including but not exclusive of the following:
   (A)   Tangible personal property;
   (B)   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other
utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this
subchapter;
   (C)   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines, and all other means of
transportation for hire;
   (D)   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall
include all services and rental charges having any connection with transmission
of any messages;
   (E)   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and the
service of printing or over-printing, including the copying of information by
mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter
in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
   (F)   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming
house, motel, public lodging house, or tourist camps;
   (G)   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots;
   (H)   Selling, renting, or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or
software or coding sheets, cards, or magnetic tapes on which prewritten
programs have been coded, punched, or otherwise recorded;
   (I)   Food, confections, and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
   (J)   Advertising of all kinds, types, and character, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this subchapter;
   (K)   Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business;
   (L)   Sales of tickets, fees, or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports entertainment,
exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made;
   (M)   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of
activity, when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis, racketball,
or handball courts;
   (N)   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports,
entertainment, or recreational activity such as trampolines or golf carts;
   (O)   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment, or other
recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or other
sports and athletic equipment;
   (P)   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without any
deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person
who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom;
   (Q)   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible
personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when the
rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair, or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided if the rental or lease
charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making the
rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the rental
or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement,
bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall
be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
   (R)   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease, or other device or instrument
whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances or
rights to receive images, pictures, or performances for telecast by any method
are transferred. Provided, persons regularly engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed
under this subchapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in respect
to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts,
cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or licensing of such
films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this subchapter;
   (S)   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees, and other floral items, whether or not
same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or nursery
business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma business for
delivery in another state. Provided, all orders taken outside this state for
delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by this
subchapter;
   (T)   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors, or
other salespeople, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will
lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this subchapter because of:
      (1)   The operation of the business;
      (2)   The nature of the business;
      (3)   The turnover of independent contractors;
      (4)   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep
records;
      (5)   Lack of adequate records;
      (6)   The persons are minors or transients;
      (7)   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
      (8)   Any other reasonable reason.
   (U)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property including
materials, supplies, and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable; and
   (V)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairpersons, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable.
(Prior Code, § 7-208)
§ 34.027 EXEMPTIONS; SALES SUBJECT TO OTHER TAX.
   There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter
the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code
inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the:
   (A)   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax, or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
   (B)   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the Oklahoma Motor Vehicle Excise Tax
levied by state law has been paid;
   (C)   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This division (C) shall not
operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of
this state; and
   (D)   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to 68 O.S. §§ 6001
through 6004 has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-209)
§ 34.028 EXEMPTIONS; GOVERNMENTAL AND NONPROFIT ENTITIES.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
Government or to the State of Oklahoma, any political subdivision of this state
or any agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States Government, State of Oklahoma or any of its political subdivisions shall
not be exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
   (B)   Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by agencies
or instrumentalities of the United States Government if ownership and
possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States
Government;
   (C)   Sales made directly by county, district, or state fair authorities of
this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
   (D)   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools, high
schools, colleges, or universities which are operated primarily for teachers
and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for profit;
   (E)   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable, or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided such societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a
profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof
to the exclusion of other members;
   (F)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
   (G)   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other form of entertainment,
edification, or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters, and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected, and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
   (H)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the Council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A., and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax;
   (I)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state system of
higher education and the Grand River Dam Authority, or to any person with whom
any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly entered
into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such public
contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract. Any person making
purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state shall certify,
in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of this state and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency.
Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that purchases are for any
of the above named subdivision or agencies of this state or who otherwise
violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined an amount equal to double the amount of the sales tax
involved or incarcerated for not more than 60 days or both;
   (J)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to private
institutions of higher education and private institutions of higher education
and private elementary and secondary institutions of education accredited by
the State Department of Education or registered by the State Board of Education
for purposes of participating in federal programs or accredited as defined by
the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education which are exempt from taxation
pursuant to the provisions of 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), including materials,
supplies, and equipment used in the construction and improvement of buildings
and other structures owned by the institutions and operated for education
purposes. Any person, firm, agency, or entity making purchases on behalf of any
institution, agency, or subdivision in this state, shall certify in writing, on
the copy of the invoice of sales ticket the nature of the purchases, and
violation of this act shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in division (I)
above;
   (K)   Tuition and education fees paid to private institutions of higher
education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education
accredited by the State Department of Education or registered by the State
Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal programs or
accredited as defined by the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education which
are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3);
and
   (L)   Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private school
for grade levels kindergarten through twelfth grade, a public school district,
public school board, public school student group or organization, or public
school district personnel for purposes of raising funds for the benefit of such
school, school district, school board, or student group or organization. For
purposes of this division (L) PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL shall mean any public or
private institution of education accredited by the State Department of
Education or registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of
participating in federal programs. SALE OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY in this
division (L) shall not include sale of admission tickets or concessions at
athletic events.
(Prior Code, § 7-210)
§ 34.029 EXEMPTIONS; GENERAL.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or high
schools in motor or other vehicles;
   (B)   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed $1, or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a
municipality except by taxicab;
   (C)   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed $0.75. A CARRIER is a person who regularly delivers
newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route;
   (D)   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the
articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this subchapter. This exemption shall not apply
to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors, and other salespersons who do not
have an established place of business and a sales tax permit;
   (E)   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard
advertising service, and
any advertising through the electronic media, including radio, television, and
cable television;
   (F)   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery, and equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of
raising same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and extended
to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the
raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is
regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the
items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to
the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to
grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or
vendor shall be a misdemeanor;
   (G)   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by 59 O.S. §
353.1;
   (H)   Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled, or filled
returnable oil drums to any person who is not regularly engaged in the business
of selling, reselling, or otherwise transferring empty, partially filled, or
filled returnable oil drums;
   (I)   Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are
purchased in whole or in part with coupons issued pursuant to the federal food
stamp program as authorized by 7 U.S.C. §§ 2011 through 2029, as to that
portion purchased with such coupons. The exemption provided for such sales
shall be inapplicable to such sales upon the effective date of any federal law
that removes the requirement of the exemption as a condition for participation
by the state in the Federal Food Stamp Program; and
   (J)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the city
from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas and
electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales tax
levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
(Prior Code, § 7-211)
§ 34.030 EXEMPTIONS; AGRICULTURE.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the producer
thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold at or from
a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
      (1)   Farm, orchard, or garden products;
      (2)   Dairy products sold by a dairyperson or farmer who owns all the
cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
      (3)   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; and
      (4)   The provisions of this division (A) shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserypersons, or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business except as set out herein;
   (B)   Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules, or other domestic or draft
animals, sold by the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock sale;
   (C)   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults, and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys, and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
   (D)   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone, and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk,
or meat for human consumption;
      (2)   Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules, or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
      (3)   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants, or other such agricultural supplies;
      (4)   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
      (5)   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such as
dogs, cats, birds, or such other fur-bearing animals; and
      (6)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy;
   (E)   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged,
for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor, that he or she is so engaged in farming or ranching and that the
material purchased will be used only in such business;
      (2)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing,
on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that he
or she is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands owned or
leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business
of farming or ranching, and shall show in the certificate the name or names of
such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on which the
materials are to be applied to each such land, and he or she shall further
certify that his or her contract price has been reduced so as to give the
farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
      (3)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceuticals, and biologicals
to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract or
custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors under this
subchapter, and the sales shall not be considered to be taxable sales within
the meaning of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. As used in this section,
AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER, PHARMACEUTICALS, and BIOLOGICALS mean any substance
sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for promoting
the growth and productivity of plants or animals;
      (4)   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. This section shall
not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and sold
for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
      (5)   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. For the purposes
of this act, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any substance or
mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling, or
mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed, or
any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus,
bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial, or other
microorganisms on or in living man, or any substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant;
      (6)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser
where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production of
agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of
the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall
certify to the Oklahoma Tax Commission that the contract price of the items has
been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by
the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor and, upon violation and
conviction for a second offense, the Oklahoma Tax Commission shall revoke the
vendor’s sales tax permit; and
   (F)   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil, lubricants,
and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm machinery
to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production, cultivation,
planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation, or irrigation
of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products produced from such
lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts thereto, or fuel must
certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained
by the vendor, that he or she is engaged in farming or ranching and that the
farm machinery, repair parts thereto, or fuel will be used only in farming or
ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to motor vehicles.
Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material purchased will only be
used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the Oklahoma
Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full
benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be
a misdemeanor and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the
Oklahoma Tax Commission shall revoke the vendor’s sales tax permit.
(Prior Code, § 7-212)
§ 34.031 EXEMPTIONS; MANUFACTURERS.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this
subchapter:
   (A)   Goods, wares, merchandise, and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling, or preparing for sale a finished article and such
goods, wares, merchandise, or property become integral parts of the
manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled, or prepared products or are
consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
or preparing products for resale. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean
those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations, and generally recognized as such;
   (B)   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same with
motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
   (C)   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in the state, and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in the state. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this subchapter. The term
MANUFACTURING PLANTS means those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
   (D)   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden, or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling, or
otherwise transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this
code. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials
delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely
essential to the sale of the sold merchandise;
   (E)   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in the state when sold
by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state; and
   (F)   Machinery, equipment, fuels, and chemicals incorporated into and
directly used or consumed in the process of treatment to substantially reduce
the volume or harmful properties of controlled industrial waste at treatment
facilities specifically permitted pursuant to the Oklahoma Hazardous Waste
Management Act, being 27A O.S. §§ 2-7-101 et seq., and operated at the place of
waste generation, or facilities approved by the State Department of Health for
the cleanup of a site of contamination. The term CONTROLLED INDUSTRIAL WASTE
may include low-level radioactive waste for the purpose of this division (F).
(Prior Code, § 7-213)
§ 34.032 EXEMPTIONS; CORPORATIONS AND PARTNERSHIPS.
   There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this
subchapter:
   (A)   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
      (1)   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this division (A)(1) the term REORGANIZATION means a
statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
      (2)   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a
corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
      (3)   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the
property prior to the transfer;
      (4)   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the property
prior to the transfer; or
      (5)   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the
dissolution of such partnership; and
   (B)   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 7-214)
§ 34.033 WHEN TAX DUE AND PAYABLE.
   The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the
Oklahoma Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-215)
§ 34.034 PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   (B)   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the Tax
Collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the state sales tax.
(Prior Code, § 7-216)
§ 34.035 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   The taxes, penalty, and interest due under this subchapter shall at all
times constitute a prior, superior, and paramount claim as against the claims
of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 7-217)
§ 34.036 VENDOR’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It is the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from
the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this subchapter, or
an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute
a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to
vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   (C)   A vendor, as defined hereunder, who willfully or intentionally fails,
neglects, or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
subchapter, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to comply
with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly
or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein
levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any
statement which infers that he or she is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax
for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.
   (D)   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this subchapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-218) Penalty, see § 34.999
§ 34.037 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Collector at the time and in the manner, form, and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code
for collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 7-219)
§ 34.038 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   There is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, 68 O.S. § 217, and
interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are
hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and
paying the tax levied by this subchapter. The failure or refusal of any
taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time
and manner required by this subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent.
In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five days, the
taxpayer shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-220)
§ 34.039 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220. To accomplish the purposes of
this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-221)
§ 34.040 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made
to any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purpose of
this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-222)
§ 34.041 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter shall be an offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-223) Penalty, see §
34.999
§ 34.042 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code,
68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq., and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city
sales tax as if here set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 7-224)
§ 34.043 AMENDMENTS.
   The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby
authorize the City Council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this subchapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-225)
§ 34.044 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
or all other taxing provisions of city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-226)
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
§ 34.055 FEE LEVIED ON TELEPHONE EXCHANGES.
   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each
and every person, firm, or corporation operating a telephone exchange in the
city in an amount equal to 2% of the gross revenues for each current year for
exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of
the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered
incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulations,
and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone
company in the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to
the city on or before May 1 of each year, for the preceding calendar year, and
shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the General Revenue Fund
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-301)
Statutory reference:
   Town powers to levy utility tax on gross receipts, see 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et
seq.
§ 34.056 FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF OTHER FEES OR TAXES.
   During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this subchapter by
the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and
continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege, and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes.
However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct
space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls
systems of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-302)
UTILITIES TAX
§ 34.070 FEE LEVIED; APPLICATION.
   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of 2% upon the gross
receipts from residential and commercial sales of gas or electricity in the
city. Such tax shall apply to all persons, firms, associations or corporations
engaged in the business of furnishing gas or electricity within the city
limits, except that it shall not apply to any person, firm, association, or
corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-401)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of council to levy above tax, see 68 O.S. § 2601
   Tax not applicable to franchise holders, see 68 O.S. § 2602
§ 34.071 TAX IS IN LIEU OF OTHER TAXES.
   The tax levied by this subchapter shall be in lieu of any other franchise,
license, occupation, or excise tax levied by the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-402)
§ 34.072 TAX TO BE PAID MONTHLY AND DEPOSITED IN GENERAL REVENUE FUND.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall be payable monthly and placed in
the General Revenue Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-403)
§ 34.073 FAILURE TO PAY; ACTION FOR COLLECTION.
   Any person failing or refusing to pay the tax levied by this subchapter
shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In addition
thereto, an action may be maintained against such person for the amount of the
tax and all expenses of collecting same, including reasonable attorneys’ fees.
(Prior Code, § 7-404)
§ 34.074 TAX LIEN.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall constitute a first and prior lien
on all the assets located within the city of any person engaged in the business
of selling gas or electricity within the city and subject to such tax.
(Prior Code, § 7-405)
EXCISE TAX
§ 34.085 CITATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as City of Hobart Use Tax
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 7-501) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.086 PURPOSES OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the
governing body of the city for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully
expended as authorized by the city, and the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-502) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.087 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Use
Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this subchapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms
shall be defined as follows.
   CITY. The City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 7-503)
   TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the city government or the official agency
of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law,
to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
(Prior Code, § 7-512)
   TRANSACTION. Sale.
(Prior Code, § 7-503)
(Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.088 EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE, OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF INTANGIBLE
PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing,
using, or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property
acquired or brought into this city, an excise tax on the storage, use of other
consumption in this city of such property at the rate of 3% of the purchase
value of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using,
or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal property purchased
or brought into the city. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at
the time of importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be
assessed to only property purchased outside the state; provided, that the tax
levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended
solely for use outside the city, but which is stored in the city pending
shipment outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the
purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance, or other
service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct
from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or
services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that
would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the
sale of such goods or services.
(Prior Code, § 7-504) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.089 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply in respect to:
   (A)   The use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the
city by a nonresident individual visiting in this city for his or her personal
use or enjoyment while within the city;
   (B)   The use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before
being used;
   (C)   The use of any article of tangible, personal property on which a tax
equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the
city use tax ordinance has been paid by the person using such tangible,
personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the laws of
the state or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any
article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax by
the state or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in
an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma Use Tax Code and the
city use tax ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to it
by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the
Oklahoma Use Tax Code and city use tax ordinance, and the rate by which the
previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall
be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or
municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in this state and the
city;
   (D)   The use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and machinery
and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of manufacturing
plants already established in the city. Provided, this exemption shall not
apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly
used in the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the
sales tax ordinances of the city. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean
those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations, and generally recognized as such;
   (E)   The use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from
taxation under the sales tax ordinances of the city;
   (F)   The use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the
city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this city where such
personal property is for such individual’s personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   The use of any article of tangible personal property used or to be
used by commercial airlines or railroads; and
   (H)   Livestock purchased outside the state and brought into this city for
feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold.
(Prior Code, § 7-505) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.090 TIME TAX DUE; MANNER AND PAYMENT.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the State Use
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-506) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.091 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   Such taxes, penalty, and interest due hereunder shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as an other debt.
(Prior Code, § 7-507) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.092 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR.
   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and
without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place
of business outside this state for use in this city shall at the time of making
such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the purchaser and
give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by
the Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall, by regulation, require such
receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the Tax Commission the name
and address of all his or her agents operating in this city and location of any
and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in
this city.
(Prior Code, § 7-508) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.093 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING PLACE OF
BUSINESS IN STATE OR BOTH IN AND OUT OF STATE.
   The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax herein levied by an retailer or vendor not maintaining a
place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal
property for use in this city and by the out-of-state place of business of any
retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the
state and making sale of tangible, personal property at such out-of-state place
of business for use in this city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the Tax Commission in such
manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe.
When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect
the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his or her knowledge for
use within this city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at any
time the Tax Commission considers that such tax can more effectively be
collected from the person using such property in this city. Provided, however,
that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the
purchaser within this city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer’s or
vendor’s vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sale or
transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax at the
point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer’s
sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 7-509) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.094 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the Oklahoma Use Tax Code or any order, rules, or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor. If any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized
to do business in this state the Tax Commission may, after notice and hearing
above provided, cancel the corporation’s license to do business in this state
and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this subchapter, the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, or any order,
rules, or regulations of the Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 7-510) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.095 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form, and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Use Tax Code.
Remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by the use tax code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Prior Code, § 7-511) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.096 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Use
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 7-513) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.097 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax Commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma Use Tax Code are for the purpose of this chapter
hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 7-514) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.098 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   There is hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter, 68 O.S. § 217,
and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified
are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting
and paying the tax levied by this subchapter. Provided, that the failure or
refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this subchapter shall
cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for
a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his or her claim to
any discount allowed under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-515) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.099 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as
applied in administration of the State Use Tax provided in 68 O.S. § 227, and
to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S.
§ 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-516) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.100 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, as amended, and to accomplish the
purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-517) (Ord. 1986-2, passed 6-17-1986)
§ 34.101 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter shall be an offense, punishable as set forth in §
34.999.
(Prior Code, § 7-518) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986) Penalty, see §
34.999
§ 34.102 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, as amended,
of the State Use Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city
use tax as if herein set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 7-519) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
§ 34.103 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of the city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-520) (Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986)
HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX
§ 34.115 CITATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the Hobart Hotel/Motel Room Tax
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 7-601) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.116 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. Any building or buildings, structures, trailer, or other
facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation of
such guests whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term shall
include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses, or courts,
lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory
space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not
occupied by “permanent residents,” and all other facilities where rooms or
sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall
not include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes, nor shall this term
affect permanent resident facilities for residents for terms in excess of 30
days.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of
any room or rooms in the hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the
furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and
possession of the room or rooms.
   OCCUPANT. A person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the
right to use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or other agreement.
   OPERATOR. Any and all persons operating a hotel(s) or motel(s) in the city,
including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee,
mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such
hotel or motel.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any occupant who has or shall have the right of
occupancy of any room in a hotel for 30 or more consecutive days during the
current calendar year or proceeding year.
   RENT. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.
   RETURN. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
   ROOM. Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel, which
is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a
place of assembly. As used herein, PLACE OF ASSEMBLY means a room or space
which is capable of being occupied by 75 or more persons and such is used for
educational, recreational, or amusement purposes and shall include dance halls,
cabarets, night clubs, restaurants, any room or space for public or private
banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings, lodge and meeting halls or
rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard, bowling, and table
tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes,
funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls, broadcasting
studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
   TAX. The tax levied pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-602) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.117 TAX RATE.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 5% upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all rent received for every occupancy of a room or rooms
in a hotel in the city except that the tax shall not be imposed where the rent
is less than the rate of $3 per day.
(Prior Code, § 7-603) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.118 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this subchapter:
      (1)   Permanent residents;
      (2)   The United States government or any agency or division thereof;
      (3)   The State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof; and
      (4)   Any organization, corporation, or association organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable, philanthropic, or educational
purposes provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a trade or
business for profit.
   (B)   Anyone claiming to be exempt from the tax must obtain a certification
from the City Clerk that the organization, association, or corporation with
which he or she is affiliated is exempt from the tax. Prior to issuing such a
certificate, the City Clerk shall require a certification from the said
organization, association, or corporation that the occupant is its agent,
representative, or employee and that his or her occupancy of the room is
required in connection with the affairs of said organization, and upon such
proof a refund may be obtained from the respective operator. The certificate
shall be available from each operator.
(Prior Code, § 7-604) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.119 ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Tax to be separately designated on bills. The operator shall
separately designate, charge, and show the tax on all bills, statements,
receipts, or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for occupancy
issued or delivered by the operator.
   (B)   Operator responsible for collection. Each operator shall be solely
responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable
to the city for the tax.
   (C)   Records to be kept. Every operator shall keep records of every
occupancy and all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable
thereon in such forms as the City Clerk may require. Such records shall be
available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the City
Clerk, or duly authorized agent or employee of the city and shall be preserved
for a period of three years from the date thereof except that the City Clerk
may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
   (D)   Returns.
      (1)   Every operator shall file with the City Clerk a return of occupancy
and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the period ending June 30,
September 30, December 31, and March 31 of each year from the effective date
hereof.
      (2)   The City Clerk may permit or require returns to be made by shorter
or longer periods and upon such dates as he or she may specify. The form of
return shall be prescribed by the City Clerk and shall contain such
information, as he or she may deem necessary for the proper administration of
this subchapter. The City Clerk may require amended returns to be filed within
20 days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
   (E)   Payment of tax. At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of
rents, each operator shall pay to the City Clerk the taxes imposed by this
subchapter upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies
collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of
this subchapter. All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to
be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the City Clerk on or
before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such period without
regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed
correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon.
   (F)   Bond required. When the City Clerk believes that any operator is about
to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any
other similar reason he or she deems it necessary in order to protect revenues
under this subchapter, he or she may require such operator to file with the
city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this
state in such amount as the City Clerk may fix to secure the payment of any tax
or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In
the event that the City Clerk determines that an operator is to file such bond,
he or she shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond
required. The operator shall file such bond within five days after the giving
of such notice unless within such five days the operator shall request in
writing a hearing before the City Council or its designee, at such the
propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the City Council or its
designee. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within
15 days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the City
Clerk, or cash in such amount as he or she may prescribe, may be deposited with
the City Clerk, who may at any time after five days’ notice to the depositor,
apply them to any tax and/or any penalties due and for the purpose the
securities may be sold at private or public sale.
   (G)   Assessment and determination of tax. If a return required by this
subchapter is not filed, or if a return when filed is incorrect or
insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the City Clerk from
such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be
estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, location,
scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number
of employees, or other factors; provided, however, such assessment shall in no
event exceed the amount of tax that was due and payable and such assessment
procedure shall not be performed in an arbitrary and capricious manner. Written
notice of such assessment shall be given to the person liable for the
collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and
irrevocably fix and determine the tax unless the person, against whom it is
assessed, shall apply in writing to the City Council or its designee for a
hearing or unless the City Clerk on his or her own motion shall reassess the
same. After such hearing, the City Council or its designee shall give written
notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and
such determination shall be final.
   (H)   Refunds.
      (1)   Refund procedure. The City Clerk shall refund or credit any tax
erroneously collected if written application to the City Clerk for such refund
shall be made within two years from the date of payment thereof. For like
causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative and
the order of the City Clerk. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor
shall be stated in writing. Such application may also be made by the person who
has collected and paid such tax to the City Clerk providing that the
application is made within two years of the payment of the occupant to the
operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he or she
has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is
made. The City Clerk in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow
credit therefor on payment due from the applicant.
      (2)   Determination and hearings. Upon application for a refund, the City
Clerk may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as
he or she deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the
City Clerk shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall
be final unless the applicant within 90 days after such notice shall apply in
writing to the City Council or its designee for a hearing. After such hearing,
the City Council or its designee shall give written notice of its decision to
the applicant.
   (I)   Notices. Notices provided for under this subchapter shall be deemed to
have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator
or deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the
operator.
   (J)   Remedies exclusive. The remedies provided in this subchapter shall be
exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability
imposed by this subchapter.
   (K)   General powers of the City Clerk. In addition to all other powers
granted the City Clerk, the City Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to:
      (1)   Make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this subchapter for the purposes thereof;
      (2)   Extend for cause shown the time for filing return for the period
not exceeding 60 days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce penalties
or interest;
      (3)   Delegate the functions of the City Clerk hereunder to an assistant
or other employee or employees of the city;
      (4)   To assess, reassess, determine, revise, and readjust the taxes
imposed by this subchapter, except the rate of tax; and
      (5)   Prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents.
   (L)   Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. The City Clerk or
designated representative shall have the power to administer oaths and take
affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of powers
and duties under this subchapter. The City Clerk shall have the power to
subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,
papers, and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his
or her duties hereunder and all the enforcement of this subchapter and to
examine them in relation thereto.
   (M)   Collection permits. Every operator shall apply for a collection permit
from the City Clerk in a form prescribed by said City Clerk within ten days
after the effective date hereof, or in the case of operators commencing
business or opening new hotels after such effective dates, within three days
after such commencement or opening. The City Clerk shall, within five days
after such application issue, without charge, to each operator a collection
permit empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and
duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each collection permit or
duplicate shall state the hotel or motel to which it is applicable. Such
collection permits shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such
manner that it may be seen and comes to the notice of all occupants and persons
seeking occupancy. Said permits shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and
shall be surrendered immediately to the City Clerk upon the cessation of
business at the hotel named, or upon its sale, lease, assignment or transfer.
   (N)   Interest. If any tax levied by this subchapter becomes delinquent, the
person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid
tax at the rate of 1.5% per month on the unpaid balance from the date of
delinquency.
   (O)   Delinquent taxes. The tax levied by this subchapter shall be due and
payable at the time filing of the returns provided for in this subchapter is
required. All taxes not paid within five days from the time they become due,
shall be delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 7-605) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.120 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the hotel/motel room tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the sales
tax law of the state, and each subsection thereof is hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city
hotel/motel room tax as if herein set forth.
(Prior Code, § 7-606) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.121 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and
remittances therein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report
for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this subchapter shall be an offense, subject to a fine as
set forth in §
34.999.
(Prior Code, § 7-607) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.122 AMENDMENTS.
   The people of the city, by their approval of this subchapter at the election
herein provided, hereby authorized the City Council by ordinances duly enacted
to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method
and manner of administration and enforcing this subchapter as may be necessary
or proper for efficiency and fairness except that the rate of the tax herein
provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the
city as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-608) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.123 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-609) (Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-2006)
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, joint venture, or association that
willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the sums
required to be collected or paid as set forth in §
34.036 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 7-218)
   (B)   The willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and
remittances required by §§
34.020 through
34.044, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
those sections, shall be an offense. Upon conviction, the offending taxpayer
shall be subject to a fine as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 7-223)
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
34.101 shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day of noncompliance with §§
34.085 through
34.103 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-518)
   (D)    Whoever violates the provisions of §
34.121 shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
operator shall be subjected to a fine of not more than $100, including costs;
each day is to be considered a separate offense to be charged severally.
(Prior Code, § 7-607)
(Ord. 1086, passed 8-26-1986; Ord. 06-03, passed 12-12-2005, effective 2-15-
2006)
CHAPTER 35: FEES AND CHARGES
Section
   
35.01   Schedule of fees and charges
§ 35.01 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.
   For the purpose of providing a clear and concise listing of the fees and
charges authorized by the provisions of this Code in payment for licenses,
permits, and services performed in accordance with the regulations and controls
upon which the licenses and permits are conditioned and to provide uniformity
in the supervision and administration of the issuance of licenses and permits
and the collection of the amounts prescribed, a schedule of fees and charges,
or fee schedule, is hereby set forth in this section. The headings give the
titles of the appropriate chapters as applicable.
Code Section  Fee
Code                                                         Fee
Section
   ADMINISTRATION
   City Officials and Employees
31.05   Certain personnel to be bonded                       $1,000
   Municipal Court
                                                             Adopted by
        Bail bond schedule                                   Judge or City
                                                             Council
                                                             Not less than
                                                             $10 nor more
33.068                                                       than the
                                                             maximum
        Procedures for bail or bond temporary                penalty
                                                             provided by
                                                             ordinance for
                                                             the offense
                                                             charged
        Trials and judgments; a judgment that the defendant  One day of
33.070  pay a fine may direct that he or she be imprisoned   imprisonment
        until the fine is satisfied                          for each $25
                                                             of fine
                                                             Each day of
                                                             such work the
                                                             prisoners
        Imprisonment, work by prisoners; prisoners to work   shall be
33.072  credited toward payment of fine and costs assessed   credited for
        against him or her                                   serving one
                                                             day of
                                                             imprisonment
                                                             under his or
                                                             her sentence
33.075  Court cost fee for filing complaint                  $30
                                                             Twice the
33.076  Appeals bond                                         amount of fine
                                                             but not more
                                                             than $200
   Finance and Taxation
                                                             4% upon gross
                                                             proceeds or
                                                             gross receipts
34.026  Sales tax rate                                       derived from
                                                             all sales
                                                             taxable under
                                                             the Oklahoma
                                                             Sales Tax Code
34.055  Fee levied on telephone exchanges                    2% of gross
                                                             revenues
34.070  Utilities (gas or electricity) sales in the city;    2% upon gross
        fee levied                                           receipts
                                                             5% upon gross
                                                             proceeds or
                                                             gross receipts
                                                             derived from
                                                             all rent
34.117  Hotel/motel room tax rate                            received
                                                             except that
                                                             the tax shall
                                                             not be imposed
                                                             where the rent
                                                             is less than
                                                             $3 per day
   PUBLIC WORKS
                                                             As set by the
        Fee for collection for garbage or rubbish by the     Council by
        city                                                 motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             Annual tax of
                                                             296 upon the
                                                             gross receipts
        Tax on sale of gas                                   from
                                                             residential
                                                             and commercial
                                                             sales of gas
                                                             in the city
        Inspection and tap fee for sewer connections         $30
                                                             As set by the
        Monthly sewer service or use charge                  Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             As prescribed
                                                             by the Water
        Meter installations and tap fees                     Superintendent
50.01                                                        and approved
                                                             by the City
                                                             Council
                                                             As set by
        Water rates for water furnished by the city          motion or
                                                             resolution by
                                                             the Council
        Water deposit to assure payment                      $100
                                                             $25 each time
                                                             each
                                                             delinquent
        Disconnecting water service for delinquency          customer has
                                                             had his or her
                                                             services shut
                                                             off
        Permit and inspection fee for a residential or       $19.50
        commercial building sewer permit
        Industrial building sewer permit at the time the     $30
        application is filed
        Permit and inspection fee to construct private       $30
        sewage disposal system
   TRAFFIC CODE
   Recreational Vehicles
75.28   Golf cart and utility vehicle permits                $10
   GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Animals
                                                             As set by the
90.026  Dog registration; tag                                Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             $10 annually
                                                             in additional
90.030  Fee for registration of dangerous dog                to regular dog
                                                             registration
                                                             fees
                                                             As set by the
90.049  Fees for impounding                                  Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
90.050  Owner may redeem animal                              By paying
                                                             required fees
90.053  Spaying or neutering deposit fee for animal adopted  $40
        from shelter
90.102  Chickens or laying hens permit fee                   $25
   Medical Marijuana
        Retail medical marijuana dispensaries permit fee     $600 per year
92.02   Commercial growing facilities and processing         $1500
        facilities permit fee
92.03   Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical    $200 per year
        use permit fee
   Streets and Sidewalks
                                                             A deposit of
                                                             money
                                                             estimated by
                                                             the City to be
                                                             adequate to
                                                             compensate the
                                                             City for
96.31   Application for permit for excavation                restoring the
                                                             street,
                                                             sidewalk or
                                                             other area
                                                             properly, if
                                                             the applicant
                                                             fails to do so
                                                             promptly
   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Alcoholic Beverages
        Annual occupation tax, each location in city, for:    
111.02  Brewer                                               $1,250
        Distiller                                            $3,125
        Winemaker                                            $625
        Oklahoma winemaker                                   $75
        Rectifier                                            $3,125
        Wholesaler                                           $3,500
        Class “B” wholesaler                             $625
111.02  Retail package store                                 $400
        Bottle club (initial)                                $1,000
        (renewal)                                            $900
        Exempt service organizations                         $500
        Class “B” wholesaler with license from state     75% reduction
111.31  Beer and wine-tasting gardens permit                 By paying
                                                             required fee
        Nonintoxicating beverages                             
111.46  License fee levied, annual consumption on or off     $100
        premises
        Original package, not for consumption on premises    $50
   Amusements
                                                             As set by the
        License tax levied on various amusements             Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             $25 per month
        Skating rink                                         or $150 per
                                                             year
        Each itinerant show, exhibition of entertainment of  $15 per day
        any kind which charges admission
        Each circus with street parade                       $75 per day
        Each circus without street parade                    $50 per day
112.01  For street parade of circus when circus is held      $25 per day
        outside of city limits
        Each street fair or carnival                         $25 per day
        Each shooting gallery                                $3 per day or
                                                             $25 per month
        For each skill or strength game                      $2 per day or
                                                             $5 per week
        For each Ferris wheel, merry-go-round, small car or  $5 per day or
        similar apparatus, when not under the auspices of a  $15 per week
        street fair, civic club, carnival or circus
        For professional wrestling matches                   $10 per day
        Each medicine show                                   $10 per day
   Fireworks
113.15  Surety bond for each display site                    $3,000
        Each fireworks stand                                 $1,000
   Garage Sales
114.03  Garage sale permit                                   No charge
   Itinerant Vendors
        Fees for itinerant vendors, exception; farm produce  $25 per day
        Itinerant person selling merchandise at auction      $25 per day
115.02                                                       $5 per day
        Itinerant photographer                               $20 per week
                                                             $50 per month
                                                             $150 per year
   Junk and Secondhand Dealers
116.01  License to engage in business as a junk dealer or     
        keeper of a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods
   Pawnbrokers
117.02  Pawnbrokers license                                  $25
   Taxicab Licenses
118.02  Taxicab licenses; annual fee                         $15
GENERAL OFFENSES
   Offenses Against the Public
132.02  Public fireworks display                             Bond as set by
                                                             Fire Chief
   LAND USAGE
   Building Regulations
                                                             As set by the
150.004 Building permit required; fee                        Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             As set by the
150.021 Plumbing permit                                      Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
150.022 Plumbing contractor’s registration certificate;    As set by the
        renewal                                              Council
150.024 Plumbing inspections                                 As set by the
                                                             Council
                                                             As set by the
150.041 Electrical permit                                    Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             As set by the
150.042 Inspection fee                                       Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
150.043 Electrician contractor’s registration certificate; As set by the
        renewal                                              Council
150.045 Electrical inspections                               As set by the
                                                             Council
                                                             $2.50 for all
150.061 Gas plumbing                                         inspections on
                                                             any one
                                                             contract
                                                             As set by the
150.076 Mechanical permit                                    Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
150.077 Mechanical contractor’s registration certificate;  As set by the
        renewal                                              Council
150.079 Inspection fee                                       As set by the
                                                             Council
150.095 Swimming pool permit fee for erection, construction  $10
        or installation
        Roofing contractors registration                     $50
150.096 Registration renewal                                 $50
        Renewal after 30-day grace period                    $100
   Planning and Zoning
                                                             Established by
153.27  Fee for hearing appeals                              Zoning Board
                                                             of Adjustment
   Subdivision Regulations
                                                             As set by the
                                                             Council by
                                                             motion or
154.059 Subdivider to pay to city a preliminary plat and     resolution,
        application fee                                      $15;
                                                             $2 per acre
                                                             where acreage
                                                             involved
   Zoning Regulations
                                                             As set by the
155.105 Zoning clearance permit fees                         Council by
                                                             motion or
                                                             resolution
                                                             $50
155.121 Application for amendment                            $25 refund to
                                                             applicant if
                                                             denied
155.123 Request for hearing after denial (if application fee $50
        refunded in appeal)
 
(Prior Code, Appendix I)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SCAVENGING OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RUBBISH
      
52.   WATER CONSERVATION
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Lease of systems
   
50.02   Access to city and authority agents
   
50.03   Rules and regulations adopted; penalty
§ 50.01 LEASE OF SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The city has leased its water and sewer sanitation systems to the
Hobart Public Works Authority, a public trust. The trust has power to set rates
and otherwise to regulate the water, sewer, and sanitation systems. The motions
and resolutions adopted by the trust replaced any ordinances which the city had
relating to these matters.
   (B)   For the motions and resolutions passed by the public trust, please
refer to the minutes of the Hobart Public Works Authority. A copy of the trust
indenture relating to the leasing of these systems is on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 17-101)
§ 50.02 ACCESS TO CITY AND AUTHORITY AGENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to obstruct or deny
access to, or prevent the reading of water meters in the city by the city, its
agents, employees, or officers by parking any vehicle or place any obstruction
over, or on top of, the water meter covers or to permit any vehicle to be
parked or located above or on top of the water meters. Each day’s continuation
of any such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   It is unlawful to make threats of any type to officers, agents, or
employees of the city in the performance of their duties or to prevent the
officers, agents, or employees from performing their official duties in reading
the water meters or by limiting the access to water meters in any other manner
not limited to those mentioned above.
(Prior Code, § 17-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED; PENALTY.
   The Rules and Regulations of the Hobart Public Works Authority, as amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Any
violation of the rules and regulations is punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 17-103)
CHAPTER 51: SCAVENGING OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RUBBISH
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Prohibition of scavenging
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible waste, except sewage and body wastes, including all
meat, vegetable, and fruit refuse and carcasses of small animals and fowl from
any premises within the city.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH. Tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs, leaves, and similar
materials from any premises within the city.
   SCAVENGING. To look through, sift, collect, or remove any garbage, refuse,
or rubbish that has been placed in any garbage or trash container within the
city limits.
(Prior Code, § 8-601) (Ord. 08-03, passed 4-14-2008)
§ 51.02 PROHIBITION OF SCAVENGING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to look through, sift, collect, or
remove any garbage, refuse, or rubbish that has been placed in any garbage or
trash containers within the city limits, except, that this prohibition shall
not apply to any person who is the owner or in possession of such garbage or
trash container or who is the owner or manager of a business which is the owner
or in possession of such garbage or trash container or who is acting at the
direction of the owner or manager of such business.
(Prior Code, § 8-602) (Ord. 08-03, passed 4-14-2008) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations.
(Prior Code, § 8-603) (Ord. 08-03, passed 4-14-2008)
 
CHAPTER 52: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
52.01   Intent and purpose
   
52.02   Application of chapter
   
52.03   Definitions
   
52.04   Water use restriction
   
52.05   Exceptions to the landscape water use restrictions
   
52.06   Variance from specific day of the week limitations
   
52.07   Enforcement officials
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to implement procedures that
promote water conservation during periods of drought.
(Prior Code, § 8-701) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 52.02 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to each person, as defined in §
52.03, located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-706) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 52.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural.
   ADDRESS. The house number of a physical location of a specific property. If
a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by the U.S.
Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the
property’s address. An EVEN-NUMBERED ADDRESS means an address ending in the
numbers 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8. An ODD-NUMBERED ADDRESS means an address ending in the
numbers 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9.
   CITY. The City of Hobart.
   LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION. The outside watering of plants in a landscape such as
shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, and
other such flora that are situated in such diverse locations as residential
areas, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public medians
and rights-of-way. LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION does not include agricultural crops,
nursery plants, cemeteries, golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs,
and vegetation associated with recreational areas such as playgrounds,
football, baseball, and soccer fields.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 8-702) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 52.04 WATER USE RESTRICTION.
   Water use restrictions will begin with voluntary implementation beginning
February 1 of each year and mandatory implementation beginning April 1, until
October 30 of each year. Use restrictions shall include the following
restrictions:
   (A)   Outdoor watering or irrigation of grass and landscaping shall be
allowed from 7:00 p.m. through 9:00 a.m. on the following daily schedules for
odd and even addresses.
      (1)   Odd numbered street addresses can water or irrigate on the odd
numbered days.
      (2)   Even numbered street addresses can water or irrigate on the even
numbered days.
   (B)   Car washing at a person’s house shall be allowed on the following
schedules:
      (1)   Odd numbered houses on odd numbered days; and
      (2)   Even numbered houses on even numbered days.
   (C)   No watering shall occur between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except as
allowed in §
52.05 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-703) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 EXCEPTIONS TO THE LANDSCAPE WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule
exceptions.
   (A)   Irrigation of new landscape is allowed at any time of day on any day
for the initial 30 days and every other day for the next 30 days for a total of
one 60-day period, provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum
amount necessary for such landscape establishment.
   (B)   Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides,
fertilizers, fungicides, and herbicides, when required by law, the
manufacturer, or Best Management Practices, is allowed at any time of day on
any day within 24 hours of application.
(Prior Code, § 8-704) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 52.06 VARIANCE FROM SPECIFIC DAY OF THE WEEK LIMITATIONS.
   A variance from the specific landscape irrigation days or day set forth in §
52.04 of this chapter may be granted if strict application of the scheduled
days or day would lead to unreasonable or unfair results in particular
instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that
compliance with the scheduled days or day will result in a substantial
economic, health, or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or
those served by the applicant. Where a contiguous property is divided into
different zones, a variance may be granted hereunder so that each zone may be
irrigated on different days or day than other zones of the property. However,
in no event shall a variance allow a single zone to be irrigated more than two
days per week. A petition must be filed with the City Clerk requesting a
variance. The City Manager shall hear all applications within ten days of the
application being filed. An adverse decision of the City Manager may be
appealed, in writing within ten days, to be heard by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-705) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 52.07 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   The Police Department is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, the City Manager may also delegate enforcement
responsibility for this chapter to other agencies and departments of city
government.
(Prior Code, § 8-707) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties
described below.
   (A)   Each day in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   Enforcement officials shall provide violators with no more than one
written warning.
   (C)   On the first violation after a written warning the person shall be
fined $100.
   (D)   On the second violation after receiving a written warning the person
shall be fined $250.
   (E)   On the third or subsequent violation the person shall be fined $500.
(Prior Code, § 8-708) (Ord. 14-03, passed 6-24-2014)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
73.   PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Title of provisions
   
70.002   Traffic code controlling
   
70.003   Definitions
   
70.004   Adoption of State Traffic Code
   
70.005   Obedience to traffic code
   
70.006   Application to public officers and employees
   
70.007   Exceptions for persons working on streets
   
70.008   Maintenance and construction zones
   
70.009   Push-carts, riding animals, or driving animal-drawn vehicles to comply
with code
   
70.010   Use of coasters, roller skates, similar devices
Emergency Vehicles
   
70.025   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.026   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicle
   
70.027   Following emergency vehicles prohibited
   
70.028   Crossing fire hose
Accidents
   
70.040   Duty to stop; leaving scene of accident
   
70.041   Duty on striking unattended vehicle or fixtures
   
70.042   Reporting accidents
License and Insurance Requirements and Prohibitions
   
70.055   Possession of valid driver’s license required
   
70.056   Operation of vehicle with invalid license prohibited
   
70.057   Unlawful to operate vehicle without state vehicle license
   
70.058   Permitting unauthorized person to drive
   
70.059   Insurance required
Vehicle Equipment and Inspections
   
70.070   Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles injurious to streets
   
70.071   Obstructive and dangerous vehicles
   
70.072   Equipment
   
70.073   Mufflers, cutouts
   
70.074   Width, height, length, and load
   
70.075   Inspection of vehicles
Impoundment
   
70.090   Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions
   
70.091   Place of, and duration of impoundment
   
70.092   Police granted authority to impound vehicles
   
70.093   Vehicles in certain situations may be impounded
   
70.094   Illegal trespass by vehicle
   
70.095   Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
Enforcement and Administrative Provisions
   
70.110   Enforcement by Police Department
   
70.111   Direction of traffic by hand or voice
   
70.112   Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons
   
70.113   Obedience to police and fire officials
   
70.114   Emergency and experimental regulations
   
70.115   Issuance of citation tags
   
70.116   Disposition and records of traffic citations and complaints
   
70.117   Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle
   
70.118   Presumption in reference to illegal parking
   
70.119   Illegal cancellation of traffic citations
   
70.120   Court records; abstract to be sent to State Department of Public
Safety
 
   
70.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Court traffic violations, see §§
33.050 through
33.052
   Operator of motor vehicle eluding police officer, see §
134.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 TITLE OF PROVISIONS.
   This Title VII and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
Traffic Code, City of Hobart, and may so appear upon all official documents,
records, or instruments.
(Prior Code, § 15-101)
§ 70.002 TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING.
   Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this chapter, the
Traffic Code shall be controlling and apply to the use of city streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, parks, parkways, public parking lots, school driveways, streets,
parking lots, or any other public right-of-way or municipally-owned land,
including streets and other ways that form the boundary line of the city, by
pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled or otherwise
and whether moving or at rest.
(Prior Code, § 15-102)
§ 70.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of
platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear
of stores, dwellings, or buildings.
   AMBULANCE. A motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed, or arranged for the
purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured persons.
   BICYCLE. A device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to, and including a highway if
there are buildings within 600 feet of the highway in use for BUSINESS or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   CENTER LANE. Any clearly marked CENTER LANE. If the CENTER LANE is not
marked and no cars are parked on the roadway, then the CENTER LANE is equally
distanced between the curbs or traveled portion of the roadway. In the event a
vehicle or vehicles are parked on one side of the roadway only, then the CENTER
LANE is equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle or vehicles
toward the street and curb on the opposite roadway. If vehicles be parked on
each side of the roadway, then the CENTER LANE is equally distanced from the
edges of the parked vehicles.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily
for the transportation of property.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street, or roadway.
   CROSSWALK. The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs; or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway. CROSSWALK also means any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   DOUBLE PARK. Parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another
vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. A person who drives or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or
resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of
traffic movement, or creation of conditions hazardous to normal traffic
movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot, or spontaneous assembly of
large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, and
ambulances.
   HIGHWAY. See definition of STREET.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway
of two streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join at any
other angle, may come in conflict; or
      (2)   Where a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting
street, shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event such
intersecting street also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such streets shall be regarded as separate
INTERSECTIONS.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMIT LINES. Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and non-traffic
areas and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are
required.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. See definition of CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. A freight
curb loading zone is a LOADING ZONE for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of freight; a passenger curb loading zone is a LOADING
ZONE for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
   MOTOR CYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTER, and MOTOR BICYCLE. A motor vehicle, other than a
tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to
travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding
a tractor.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean
Central Standard Time, or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in current use in
the city.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning,
or guiding traffic.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, providing such loading and
unloading is in an authorized place.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the City Police Department, or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violation of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or ROADWAY. A way or place in private ownership or leading to
property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner.
   PUBLIC PARKING LOT. A parking lot or right-of-way dedicated to public use or
owned by the state or a political subdivision thereof.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian which is approaching
under such circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity so as to give rise
to the danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed, ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event a street includes
two or more separate ROADWAYS, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to
any such ROADWAY, separately, but not to all such ROADWAYS, collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set
apart as a safety zone.
   SCHOOL ZONE. All streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a
school, school crosswalk, or school ground where the street is adjacent to and
for a distance of 300 feet in each direction from the school, school ground, or
school crossing; and all streets or portions of streets designated by the City
Council and appropriately marked with signs that give notice that it is a
SCHOOL ZONE.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curblines or at lateral lines
of the roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
   STAND or STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
   STOP. When required, shall mean the complete cessation from movement.
   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
traffic signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY. A street, or boulevard, or highway or portion
thereof at the entrances to which:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required
by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and
      (2)   Stop signs are erected as provided in this part.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singularly or together, while using any highway or street
for purpose of travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR SIGNALS. Any device legally authorized and used
for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   U-TURN. A turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same
street.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter mile or
more.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or
may be transported, or drawn, upon a highway or street, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 15-103) (Ord. 15-02, passed 1-12-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.
§ 70.004 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE.
   The misdemeanor provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code, 47 O.S. §§ 1-101
et seq., the Rules of the Road, 47 O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq., and 47 O.S. §§ 1 et
seq., on traffic and motor vehicles are hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the city limits as fully
as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 15-104)
Statutory reference:
   State Motor Vehicle Code, see 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.
   State rules of the road, see 47 O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq.
§ 70.005 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE.
   (A)   It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this title.
   (B)   It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or for
the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this title.
   (C)   It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit
any vehicle registered in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to be
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 15-1401) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.006 APPLICATION TO PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, any state, county,
city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is
unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this part,
except as otherwise permitted in this part by state statute. This part shall
not apply to the military forces of the United States and organizations of the
National Guard when performing any military duty.   
(Prior Code, § 15-208) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Municipal drivers to obey state rules of the road, see 47 O.S. § 16-103
§ 70.007 EXCEPTIONS FOR PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS.
   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title, except
those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not
apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles,
and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or
repair of public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations
shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flagpersons.
The provisions of this title shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles
exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work.
(Prior Code, § 15-209)
§ 70.008 MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES.
   (A)   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the Mayor, to close any
street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance, or
construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel,
contractor, or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper
control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street
has been closed to traffic.
   (B)   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
division (A) above, and traffic-control devices or barricades have been
erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under,
over, or around such traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to
enter the closed area. The provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to
persons entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or
property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within
the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their
own risk.
   (C)   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility
line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel,
contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using the
street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons, or other traffic-
control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic
through the construction or maintenance area.
(Prior Code, § 15-210) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.009 PUSH-CARTS, RIDING ANIMALS, OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES TO COMPLY
WITH CODE.
   Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 15-206) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar state provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-104
§ 70.010 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be subject to
all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon
any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of this
city.
(Prior Code, § 15-207) Penalty, see § 70.999
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
§ 70.025 EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions stated in this section.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the
following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or
ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this part;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is not
endangered; or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   (C)   The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 15-211)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency vehicle driving rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-106
§ 70.026 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this
state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(Prior Code, § 15-212) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Approach of emergency vehicles, see 47 O.S. § 11-405
   Authorized emergency vehicles and their equipment, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-106,
11-405, and 12-218
§ 70.027 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any police vehicle, ambulance, civil defense vehicle, fire apparatus, or
other emergency vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call or request
closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
the emergency vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call.
(Prior Code, § 15-213) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1108(a)
§ 70.028 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command.
(Prior Code, § 15-214) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1109
ACCIDENTS
§ 70.040 DUTY TO STOP; LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to, or death of, any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of
the accident, or as close thereto as possible and shall then forthwith return
to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or
she has fulfilled the requirements of division (C) below. Every such stop shall
be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to a vehicle, which is driven or attended by any person, shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, or as close thereto
as possible, and shall forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at
the scene of the accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of
division (C) below. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary.
   (C)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident shall give his or
her correct name and address and the registration number of the vehicle he or
she is driving; and shall exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license
to the person struck, or the driver, or occupant of, or person attending any
vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in the accident
reasonable assistance. If the driver does not have an operator’s or chauffeur’s
license in his or her possession, he or she shall exhibit other valid evidence
of identification to the occupants of a vehicle, or to the person collided
with.
   (D)   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.
(Prior Code, § 15-219) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 6-303
§ 70.041 DUTY ON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR FIXTURES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop, and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of the vehicle, of the correct name and address of
the driver and the owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or
shall leave in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle struck a written notice
giving the correct name and address of the driver and of the owner of the
vehicle doing the striking, and shall provide the same information to an
officer having jurisdiction.
   (B)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take reasonable
steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property, of
the fact, and of his or her name and address, and of the registration number of
the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall exhibit his or her operator’s or
chauffeur’s license.
      (2)   If the operator’s or chauffeur’s license is not in his or her
possession at that time, the driver shall make report of such accident when and
as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 15-220) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.042 REPORTING ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent
that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of $300 shall, as
soon as practicable, report such accident to a police officer or to the Police
Department unless settlement of the collision has been made within six months
after the date of the accident.
   (B)   If a driver makes out a written report of the accident in the office
of the Police Department as soon as practicable after the accident, which
report is to be forwarded to the State Department of Public Safety in
accordance with state law, the driver shall be deemed to be in compliance with
this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-221) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 10-108
LICENSE AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS
§ 70.055 POSSESSION OF VALID DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his or her possession at all times, when operating such motor
vehicle, an unrevoked or unsuspended operator’s or chauffeur’s license as
required by the laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted
from such laws by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this
section shall be convicted if he or she produces in court an operator’s or
chauffeur’s license issued to him or her and valid at the time of his or her
arrest.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of
any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him or
her with respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required
on a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the
state may determine.
(Prior Code, § 15-215)
Statutory reference:
   Driver’s licenses, see 47 O.S. § 6-101
§ 70.056 OPERATION OF VEHICLE WITH INVALID LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his or her privilege to do so
is cancelled, suspended, revoked, or denied. Any person convicted of violating
this section shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as prohibited by this
section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 15-216) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.057 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE VEHICLE WITHOUT STATE VEHICLE LICENSE.
   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city
without a state vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display
the state vehicle license as may be required by law.
(Prior Code, § 15-217) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.058 PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or
her or under his or her control to be driven upon any highway by any person who
is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-218) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.059 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state and operating
the vehicle within the city’s boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle at all
times a current owner’s security verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been issued by the State Department of Public Safety
which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by
any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form shall be
shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
   (B)   The following shall not be required to carry an owner’s or operator’s
security verification form or an equivalent form from the department during
operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for
vehicle registration purposes:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol, or logo of the business,
corporation, or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
Compulsory Insurance Law according to records of the Department of Public
Safety and which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the Interstate Commerce Commission, or the Oklahoma Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW. The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in 47
O.S. §§ 7-600 et seq.
      OPERATOR’S POLICY. An operator’s policy of liability insurance which
shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him
or her by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him or her of
any motor vehicle not owned by him or her, subject to the same limits of
liability required in an owner’s policy.
      OWNER’S POLICY. An owner’s policy of liability insurance which:
         (a)   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate
reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
         (b)   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other
person, except as provided in division (c) below, using an insured vehicle with
the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the
liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation, or use of such vehicle;
         (c)   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with
existing laws; and
         (d)   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204.
      SECURITY.
         (a)   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204;
         (b)   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or
         (c)   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503,
having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond.
      SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM. A form, approved by the State Board for
Property and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the Compulsory Insurance Law of the State of Oklahoma.
   (D)   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state, shall
while operating or using such vehicle within the city’s boundaries, carry
either an operator’s or an owner’s security verification form issued by a
carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an
equivalent form issued by the Department of Public Safety, reflecting liability
coverage.
   (E)   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the Department upon request of any peace officer of the Department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as
provided in § 10.99.
   (F)   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department
reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge. Court costs
may be assessed by the city.
   (G)   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the Court
Clerk shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within
ten days reflecting the action taken by the court.
(Prior Code, § 15-229) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 7-601 et seq.
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND INSPECTIONS
§ 70.070 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS.
   No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street, shall be driven or moved on any street.
(Prior Code, § 15-301) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Required equipment of vehicles, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-101 et seq.
§ 70.071 OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so
loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
Chief of Police and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Prior Code, § 15-302) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.072 EQUIPMENT.
   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city
which is not equipped as required by law. It is unlawful to fail to use such
equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by
law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law
upon a street of the city.
(Prior Code, § 15-303) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   For state law relating to equipment, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-201 et seq.
§ 70.073 MUFFLERS, CUTOUTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at
all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. No
muffler cut-out, by-pass, or similar muffler elimination device, exhaust, or
vacuum whistle shall be used on any motor vehicle while operating within the
city; however exhaust whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-304) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.074 WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, AND LOAD.
   No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
height, length, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 15-305) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   State law relating to size, weight, and load, see 47 O.S. §§ 14-101 et seq.
§ 70.075 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this
city any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semi-trailers, or pole
trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and operated on the
streets or highways, of this city, or any combination thereof, unless the
vehicle is:
      (1)   In good working order and adjustment and is in such safe mechanical
condition as not to endanger the driver or other occupants; and
      (2)   Bearing a valid official inspection sticker issued by an official
inspection station licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any housetrailer,
which requires a permit to be moved upon the highways of this state.
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction thereof be subject to punishment as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 15-306) Penalty, see §
70.999
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 70.090 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS.
   The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety, and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from
obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-1301) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Grounds for removal of vehicles on highways by state, see 47 O.S. § 955
   Removal of abandoned vehicles on private property, see 47 O.S. § 954A
§ 70.091 PLACE OF, AND DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Place of impoundment. Every vehicle that is impounded under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be removed to the nearest garage or place
of safekeeping designated by the city and to no other place.
(Prior Code, § 15-1302)
   (B)   Duration of impoundment.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the
authority of this subchapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for
its release is received from an officer of the Traffic Violations Bureau or
other proper police officer.
      (2)   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned
upon the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment
costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-1303)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.092 POLICE GRANTED AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this subchapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order
of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures
required in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1304)
§ 70.093 VEHICLES IN CERTAIN SITUATIONS MAY BE IMPOUNDED.
   (A)   Disabled vehicles. A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be
impounded under the following circumstances:
      (1)   If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
or
      (2)   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated
to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-1305)
   (B)   Vehicles on bridge. An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge,
viaduct, or causeway or in any tube or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic or hazard, may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1306)
   (C)   Arrest and detention of driver. Whenever the driver or person in
charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and
detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle
unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded, unless the
driver or person in charge can provide immediately for the vehicle’s custody or
removal.
(Prior Code, § 15-1307)
   (D)   Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard. A vehicle left unattended upon any
street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to constitute a
definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1308)
   (E)   Vehicles parked overtime. Any unattended vehicle which has been parked
for more than one hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place
shall be impounded, and any vehicle parked in violation of this code, regarding
more than 48 hours, shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1310)
   (F)   Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants. Any vehicle illegally parked
in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device, or exit or blocks
ready access to a fire hydrant shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1311)
   (G)   Vehicles parked in intersection. Any unattended vehicle illegally
parked in any street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled vehicle in an
intersection with the person in charge of the vehicle being present, shall be
moved out of the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space
at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, § 15-1312)
   (H)   Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations. Any vehicle for which two
or more citations have been issued, for violation of an ordinance, and have not
been presented as required, may be impounded if parked in violation of any
provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1314)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.094 ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE.
   (A)   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this code may be
impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as
provided in this section.
   (B)   If a violation of the provisions of this code occurs, the owner or
legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking
the vehicle on the owner’s or legal occupant’s property, or if the identity of
the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may be filed
against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be verified
and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of
the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing.
   (C)   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant,
and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of this code
have been violated, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle to be
impounded from the property and placed in storage.
(Prior Code, § 15-1309) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.095 STOLEN VEHICLES; RECOVERY BY POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or
cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in
the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen
cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place to impoundment
and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of
the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the Police Department.
   (B)   If the registered owner is identified, located, and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, then the owner shall be given the right to make
his or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of
one hour from the time he or she is actually notified of its recovery, and if
the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time
specified, then the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 15-1313) Penalty, see §
70.999
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 70.110 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It is the duty of the officers of the Police Department or any officers that
are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic laws of this
city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
Officers of the Department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the Department
by this title and any other traffic ordinances of this city. Officers may issue
written notice to appear to any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident
when, based on personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable
grounds to believe that the person has committed an offense under the
provisions of the traffic code in connection with the accident.
(Prior Code, § 15-201)
§ 70.111 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY HAND OR VOICE.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department or any officers designated by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire
or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, or other
emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 15-202)
§ 70.112 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in
case of emergency where no officer is present.
(Prior Code, § 15-203) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.113 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
(Prior Code, § 15-204) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.114 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor, subject to any directions which the Council may give by
motion or resolution, is empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than 90 days.
   (B)   The Mayor may have traffic-control devices tested under actual
conditions of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-205)
§ 70.115 ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS.
   (A)   Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons
violating provisions of this part by delivering citation tags to violators or,
in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of
this chapter, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by means of which the
violation occurred. Such citation tags, among other things, shall bear briefly
the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and shall direct
the violator to present the tag at the police station or other designated place
within the time as may be specified thereon.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may require that the police officers use citation
tags furnished by the city and that such tags are serially numbered, and may
regulate the use and handling of the citation tags.
(Prior Code, § 15-222)
§ 70.116 DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of this traffic ordinance, shall deposit the original
and a duplicate copy of the citation to an immediate superior officer who shall
cause the original to be delivered to the Municipal Court of the city and the
duplicate copy to the central records section of Police Department. The second
duplicate copy of the citation shall be retained in the traffic citation book
and shall be delivered by such superior officer to the City Clerk together with
such book when all traffic citations therein have been issued.
   (B)   Upon the filing of such original citation in the Municipal Court of
this city the citation may be disposed of by the City Attorney, by trial in the
court, or by other official action by a Judge of the court, including the
settlement of bail or the payment of a fine, or may be dismissed by the Judge,
if in his or her opinion, the actions complained of do not constitute a
violation of traffic ordinances.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall require the return to him or her of each
traffic citation and all copies thereof except that copy required to be
retained in the book as provided herein, which has been spoiled or upon which
an entry has been made, and has not been issued to an alleged violator.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in
connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the Police
Department, a record of the disposition of the charge by the Municipal Court of
the city.
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a
record of all warrants issued by the Municipal Court of the city, all the
traffic fines which are delivered to the Police Department for service and of
the final disposition of the warrant.
   (F)   It is unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police
Department or other officer of public employ to dispose of, alter, or deface
any traffic citation or any copy thereof or the record of issuance of any
traffic citation, complaint or warrant in any manner other than is required in
this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-223)
   (G)   In the event the form of citation provided herein includes information
and is sworn to, then such citation, when filed with the Municipal Court, shall
be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-224)
§ 70.117 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE.
   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under
the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic
citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of days as specified on
the citation, the Clerk of the Municipal Court may send to the owner of the
motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him
or her of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is
disregarded for the specified period of days, a warrant of arrest may be
issued. On any occasion where two or more such traffic citations have been
affixed on the same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been
disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued without sending the letter
provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 15-225) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.118 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
   (B)   The presumption in division (A) above shall apply only when the
procedure as prescribed in this subchapter has been followed.
(Prior Code, § 15-226)
§ 70.119 ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any
traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-227) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.120 COURT RECORDS; ABSTRACT TO BE SENT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY.
   (A)   The Municipal Judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation
deposited with or presented to the Court and shall keep a record of every
official action by the Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in reference
thereto, including but not limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture
of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture.
   (B)   Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person
upon a charge of violating
any provision of this title or other law regulating the operation of vehicles
on highways, the Municipal Judge or Clerk of the Court in which the conviction
was had or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the
State Department of Public Safety a certified abstract of the Court’s record of
the case. An abstract need not be made of any conviction involving the illegal
parking or standing of a vehicle.
   (C)   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State
Department of Public Safety and shall include the name and address of the party
charged, the number of his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license, the
registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the
date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the
amount of the fine or forfeiture.
(Prior Code, § 15-228)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided in this title, any person violating any of the
provisions of this title containing the traffic laws of the city, or who
performs any unlawful act as defined in this title, or who fails to perform any
act required by this title, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined or punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 15-1402)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Operating Regulations
   
71.001   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.002   Following too closely
   
71.003   No passing zones
   
71.004   Driving vehicles on sidewalks
   
71.005   Limitations on backing vehicle
   
71.006   Limitation on use of motorcycles, bicycles, and motor scooters
   
71.007   Required motorcycle equipment; headgear
   
71.008   Clinging to vehicles
   
71.009   Entering and leaving controlled access highways
   
71.010   Reckless driving
   
71.011   Careless or negligent driving, stopping, or parking
   
71.012   Full time and attention required
   
71.013   Vehicle to be operated in careful and prudent manner
   
71.014   Driving while under the influence of drugs
   
71.015   Driving while under the influence of alcohol
   
71.016   Speed contest prohibited
   
71.017   Driving through safety zone
   
71.018   Starting parked vehicle
   
71.019   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
71.020   Obstruction to driver’s view
   
71.021   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
71.022   Unlawful riding
   
71.023   Private service drives
   
71.024   Truck driving and route restrictions
   
71.025   Loads on vehicles
   
71.026   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train
   
71.027   Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade crossings
   
71.028   Seat belts
   
71.029   Child passenger restraints required
   
71.030   Texting while driving
Overtaking and Passing
   
71.045   Changing lanes
   
71.046   Driving on right side of roadway required
   
71.047   When overtaking on the right side permitted
   
71.048   Overtaking a vehicle on the left
   
71.049   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
71.050   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
71.051   Overtaking and passing in school zone
   
71.052   Overtaking and passing school bus
   
71.053   School bus requirements
Funeral Processions
   
71.065   Driving through funeral or other procession prohibited
   
71.066   Drivers in a procession
   
71.067   Funeral processions to be identified
Right-of-Way and Intersections
   
71.080   Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
   
71.081   Vehicle turning left at intersection
   
71.082   Vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign
   
71.083   Vehicle entering through highway
   
71.084   Vehicle facing stop, slow, warning, or caution signal
   
71.085   Through streets
   
71.086   Intersections where stop or yield required
   
71.087   Stop or yield sign construction and placement
   
71.088   Vehicle entering stop intersection
   
71.089   Vehicle entering yield intersection
   
71.090   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
   
71.091   Vehicle entering traffic from parking
   
71.092   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building
   
71.093   Stop when traffic obstructed
Speed Regulations
   
71.105   Speed limits generally; exceptions
   
71.106   School zones
   
71.107   Speed to be reasonable and prudent
   
71.108   Minimum speed requirements; exceptions
   
71.109   Obedience to maximum and minimum speeds
Turning Movements
   
71.120   Turning markers or indicators
   
71.121   Designation of restricted turns
   
71.122   Obedience to no-turn signs
   
71.123   U-turns
   
71.124   Position and method of turning
   
71.125   Turning movements and required signals
   
71.126   Means of giving turn signals
   
71.127   Method of giving hand and arm signals
 
   
71.999   Penalty
OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 71.001 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   City personnel, subject to any directions given by the Council by
motion or resolution, may designate any road, street, alley, or highway, or any
separate roadway under their jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause
appropriate signs giving notice thereof, to be erected.
   (B)   Whenever the city designates any street or alley or part thereof as a
one-way street or alley, city personnel shall have placed and maintained signs
giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   (C)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts
of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
   (D)   Upon roadways designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (E)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(Prior Code, § 15-507) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-308
§ 71.002 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(Prior Code, § 15-508) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-310
§ 71.003 NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and federal
highways, and the Mayor as regards all other streets, are hereby authorized to
determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and passing to the
left would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings
on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs
or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person,
every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as
set forth in division (A) above, no driver shall at any time drive to the left
side of the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any
pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.
(Prior Code, § 15-509) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.004 DRIVING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15-516) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.005 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic.
No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection.
(Prior Code, § 15-517) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.006 LIMITATION ON USE OF MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS.
   (A)   No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall
carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway,
except as provided in this section:
      (1)   If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter
of 12 inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating
device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a separate
seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so
that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side car, then
it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 or older
to carry a passenger; and
      (2)   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his or her employee is
permissible.
   (B)   No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of
the city.
   (C)   No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor scooter shall hold on to
any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled.
   (D)   A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or
motor bicycle, shall ride only on the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto.
   (E)   No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles
in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. Authorized
emergency vehicles are excepted from the provisions of this division (E).
   (F)   No person under the age of 16 shall operate any motorcycle, motor
bicycle, or motor scooter within the city between and during the hours of 10:00
p.m. of one day and 4:00 a.m. of the next day.
(Prior Code, § 15-518) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.007 REQUIRED MOTORCYCLE EQUIPMENT; HEADGEAR.
   (A)   In addition to all other requirements motorcycles and motor scooters
shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   Handle bars which do not exceed 12 inches in height, measured from
the crown or point of attachment;
      (2)   Two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three
inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so
as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of 200
feet to the rear of his or her vehicle;
      (3)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and
hold the vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One
means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the
front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the rear
wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the
vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between
red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in
normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon application of the service
brake;
      (4)   A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least
the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided;
      (5)   A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided
by the manufacturer;
      (6)   One lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at
least 300 feet in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding, and one
tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light
plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear. The lights required by this
division (A)(6) shall be burning whenever the vehicle is in motion during the
period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at
any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at
a distance of at least 500 feet ahead; and
      (7)   A windshield of sufficient quality, size, and thickness to protect
the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator
shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him or her
from foreign objects.
   (B)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any vehicle
covered under this section unless the person is equipped with and wearing on
the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by the
operators of such vehicles. All such helmets shall consist of lining, padding,
and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the driver.
Such headgear shall comply with the regulations issued by the State Department
of Public Safety as provided in 47 O.S. § 12-609.
   (C)   No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter with the exhaust
system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the
original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-519) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.008 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon
a roadway
(Prior Code, § 15-520) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.009 ENTERING AND LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 15-521) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.010 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any vehicle in a wanton manner without regard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in §
71.999.
(Prior Code, § 15-522) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-901
§ 71.011 CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING, STOPPING, OR PARKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be
parked, or stop any vehicle:
   (A)   In a careless manner;
   (B)   In a negligent manner;
   (C)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or
   (D)   In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful movement
of traffic or use of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 15-523) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.012 FULL TIME AND ATTENTION REQUIRED.
   The operator of every vehicle while driving upon the streets and highways of
the city shall devote full time and attention to such driving.
(Prior Code, § 15-524) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.013 VEHICLE TO BE OPERATED IN CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER.
   Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in
a careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater
than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic,
surface, and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 15-525) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.014 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS.
   (A)   No person shall drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of
any motor vehicle upon any highway who is under the influence of any substance
included in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act, being 63 O.S. §§ 2-
101 et seq. The fact that any person charged with a violation of this provision
is or has been lawfully entitled to use such controlled substance shall not
constitute a defense.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
71.999.
(Prior Code, § 15-526) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-902
§ 71.015 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating drugs or liquor to drive, operate, or be in actual physical
control of any motor vehicle in the city.
   (B)   Any person who operates a motor vehicle while his ability to operate
such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol shall be punished
as provided in §
71.999.
   (C)   Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of
acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or
intoxicating liquor, or operating a motor vehicle while his or her ability is
impaired by the consumption of alcohol, evidence of the amount of alcohol in
the person’s blood as shown by a chemical analysis of his or her blood or
breath is admissible.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, for persons 21 years of age or older:
      (1)   Evidence that there was 0.05% or less by weight of alcohol in his
blood is prima facie evidence that the person was not under the influence of
alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
      (2)   Evidence that there was more than 0.05%, but less than 0.08% by
weight of alcohol in the person’s blood is relevant evidence of operating a
motor vehicle while his or her ability to operate such motor vehicle is
impaired by the consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor; however, no
person shall be convicted while his or her ability to operate such vehicle is
impaired by consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor solely because there
was more than 0.05%, but less than 0.08% by weight of alcohol in the person’s
blood or breath in the absence of additional evidence that such person’s
driving was affected by the consumption of alcohol to the extent that the
public health and safety was threatened or that the person had violated a state
statute or local ordinance in the operation of a motor vehicle;
      (3)   Evidence that there was 0.08% or more by weight of alcohol in his
or her blood shall be admitted as prima facie evidence the person was under the
influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor. The percent by weight of alcohol
in the blood shall be based upon grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood
if blood was tested or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath if the breath
was tested. The provisions of this division do not limit the introduction of
any other competent evidence bearing on the question of whether the person was
under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor; and
      (4)   To be admissible in a proceeding, the evidence must first be
qualified by establishing that the test was administered to the person within
two hours after the arrest of the person.
(Prior Code, § 15-527) (Ord. 01-29, passed 12-10-2001) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.016 SPEED CONTEST PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest
or exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
   (B)   No person shall, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an
incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any
manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or
highway.
   (C)   When three or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an
unlawful speed contest such assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who
participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 15-528) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.017 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island.
(Prior Code, § 15-529) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.018 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Prior Code, § 15-530) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.019 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 15-531) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1105
§ 71.020 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.   
(Prior Code, § 15-532) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.021 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 15-533) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.022 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply
to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons
riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 15-534) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.023 PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES.
   No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 15-535) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.024 TRUCK DRIVING AND ROUTE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may prescribe routes through the city for the use of
trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds, or other vehicles which are not
ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. Appropriate and
adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so that drivers of such
vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place,
the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed,
as provided above, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and
shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such
vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving
within the city and not merely through the city.
   (B)   That no truck, trailer, or commercial vehicle of a greater length than
18 feet, or a weight capacity greater than two tons shall be parked on any
street in a residential district, as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the
city at any time, except for and only while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading and unloading of materials.
   (C)   Any person, firm, or business parking a truck, trailer, or commercial
vehicle of a length greater than 18 feet, or a weight capacity greater than two
tons, on any street within the residential area of the city, except while
expeditiously loading and unloading of materials is in violation of this
section and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Jake brake or any similar devices on any engine shall not be energized
or otherwise used inside the city limits. A JAKE BRAKE is defined as a
hydraulically operated device that operates a power producing diesel engine
into a power absorbing retarding mechanism that produces a noise that is loud
and excessive. Accordingly the use of all JAKE BRAKE or similar devices within
the city limits is hereby prohibited from and after the effective date hereof.
This division (D) shall not apply to fire protection equipment or other
emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-536) (Ord. 1073, passed 3-9-1982; Ord. 09-01, passed 7-14-
2008) Penalty, see §
71.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
   Loading regulations, see §§
73.40 through
73.47
   Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials, see §
73.20
   Trucks containing liquid petroleum gas, see §
150.097
§ 71.025 LOADS ON VEHICLES.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so contracted or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-537) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.026 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagperson gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad
train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate
hazard; or
      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 15-552) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.027 CERTAIN VEHICLES TO STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of
any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing
at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50
feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and
while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along such track for
any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe
to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the
vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing
such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or
tracks.
   (B)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-553) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.028 SEAT BELTS.
   (A)   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in
this city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, being 47 C.F.R. § 571.208. For the
purposes of this section,  PASSENGER CAR shall mean “automobile” as defined in
47 O.S. § 12-101, except that PASSENGER CAR shall not include trucks, pickup
trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles, or motorized
bicycles.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in this state that he or she is unable
to wear a safety belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such
verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall
such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise,
to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt
system. Division (A) above shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle
who is a route carrier of the U.S. postal service.
(Prior Code, § 15-554) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.029 CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every driver, when transporting a child under six years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of the city, shall
provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child passenger
restraint system. For purposes of this section, CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT
SYSTEM means an infant or child passenger restraint system which meets the
federal standards as set by 49 C.F.R. § 571.213.
   (B)   Children at least six years of age but younger than 13 years of age
shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      (2)   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use;
      (4)   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable
to be placed in such devices; or
      (5)   The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and
who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap
safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination
lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety
belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40
pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this division (C)(5), BACK SEAT
shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by
a licensed childcare facility or church. Provided further, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this
division (C)(5) if at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed
childcare facility or church provides the officer with a written statement
verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more than 40
pounds.
   (D)   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it
appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
section and to give an oral warning to said driver. The warning shall advise
the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to
install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor
vehicle.
   (E)   A violation of the provisions of this section shall not be admissible
as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages.
   (F)   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of
damages.
(Prior Code, § 15-555) (Ord. 06-04, passed 12-12-2005) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.030 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any
street or highway while using a hand-held electronic communication device to
manually compose, send, or read an electronic text message while the motor
vehicle is in motion.
   (B)   The Department of Public Safety shall not record or assess points for
violations of this section on any license holder’s traffic record maintained by
the Department.
   (C)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply if the person is
using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent
emergency situation:
      (1)   An emergency response operator;
      (2)   A hospital, physician’s office, or health clinic;
      (3)   A provider of ambulance services;
      (4)   A provider of firefighting services; or
      (5)   A law enforcement agency.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CELLULAR TELEPHONE. An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth
reserved for cellular telephones.
      COMPOSE, SEND, or READ. With respect to a text message means the manual
entry, sending, or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person
or device.
      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. An electronic device that permits the
user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than
through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a
device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or
a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a
motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send, or
read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate a feature or function.
      TEXT MESSAGE. A text-based message, instant message, electronic message,
photo, video, or electronic mail.
(Prior Code, § 15-556) (Ord. 16-02, passed 11-9-2015, effective 11-12-2015)
Penalty, see §
71.999
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 71.045 CHANGING LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this section,
a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane
and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained
that the movement can be made with safety and has signaled for a change of
course.
   (B)   Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles
shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as
practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side
unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or
making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled for a change
of course.
   (C)   Upon a roadway which has been divided into three lanes, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
   (D)   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway. Drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Prior Code, § 15-501) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.046 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven to the
right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or
highways which are divided into two roadways.
   (C)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Prior Code, § 15-502) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-301
§ 71.047 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT SIDE PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; or
      (3)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-503) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.048 OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-504) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.049 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every instance the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
   (B)   No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the
street or highway where the driver’s view along the street or highway is
obstructed; or
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel
or when approaching within 50 feet of or traversing any intersection or
railroad grade crossing.
(Prior Code, § 15-505) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.050 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right. Upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 15-506) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.051 OVERTAKING AND PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONE.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion
and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours
posted on all days when schools are in session.
   (B)   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the right
half of the roadway has been divided into two or more lanes, or on one-way
streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being driven
in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane movement.
(Prior Code, § 15-513) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.052 OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is
stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading
signals are in operation, shall stop his or her vehicle before it reaches the
school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then
proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due
caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle when passing a school bus shall use due
caution for the safety of school children and other occupants of the school
bus.
   (C)   Occupants of the school bus shall have the right-of-way when crossing
the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus.
(Prior Code, § 15-514) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-705
§ 71.053 SCHOOL BUS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The provisions of §
71.052 of this code shall be applicable only if the school bus is painted
yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign
containing the words “SCHOOL BUS” in letters not less than eight inches in
height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a
school bus.
   (B)   The school bus shall be equipped with four red alternately flashing
warning signal lights, two of which shall be located high on the front and two
high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four inches
in diameter and shall be widely separated.
(Prior Code, § 15-515) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-705
FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
§ 71.065 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION PROHIBITED.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles
are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall
not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control
signals or police officers.
(Prior Code, § 15-510) Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
   Local powers to regulate processions, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 71.066 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practical and safe.
(Prior Code, § 15-511) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.067 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.
   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by
headlights or as may be determined and designated by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 15-512) Penalty, see §
71.999
RIGHT-OF-WAY AND INTERSECTIONS
§ 71.080 VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   (A)   When two vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from
different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on
the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right as otherwise
stated in this chapter; however, the driver of a vehicle on a street which is
not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or
federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has
entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) above is modified at
through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-538) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-401
§ 71.081 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 15-539) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-402
§ 71.082 VEHICLE APPROACHING A YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGN.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a “yield right-of-way” sign shall slow
to a reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility,
yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway
which have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-540) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.083 VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY.
   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this code at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(Prior Code, § 15-541) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.084 VEHICLE FACING STOP, SLOW, WARNING, OR CAUTION SIGNAL.
   If two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning, or caution signs or
signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the intersection at
the same time, the following rules shall apply: If each vehicle is required to
stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. If each
vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the
right-of-way. If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming
from the right shall have the right-of-way. If one vehicle is required to slow
and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the
right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the
intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 15-542) Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.085 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   City personnel, subject to such direction as the Council may give, may
designate any street or part of a street a through street.
   (B)   Whenever the city designates and describes a through street, the stop
sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and maintained
on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that portion
thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic-control signals.
   (C)   At the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection
of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs
shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be
determined by the city if deemed desirable.
(Prior Code, § 15-543) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.086 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED.
   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the Council by motion or
resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon
other than through streets where particular hazards exist and to determine
whether:
   (A)   Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place a stop is required; or
   (B)   Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different
street as provided in this part in which event he or she shall cause to be
erected a yield sign at every place where yield is required.
(Prior Code, § 15-544) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.087 STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT.
   Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the
word “Stop” or “Yield” in letters not less than eight inches in height for a
stop sign and not less than seven inches in height for a yield sign. Every stop
or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign,
or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or
yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk,
then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-545) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.088 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
   Except when directed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop sign,
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection.
In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection. If there is no marked stop line,
then the driver shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting road where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection. A driver after having stopped shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway
or road, or which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard;
but the driver having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle so proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 15-546) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.089 VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in observance to
such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing condition or shall
stop if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally
crossing the roadway on which he or she is driving and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may then proceed and drivers of
all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding. A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has
or causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein. The provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of other
vehicles approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to constitute
immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. The
driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
before entering the intersection; if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if there is no stop line, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-547) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.090 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave, or cross a highway from or
into a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway.
(Prior Code, § 15-548) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.091 VEHICLE ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING.
   Any vehicle attempting to reenter traffic while parked at the curb shall
yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the
rear. The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the
driver has given the appropriate signal which indicates his or her intention of
turning from the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no
event enter the line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard
exists.
(Prior Code, § 15-549) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.092 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-550) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   State provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-704
§ 71.093 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-551) Penalty, see §
71.999
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.105 SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 25 mph in the city
except:
      (1)   On designated and numbered state and federal highways, the maximum
is as posted;
      (2)   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this code;
      (3)   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
      (4)   When a different speed limit is established in this code.
   (B)   City personnel, subject to such direction as the Mayor and Council may
give by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase the speed limits provided
in this code, and when he or she does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on
such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 15-401) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Basic and minimum speed rules, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-801, 11-804
   City powers, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 71.106 SCHOOL ZONES.
   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted speed per
hour between the hours posted on any street adjacent to any school in a
designated school zone on days when school is in session, unless a different
speed limit or time is otherwise designated and posted.
(Prior Code, § 15-402) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Local authority to set speed limits, 47 O.S. §§ 11-803, 15-102
§ 71.107 SPEED TO BE REASONABLE AND PRUDENT.
   No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is
reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into
consideration among other things, the condition of the vehicle, the traffic,
roadway surface or width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of
pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No person
shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than will permit him or her to bring
it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(Prior Code, § 15-403) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.108 MINIMUM SPEED REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to
the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere
with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is
unavoidable.
(Prior Code, § 15-404) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.109 OBEDIENCE TO MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum
speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in
excess of the maximum nor slower than the minimum except as required by an
authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs.
(Prior Code, § 15-405) Penalty, see §
71.999
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.120 TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS.
   (A)   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the Council by motion or
resolution, is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or
adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may
conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Prior Code, § 15-901) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.121 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to determine those street intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U-turns, and shall
have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of the turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. Where
turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section, the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are
permitted.
(Prior Code, § 15-902) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.122 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U-
turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of
any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 15-903) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.123 U-TURNS.
   (A)   Locations where U-turns prohibited. The driver of a vehicle shall not
turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in
the city at the following locations:
      (1)   At intersections controlled by traffic-control devices or signals
unless such turns are specifically authorized;
      (2)   Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the latter’s
direction; or
      (3)   At any other location where an official “No-U-Turn” has been placed
and is maintained.
   (B)   Manner of making U-turns. A U-turn may be made only when it can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. No person shall make
a U-turn except in the following manner:
      (1)   By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the
right curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a
signal for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn
across the intersection;
      (2)   In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle;
      (3)   By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until
such turn is completed; and
      (4)   Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-904) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.124 POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows.
   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
center of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall
be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
   (C)   Left turns, on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearby as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered.
(Prior Code, § 15-905) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-601
§ 71.125 TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §
71.124 of this code, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or
otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop when
required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
the signal.
(Prior Code, § 15-906) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-604
§ 71.126 MEANS OF GIVING TURN SIGNALS.
   (A)   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by
means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a
type approved by the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety, except as provided
in division (B) below.
   (B)   A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by,
signal lamps or devices when:
      (1)   The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects 24
inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel;
      (2)   Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be
visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle
projects 14 feet or more beyond the center top of the steering post.
(Prior Code, § 15-907) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.127 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear.
(Prior Code, § 15-908)
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to §
71.999.
   (B)   Any person found to be in violation of any of the terms and provisions
of §
71.024(D) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine or punishment
as provided by §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 15-536)
   (C)   Any person convicted of violating §
71.029(A) or (B) shall be punished by a fine of $50 and shall pay all court
costs thereof. This fine shall be suspended and the court costs limited to a
maximum of $15 in the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or
acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system.
(Prior Code, § 15-555)
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
71.030(A) shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100,
excluding costs, fees and assessments.
(Prior Code, § 15-556)
(Ord. 1073, passed 3-9-1982; Ord. 06-04, passed 12-12-2005; Ord. 09-01, passed
7-14-2008; Ord. 16-02, passed 11-9-2015, effective 11-12-2015)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
72.01   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
72.02   Manual adopted; uniform requirements
   
72.03   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
72.04   When official traffic-control devices required for enforcement purposes
   
72.05   Traffic-control signal legend
   
72.06   Pedestrian control signals
   
72.07   Flashing signals
   
72.08   Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals
   
72.09   Unauthorized traffic-control devices prohibited
   
72.10   Defacement of traffic-control devices
   
72.11   Play streets
   
72.12   Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
   
72.13   Traffic lanes
§ 72.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   City personnel, subject to any directions given by the Council by motion or
resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals,
and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to
make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed and
maintained such additional traffic-control signs, signals, and devices as he or
she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this
city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-601) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   State law relating to traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-201 et seq.
§ 72.02 MANUAL ADOPTED; UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, 1988 Edition, as
approved by the Federal Highway Administrator and as adopted by the Oklahoma
State Department of Transportation, is adopted and incorporated as currently
approved, or as subsequently amended.
   (B)   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices and other highway and
street markings shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices
as approved by the Federal Highway Administrator and as adopted by the Oklahoma
State Department of Transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder
for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type
and location throughout the municipality. All traffic-control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
official traffic-control devices.
(Prior Code, § 15-602) (Ord. 1100, passed 5-14-1991)
§ 72.03 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this title.
(Prior Code, § 15-603) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Drivers to obey traffic devices, see 47 O.S. § 11-201
§ 72.04 WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT
PURPOSES.
   No provision of this chapter for which official traffic-control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a
particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place.
(Prior Code, § 15-604)
§ 72.05 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   The display of signal lights, arrows, and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
   (A)   Green alone, “go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic; and
      (2)   Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal, may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a “walk” signal
indicator is operating.
   (B)   Steady yellow or amber alone, “caution.”
      (1)   The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the “red” or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter; and
      (2)   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the “caution” signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the “red” signal flashes.
   (C)   Red alone, “stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green, or “go” is shown alone. Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right
traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right-of-
way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall
be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green
signal indication on the cross street; and
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
“go” is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a pedestrian “walk” signal.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic
lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated
by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement
indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only
on the red with green arrow signal; and
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “go” is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian “walk”
signal.
   (E)   Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular traffic movements are
controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by
the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed.
(Prior Code, § 15-605)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-202
§ 72.06 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “walk,” “wait,” or
“don’t walk” shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows:
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles; and
   (B)   Wait or Don’t Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his or her crossing on the “walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the “wait” signal is showing.
(Prior Code, § 15-606) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.07 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it shall
require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      (1)   Flashing red. When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and
      (2)   Flashing yellow. When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(Prior Code, § 15-607) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-204
§ 72.08 PEDESTRIAN-ACTIVATED SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS.
   Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it
requires obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Flashing yellow.
      (1)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass
such signal only with caution; and
      (2)   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
activate the signal control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or stop signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the signal when
the red or stop signal is exhibited; and
      (2)   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the
signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown.
   (C)   Steady red.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and shall remain standing until
flashing yellow is shown alone; and
      (2)   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal,
and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (D)   Steady red and steady yellow combined.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone; and
      (2)   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is
about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing
shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-608)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-203
§ 72.09 UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information which are
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (D)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device may be removed
without notice.
(Prior Code, § 15-609) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-206
§ 72.10 DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove, or have
in his or her possession any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal or an inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons when
acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      (1)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant, or
trustee of any governmental agency; or
      (2)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant, or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company.
(Prior Code, § 15-610) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-207
§ 72.11 PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   City personnel, subject to any directions given by the Council, shall
have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have
placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to
protect the same.
(Prior Code, § 15-611)
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street
or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area; and then any such driver shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-612)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.12 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
   Authorized city personnel, subject to any directions given by the Council,
may:
   (A)   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his or her
opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as deemed necessary; and
   (B)   Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 15-613)
§ 72.13 TRAFFIC LANES.
   (A)    City personnel, subject to any directions given by the Council, may
be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where
a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   (B)   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 15-614)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-309
CHAPTER 73: PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Section
Stopping, Standing, and Parking Generally
   
73.01   Illegal parking declared public nuisance
   
73.02   Application of standing or parking regulations
   
73.03   Parking time limits may be established; signs
   
73.04   Parking more than forty-eight hours
   
73.05   Brakes; motor not to be left running
   
73.06   Angle parking
   
73.07   Manner of parking in marked spaces
   
73.08   Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
   
73.09   Hazardous or congested places; stopping, standing, parking
   
73.10   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
   
73.11   Blocking of intersection or crosswalk prohibited
   
73.12   Standing or parking on one-way roadway
   
73.13   Standing or parking on left side of one-way streets
   
73.14   Parking adjacent to schools
   
73.15   Parking prohibited at intersections
   
73.16   Parking in alleys, blocking driveways
   
73.17   Entry on private property
   
73.18   Parking on main traveled portion of roadway
   
73.19   Double parking prohibited
   
73.20   Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials
   
73.21   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
73.22   Method of parking, standing, or parking close to curb
   
73.23   Negligent parking
   
73.24   Procedure for occupying parallel parking space
   
73.25   Handicapped parking
Loading
   
73.40   Definitions
   
73.41   Curb loading zones, designation
   
73.42   Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose
   
73.43   Stopping, standing, or parking in passenger curb loading zone
   
73.44   Stopping, standing, or parking in commercial curb loading zone
   
73.45   Designation of public carrier stops and stands
   
73.46   Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted
   
73.47   Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxis
Cross-reference:
   Impoundment provisions, see §§
70.090 through
70.095
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING GENERALLY
§ 73.01 ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this subchapter
governing, limiting, or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any
street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for
such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or
operator of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-701) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.02 APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be applicable when it is
necessary for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device.
(Prior Code, § 15-702)
§ 73.03 PARKING TIME LIMITS MAY BE ESTABLISHED; SIGNS.
   City personnel, subject to any directions given by the Council by motion or
resolution, may establish parking time limits or prohibit parking on designated
streets or parts of streets and have appropriate signs placed on the streets.
When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in
violation of the sign. No such time limits shall be effective unless a sign is
erected and in place at the time of the alleged violation
(Prior Code, § 15-703) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.04 PARKING MORE THAN FORTY-EIGHT HOURS.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time
longer than 48 hours. This section shall not affect parking limits established
for shorter periods.
   (B)   The parking of a disabled vehicle for more than 48 hours shall
constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 15-704) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.05 BRAKES; MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING.
   Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked.
(Prior Code, § 15-705) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.06 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the City Council by
motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets
angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have such streets marked or signed.
(Prior Code, § 15-706)
   (B)   On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(Prior Code, § 15-707) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.07 MANNER OF PARKING IN MARKED SPACES.
   In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space.
(Prior Code, § 15-708) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.08 PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing
of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or
materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may
be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the
vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and
authorized herein. The Mayor may revoke such permits at any time.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permit.
(Prior Code, § 15-709) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.09 HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES; STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING.
   (A)   City personnel are hereby authorized to determine and regulate by
proper signs the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping,
standing, or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
   (B)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as
authorized in division (A) above, no person shall violate such signs.
(Prior Code, § 15-710) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.10 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except in emergencies
or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the
street;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant except in a parking space
officially marked;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length has been indicated by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and
on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance when properly signposted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or within
a highway tunnel; or
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb.
(Prior Code, § 15-711) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1003
§ 73.11 BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK PROHIBITED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 15-712) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.12 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY.
   (A)   If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
   (B)   The City Council may determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15-713) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.13 STANDING OR PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
   City personnel may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way
street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in
place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, § 15-714) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.14 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   (A)   City personnel may have signs erected indicating no parking upon
either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, § 15-715) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.15 PARKING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be
prohibited 15 feet in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 15-716) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.16 PARKING IN ALLEYS, BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop,
stand, or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position as to block
a driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Prior Code, § 15-717) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.17 ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property
owned or legally occupied by another without the owner’s or occupant’s consent
except where such private property is provided as public parking and the
general use of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings.
   (B)   Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by
another without the owner’s or occupant’s consent, except on unrestricted
public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the
premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to show that
permission for such entry was given.
(Prior Code, § 15-718) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.18 PARKING ON MAIN TRAVELED PORTION OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   Upon any street, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended upon the paved or main traveled part of
the street when it is practical to stop, park, or leave the vehicle off such
parts of the street, except, that delivery vehicles, either loading or
unloading, may park in the center of Main Street, headed east, while in the
process of loading or unloading and making delivery or pick up at any local
business establishment.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a street in such manner
and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily
leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(Prior Code, § 15-719) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.19 DOUBLE PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be double parked on any street within the city
limits, except in compliance with the directions of a police officer, or
traffic-control device, or except when necessary to avoid conflict with another
vehicle.
   (B)   Delivery vehicles, either loading or unloading, may double park in the
right-hand lane while in the process of loading or unloading and making
delivery to local business establishments; provided that the driver of the
delivery vehicle shall keep a lookout for cars and vehicles needing or
attempting to move away from the curb and shall move his or her delivery
vehicle as soon as possible to permit the parked vehicles to be moved and
further providing that the double parking shall be permitted only so long as
both traffic lanes are not blocked.
(Prior Code, § 15-720) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.20 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR TRUCKS TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   It is unlawful to park, store, or otherwise let stand a truck or other
vehicle which is used for the purpose of transporting or delivering flammable
and combustible liquids as defined by the Fire Prevention Code and trucks or
other vehicles which are used for the transportation and delivery of liquefied
petroleum gases in any area within the city. However, the trucks and vehicles
restricted in this section may be temporarily parked at locations otherwise
zoned for the purpose of loading and unloading flammable and combustible
liquids and liquefied petroleum gases for a period not to exceed one and one-
half hours during any 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 15-721) Penalty, see §
70.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
   Loading regulations, see §§
73.40 through
73.47
   Trucks containing liquid petroleum gas, see §
150.097
§ 73.21 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things; or
   (C)   Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 15-722) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.22 METHOD OF PARKING, STANDING, OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or parked upon the left-hand
side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the left-
hand curb.
(Prior Code, § 15-723) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1004
§ 73.23 NEGLIGENT PARKING.
   No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop, or leave unattended any
vehicle as follows:
   (A)   In a careless or negligent manner;
   (B)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or
   (C)   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or
use of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 15-724) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.24 PROCEDURE FOR OCCUPYING PARALLEL PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his or her vehicle to the rear of the parking space until
the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He or she then
shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other
vehicle attempting to park therein.
   (B)   The first of two or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy, shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space.
(Prior Code, § 15-725)
§ 73.25 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any
parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public
is invited or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area
for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as under the provisions of 47 O.S. §
15-112, and such insignias are displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112 or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
by a fine as provided in §
70.999.
(Prior Code, § 15-726) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Handicapped insignia, application, and display on vehicles, see 47 O.S. §
15-112
LOADING
§ 73.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner
or his or her business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used
during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or
freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag.
      (2)   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during
normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight,
and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear
of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued vehicle.
   FREIGHT LOADING ZONES. All curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade,
shipment, or re-sale.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.  All loading zones authorized and used regularly
and exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops,
taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-801)
§ 73.41 CURB LOADING ZONES, DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the Council by motion or
resolution, may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading
zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the
zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected
in accordance with this section.
   (C)   If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs
shall not be placed until
the applicant pays to the city an amount of money estimated by the City Council
to be adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing
the same.
(Prior Code, § 15-802)
§ 73.42 LOADING ZONES TO BE USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE.
   No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be
used as a passenger loading zone except as may be specifically provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 15-803) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.43 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading
zone for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three minutes.
(Prior Code, § 15-804) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.44 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING IN COMMERCIAL CURB LOADING ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb
loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop
for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. Vehicles using any
commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing requirements and
regulations provided by this subchapter.
   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 15-805) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.45 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.
   The Mayor may establish loading zones for common carriers, including but not
limited to bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places
and in such number as he or she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit
and convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by
appropriate signs.
(Prior Code, § 15-806)
§ 73.46 USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 15-807) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 73.47 STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXIS.
   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
except in a bus stop, stand, or loading zone designated as provided herein,
except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the
bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement
of other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 15-808) Penalty, see §
70.999
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals
   
74.02   Pedestrians’ right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.03   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
   
74.04   Crossing at right angles
   
74.05   When pedestrians shall yield
   
74.06   Pedestrians walking along roadways
   
74.07   Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business, or donations
from vehicle occupants
   
74.08   Drivers to exercise due care
   
74.09   Crossing other than in crosswalk prohibited
   
74.10   Pedestrians to obey railroad signals
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided for in
this code of ordinances, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1001) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrian rights and duties, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-501 through 11-507
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way slowing down or
stopping, if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when:
         (a)   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
         (b)   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge
of the roadway as to be in danger.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (A) are not applicable under
conditions where pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or
walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
   (C)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked
crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake to
pass such stopped vehicle.    
(Prior Code, § 15-1002) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.03 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-1003) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.04 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-1004) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.05 WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian
crossings are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 15-1005) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the
roadway, or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-1006) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.07 PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS, OR DONATIONS
FROM VEHICLE OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride,
donations, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Stand in any street, roadway, or park and stop or attempt to stop
and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
contributions or the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about
to be parked on a street;
      (2)   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
      (3)   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill, or any political campaign literature, or any sample,
souvenir, or gift; or
      (4)   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway,
attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar
purpose.
(Prior Code, § 15-1007) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.08 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1008) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.09 CROSSING OTHER THAN IN CROSSWALK PROHIBITED.
   Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the center
thereof, except in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 15-1009) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 74.10 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 15-1010) Penalty, see §
70.999
CHAPTER 75: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
75.01   Application of bicycle regulations
   
75.02   Application of traffic laws to bicycles
   
75.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
75.04   Riding on bicycles
   
75.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
75.06   Speed of bicycle
   
75.07   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
75.08   Carrying articles
   
75.09   Parking
   
75.10   Riding on sidewalks
   
75.11   Lamps and equipment on bicycles
Recreation and Utility Vehicles
   
75.25   Definitions
   
75.26   Mini bikes
   
75.27   All-terrain vehicles
   
75.28   Golf carts and utility vehicles
   
75.29   Traffic regulations
   
75.30   Conflict
 
   
75.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 75.01 APPLICATION OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any public way.
   (B)   These provisions shall apply when a bicycle is operated upon any path
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1101) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-1201 et seq.
§ 75.02 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS TO BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of this state and the traffic provisions of this code applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature are
inapplicable to such persons.
(Prior Code, § 15-1102)
§ 75.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to the pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 15-1103) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.04 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Prior Code, § 15-1104) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   (C)   If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 15-1105) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.06 SPEED OF BICYCLE.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 15-1106) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway,
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways.
(Prior Code, § 15-1107) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.08 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handle bars.
(Prior Code, § 15-1108) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.09 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 15-1109) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.10 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (B)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have
erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same.
   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 15-1110) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.11 LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Bicycles in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to
the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from
a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet.
   (C)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any
siren or whistle.
   (D)   Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator
to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 15-1111) Penalty, see §
75.99
RECREATION AND UTILITY VEHICLES
§ 75.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE.  A self propelled vehicle powered by an internal
combustion or electric engine manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway
use traveling on four or more low pressure tires, and having a seat designed to
be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering.
   GOLF CART.  A self-propelled vehicle manufactured for use on a golf course
to transport persons playing golf.
   MINI BIKE. Any self-propelled vehicle or motor-driven cycle having less than
an eight-inch wheel rim, or less than a 40-inch wheelbase or less than a 25-
inch seat height.
   UTILITY VEHICLE. A vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine larger
than 300 CC or an equivalent electric motor which produces the same energy,
manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use, equipped with seating
for two to four people and a steering wheel, traveling on four or more wheels.
(Prior Code, § 15-1201) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 75.26 MINI BIKES.
   Mini bikes shall be prohibited from operating on streets, highways, alleys,
or other public ways within the city except when used in a parade.
(Prior Code, § 15-1202) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.27 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   All-terrain vehicles shall be prohibited from operating on streets,
highways, alleys, or other public ways within the city except when operated for
an official government purpose or when properly licensed by the State of
Oklahoma and tagged.
(Prior Code, § 15-1203) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.28 GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Golf carts and utility vehicles may operate on state or federal
highways within the city only if making a perpendicular crossing of the
highway.
   (B)   Golf carts may be operated only on city streets with a speed limit of
35 mph or less.
   (C)   Golf carts and utility vehicles may operate on city streets only
during daylight hours.
   (D)   The operator is required to possess a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license.
   (E)   Golf carts and utility vehicles must comply with the financial
responsibility laws of the State of Oklahoma and the operator must carry proof
of such insurance.
   (F)   Golf carts and utility vehicles shall have the following equipment:
rear stop light, turn signals, rear view mirror, seat belts, brakes, horn,
windshield or eye protection such as goggles or safety glasses and a
manufacturer’s serial number plate.
   (G)   A city permit shall be affixed to the dash area of the vehicle in
plain view. The permit shall be issued by the city to the owner upon inspection
of the vehicle and proof of compliance with the requirements of this section
and payment of a permit fee of $10. The charge for the permit fee may be
amended by the city by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 15-1204) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012; Ord. 13-02, passed 9-10-
2012) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.29 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Operators of golf carts or utility vehicles shall be subject to the same
rules of the road and traffic regulations established by the State of Oklahoma
and the city regulating operation of motor vehicles, violation of which shall
be subject to the same penalty applicable to operators of motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 15-1205) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.30 CONFLICT.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-1206) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of the provisions of §§
75.25 through
75.30 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 15-1207) (Ord. 13-01, passed 8-13-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   PUBLIC LIBRARY
      
96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Animals running at large prohibited
   
90.003   Turning animals at large unlawful
   
90.004   Keeping of livestock prohibited; exceptions; staking or pasturing on
public property
   
90.005   Animals which disturb prohibited, constitute nuisance
   
90.006   Buildings for animals; construction and conditions
   
90.007   Premises to be kept clean
   
90.008   Inspections
   
90.009   Leashing animals
   
90.010   Kennels, breeding dogs or cats prohibited
   
90.011   Keeping of wild, exotic, or dangerous animals
   
90.012   Zoning ordinance to prevail
Dogs and Cats
   
90.025   Dogs and cats to be vaccinated
   
90.026   Dog and cat registration; tag
   
90.027   Tag to be placed on dog collar; lost tags
   
90.028   Right to kill dog in defense of self or another
   
90.029   Court proceedings against vicious or dangerous animals
   
90.030   Registration of dangerous dogs
Animal Control Shelter
   
90.045   Shelter established; feeding animals
   
90.046   Impounding animals
   
90.047   Animals to be impounded
   
90.048   Breaking animal control shelter
   
90.049   Fees for impounding
   
90.050   Owner may redeem
   
90.051   Sale or destruction of impounded animals
   
90.052   Owner may claim excess money
   
90.053   Adoption of animals from the Hobart Animal Control Shelter
Cruelty to Animals
   
90.065   Cruelty to animals
   
90.066   Poisoning animals
   
90.067   Encouraging animals to fight
Proclamation of Rabies
   
90.080   Dogs and cats confined
   
90.081   Quarantine of animals for observation
   
90.082   Securing support information on diagnosed animals
   
90.083   Rabies crisis declaration
   
90.084   Destruction of animals under crisis period
   
90.085   Surrender of animals under suspect
Bird Sanctuary
   
90.100   Bird sanctuary established
   
90.101   Unlawful to hurt birds in sanctuary; exceptions
   
90.102   Chicken or laying hens - land use
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat,
rabbit, chicken, goose, duck, turkey, or other ANIMAL, including fowl.
   AT LARGE. Neither enclosed within a building, fence, or other enclosure of
sufficient strength and construction to restrain and keep the animal within the
building, fence, or other enclosure, nor securely restrained and controlled by
a person by a leash or harness with handhold.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the County Health Department or his or her
authorized agent and shall also include the City Animal Control Officer.
   LARGE ANIMALS. Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, or any other
animal of similar size or stature.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, or corporation owning, harboring, or keeping an
animal. The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal
remains, or to which it customarily returns, for a period of ten days or more,
shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal.
   PERMIT. Includes, but is not limited to, the failure to take adequate
precautions to prevent an animal from being at large.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person
without undue provocation, or which attacks or barks or growls at and acts as
if it intends to attack or bite, or bites a person or persons, when not unduly
provoked.
(Prior Code, § 4-101)
§ 90.002 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any fowl or any animal shall keep such animal
under restraint at all times and shall not permit such animal to be at large.
   (B)   If a dog or cat is found running at large and the ownership of the
animal is known, the dog or cat need not be impounded, in the discretion of the
officer, if the officer cites the owner of the dog or cat to appear in
Municipal Court or pay a fine for violation of this code.
(Prior Code, § 4-102) (Ord. 1078, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 11 O.S. § 22-115
§ 90.003 TURNING ANIMALS AT LARGE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is
confined as required by ordinance, so as to turn the animal at large, or in any
manner to turn the animal at large.
(Prior Code, § 4-103) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.004 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS; STAKING OR PASTURING ON
PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No livestock shall be kept within the city, except temporarily in a
stockyard or other enclosure awaiting transportation and except as otherwise
permitted by the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section,  LIVESTOCK means horses, mules, cows,
goats, sheep, swine, and any other animal commonly considered as LIVESTOCK.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine, or pasture any animal
on any public property (federal, state, municipal, or other), or on any
railroad right-of-way, without the consent of the person owning or controlling
such property.
(Prior Code, § 4-104) (Ord. 1098, passed 3-27-1990) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 ANIMALS WHICH DISTURB PROHIBITED, CONSTITUTE NUISANCE.
   (A)   The following conditions are hereby declared to be a nuisance:
      (1)   Any dog or other animal which, by barking, howling, or otherwise,
disturbs the peace and quiet of any person;
      (2)   Any dog or other animal, which goes into any garbage can or other
waste vessel, or turns the same over or scatters the contents of the same on
the ground; or
      (3)   Any dog or other animal which chases cars, motorcycles, bicycles,
or any other motor vehicle or intimidates joggers, pedestrians, or children.
   (B)   Any dog or other animal alleged to be a nuisance, as defined in this
section, may be proceeded against in the Municipal Court after a complaint has
been duly filed therein by any person having knowledge thereof, and if the
court shall find that such dog or other animal is a nuisance, then the Court
may order the owner or person in possession to prevent and abate such nuisance,
or the Court may order such dog or animal impounded and the owner or person in
possession may have the dog or other animal returned upon paying all costs of
impounding and giving good and sufficient bond, in the sum as set by the city,
conditioned that he or she will prevent and abate such nuisance. Thirty days
thereafter, such owner or person in possession may present to the Court
evidence that the nuisance has been abated and prevented and the Court may,
upon such hearing, order the bond returned.
(Prior Code, § 4-105) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.006 BUILDINGS FOR ANIMALS; CONSTRUCTION AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Every building or structure wherein any animal is kept within the city
shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept
clean and sanitary at all times.
   (B)   Every such building, housing any livestock or furbearing animals,
including, but not limited to, any horse, mule, donkey, cow, goat, or sheep, if
located within 200 feet of any apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding
house, retail food store, building used for educational, religious, or hospital
purposes or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which such animal is kept, shall be provided with a watertight
and flytight receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulations
of manure. The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept
covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in
the receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 4-106) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.007 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   Every structure or building, stable, pen, coop, or place wherein an animal
is kept or permitted to be kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable orders.
(Prior Code, § 4-107) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.008 INSPECTIONS.
   The Animal Control Officer, the Health Officer, or any police officer, upon
complaint of any person, shall inspect any structure or place where an animal
is kept, and may do so on his or her own initiative. He or she may issue any
such reasonable order as he or she may deem necessary to the owner of the
animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided in this chapter or in a
manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He or she may make a complaint
before the Municipal Judge against any person for violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure shall not
abridge the right of others to make such complaint.
(Prior Code, § 4-108)
§ 90.009 LEASHING ANIMALS.
   When requested by any proper official, meter reader, police officer,
sanitation worker, or other person whose duty is to enter onto private
property, an owner shall leash or otherwise confine any and all dogs to prevent
harm to the person making a lawful entry on owner’s private property.
(Prior Code, § 4-109) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.010 KENNELS, BREEDING DOGS OR CATS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to breed dogs or cats for commercial purposes
or to maintain and operate kennels in the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-110) (Ord. 1087, passed 7-26-1983; Ord. 99-07, passed 4-5-
1999) Penalty, see §
90.999
Cross-reference:
   For definition of kennel, see §
155.005
§ 90.011 KEEPING OF WILD, EXOTIC, OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, a WILD, EXOTIC, OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL
means an animal of the larger variety which is usually not a domestic animal
and which can normally be found in the wild state, with or without mean or
vicious propensities, including, but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards,
panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes, foxes, elephants,
rhinoceroses, and all forms of poisonous or large snakes or reptiles, including
those considered dangerous such as boas and pythons, lynxes, raccoons, skunks,
monkeys, and other like animals.
   (B)   It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild, exotic, or dangerous animal
in the city limits as a pet or for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee, except as provided in this section.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks or
zoos, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses licensed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-150) (Ord. 1071, passed 1-12-1982) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.012 ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL.
   In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future
zoning ordinance, the provision of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and
supersede the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-160)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning ordinance, see
Chapter 155
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.025 DOGS AND CATS TO BE VACCINATED.
   The owner of a dog or cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against
rabies by a veterinarian every calendar year before May 1 thereof, or, in the
case of a pup or kitten, before it is six months old. The person vaccinating
the dog or cat shall furnish a certificate or statement of vaccination.
(Prior Code, § 4-120) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.026 DOG AND CAT REGISTRATION; TAG.
   (A)   A fee in such sum as set by the Council by motion or resolution for
every dog or cat more than six months of age is hereby levied upon the owner of
any such dog or cat kept or harbored within the city.
   (B)   The regulatory fee levied in this section shall not apply to a dog or
cat only temporarily brought and kept within the city, nor to a dog or cat
brought within the city to participate in a dog or cat show, nor to a “seeing
eye” dog when such dog is actually being used by a blind person to aid him or
her in going from place to place, nor to dogs or cats being kept in kennels or
pet shops for sale.
   (C)   The owner shall pay the fee levied to the city for every calendar year
within thirty days after acquiring or bringing the dog or cat into the city.
The licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.
   (D)   The person offering the fee shall present to the city the certificate
of a veterinarian or other person legally authorized to immunize dogs or cats,
showing that the dog or cat has been immunized against rabies during the
preceding six months prior to issuance of the license.
   (E)   The owner of the dog or cat shall, at the time of paying the fee,
register the dog or cat by giving the name and address of the owner, the name,
breed, color, and sex of the dog or cat, and such other reasonable information
as the city may request.
   (F)   The city thereupon shall deliver an original receipt to the owner and
also an appropriate tag to him or her for the dog or cat. The tag shall
constitute a license for the dog or cat.
   (G)   A licensed veterinarian may also issue appropriate tags, after
registration and proof of vaccination, which shall constitute a valid license
for the dog or cat.
(Prior Code, § 4-121) (Ord. 2020-04, passed 7-14-2020)
§ 90.027 TAG TO BE PLACED ON DOG COLLAR; LOST TAGS.
   (A)   The owner shall cause the tag received from the city to be affixed to
the collar of the dog, so that the tag can easily be seen by officers of the
city. The owner shall see that the tag is so worn by the dog at all times.
   (B)   In case the tag is lost before the end of the year for which it was
issued, the owner may secure another for the dog by applying to the City Clerk,
presenting to him or her the original receipt, and paying to him or her a fee
as set by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-122) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.028 RIGHT TO KILL DOG IN DEFENSE OF SELF OR ANOTHER.
   Any person may kill a dog in self-defense or in defense of another when the
dog, without undue provocation, bites him or her or the other, or attacks or
attempts to bite or attack him or her or the other in such manner that an
ordinarily prudent person would be led to believe that the person toward whom
the efforts of the dog are directed is about to be bitten or otherwise
physically harmed.
(Prior Code, § 4-123)
§ 90.029 COURT PROCEEDINGS AGAINST VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any dog or other animal which is alleged to be vicious or dangerous
may be proceeded against in the Municipal Court, after a complaint has been
duly filed therein by any person having knowledge thereof.
   (B)   If the court shall find that, at such time:
      (1)   The dog or other animal has attacked a person and:
         (a)   The person so attacked was not at the time trespassing upon the
property of the owner or person having control of such dog or other animal; or
         (b)   It cannot be proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the person so
attacked was provoking or teasing such dog or other animal.
      (2)   The dog or other animal is of such vicious and fierce disposition
as to attack human beings without provocation, then the court shall have the
authority to order such dog or other animal kept muzzled or that such dog or
other animal be kept within a sufficient enclosure. If such dog or other animal
has bitten or attacked a human being on other occasions, the court may order
that it be delivered to the Animal Control Officer and destroyed by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 4-124)
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Court, see §
33.001
§ 90.030 REGISTRATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. An entity acting alone or in concert with other
local governmental units for enforcement of the animal control laws of the
city, county, and state and the shelter and welfare of animals.
      ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any individual employed, contracted with, or
appointed by the Animal Control Authority for the purpose of aiding the
enforcement of this section or any other law or ordinance relating to the
licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of
animals, and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other
employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve the
seizure and impoundment of any animals.
      DANGEROUS DOG.  
         (a)   Any dog that:
            1.   Has inflicted serious or severe injury on a human being
without provocation on public or private property or has attacked without
provocation another domestic animal in a place other than a secure and enclosed
place in which the dog is kept; or
            2.   Has been previously found to be potentially DANGEROUS, the
owner having received notice of such by the Animal Control Authority in
writing, and the dog thereafter aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the
safety of humans.
         (b)   No person shall be allowed to keep within the city limits any
dog bred or trained for fighting, the dog being inherently DANGEROUS to other
residents of the city, particularly children. Any owner or person responsible
for bringing or keeping such dogs in the city limits of the city shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and each day shall constitute a separate offense. Such
person shall be strictly liable for harm or damage caused by the animal.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having control or
custody of an animal.
      POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites on
a human either on public or private property.
      PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A DANGEROUS DOG.  While on the owner’s property, a
dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure with at least 150 square feet of space for each dog
kept therein which is over six months of age, and which is suitable to prevent
the entry of children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such
pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and shall also
provide protection from the elements for the dog.
      SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
   (B)   Certificate of registration requirements are as follows.
      (1)   It is unlawful for an owner to have a dangerous dog in the state
without certificate of registration issued under this section. This section
shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work.
      (2)   The Animal Control Authority shall issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of such animal if the owner presents to the Animal
Control Unit sufficient evidence of:
         (a)   A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog and the posting of
the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog
on the property. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with
a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog; and
         (b)   A policy of liability insurance such as homeowner’s insurance,
or surety bond, issued by an insurer qualified under 36 O.S. in the amount of
not less than $50,000 insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by
the dangerous dog.
      (3)   The annual fee for registration of a dangerous dog shall be $10, in
addition to regular dog licensing fees.
   (C)   Enclosure and control of dangerous dogs is required as follows.
      (1)   (a)   It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the
dog to be outside the proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained
by a substantial chain or leash and under physical restraint of a responsible
person over 16 years of age.
         (b)   The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury
to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it
from biting any person or animal.
      (2)   This section is not and shall not be construed to be “breed
specific.”
      (3)   Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or
damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful
trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or
was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime.
   (D)   Any dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an Animal
Control Authority if:
      (1)   The dog is not validly registered under division (B) above;
      (2)   The owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage or
surety bond required under division (B) above;
      (3)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure; and
      (4)   The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure and not under physical restraint of the responsible person.
(Prior Code, § 4-125) (Ord. 1103, passed 9-24-1991; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-13-
2001; Ord. 10-09, passed 2-8-2010) Penalty, see §
90.999 
ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER
§ 90.045 SHELTER ESTABLISHED; FEEDING ANIMALS.
   A City Animal Control Shelter is hereby established under the jurisdiction
of the Animal Control Officer or of such other person as may be officially
designated. The person in charge of the Animal Control Shelter shall provide
proper sustenance for all animals impounded and shall treat them in a humane
manner.
(Prior Code, § 4-130) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.046 IMPOUNDING ANIMALS.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer, or any other city officer or employee
shall catch, or take up, and impound in the city pound any animal which is at
large within the city or in violation of this code. When an animal is so
impounded, it shall be humanely kept and treated, and may be redeemed and
disposed of, as other impounded animals are kept, treated, and redeemed or
disposed of. A description of the animal shall be kept and if the owner is
known, the city shall attempt to notify the owner of the impoundment orally or
in writing.
   (B)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any part of this section
proof that the animal described in the complaint was at large as defined herein
and that the defendant named in the complaint was the owner of the animal shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner permitted his
or her animal to be at large in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-131) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   State law on disposal of animals, applicable to cities over 10,000, see 4
O.S. §§ 501 through 508
§ 90.047 ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer, a police officer, or such other officer or
employee of the city as may be authorized:
      (1)   Shall take into custody and impound any animal running at large in
violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city; and
      (2)   May enter upon the premises of the owner or other private premises
to take such animal into custody.
   (B)   Any other person may take such animal into custody and present it to
the authority in charge of the Animal Control Shelter for impounding.
(Prior Code, § 4-132)
§ 90.048 BREAKING ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER.
   No unauthorized person shall:
   (A)   Break or attempt to break open the Animal Control Shelter, or take or
let out any animal therefrom;
   (B)   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
   (C)   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the
discharge of his or her duties relating to the taking into custody and
impounding of animals as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-133)
§ 90.049 FEES FOR IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   The City Council by motion or resolution shall determine the fees to
be charged for impounding and keeping animals. In computing the fee, a fraction
of a day during which an animal has been fed shall be deemed a full day.
   (B)   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees
to the city and present his or her receipt therefor to the person in charge of
the Animal Control Shelter before the latter releases the animal.
   (C)   Any person redeeming a dog not licensed as required by §§
90.025 through
90.030 of this code shall pay the required license tax to the city and secure a
tag and present the receipt therefor and the tag to the person in charge of the
Animal Control Shelter before the latter releases the dog. If a dog has been
licensed but is not wearing the tag, the person in charge of the Animal Control
Shelter shall require adequate evidence of the proper licensing of the dog
before releasing it.
(Prior Code, § 4-134)
§ 90.050 OWNER MAY REDEEM.
   An owner of an impounded animal or his or her agent may redeem the animal;
prior to its sale or destruction as provided for herein, by paying the required
fees against the animal and meeting any other requirements which may be
prescribed in this chapter. However, when in the judgment of the Animal Control
Officer, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not
be redeemed.
(Prior Code, § 4-135)
§ 90.051 SALE OR DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal
shall be held for 72 hours during which time it may be redeemed pursuant to
this chapter. No animal may be destroyed or sold until after this period.
   (B)   Sales herein provided for shall be for cash and shall be conducted by,
or under the direction of the Chief of Police. In no case shall the price of an
animal be less than the fees, set out in this chapter, which have accrued
against the animal. If an impounded animal cannot be sold, the animal shall be
destroyed, in a humane manner, or otherwise disposed of in a legal manner.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall pay to the city any money received
from the sale of impounded animals.
(Prior Code, § 4-136) (Ord. 1078, passed 7-26-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Authorized means of destroying animals in animal shelters, 4 O.S. §§ 501
through 508 
§ 90.052 OWNER MAY CLAIM EXCESS MONEY.
   The owner of an impounded animal sold as provided herein may claim the
excess of the sale price of the animal above the fees for impounding and
keeping the same and a fee of $5 to reimburse the city for any expense it has
had in making the sale, at any time within three months after the sale. If a
claim is so made and approved by the Council, the City Treasurer shall pay him
or her such excess. If a claim is not made, the excess shall belong to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 4-137)
§ 90.053 ADOPTION OF ANIMALS FROM THE HOBART ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NEUTER. To render a male dog or cat unable to reproduce.
      NEW OWNER or OWNER. A person legally competent to enter a contract
acquiring a dog or cat from a releasing agency.
      RELEASING AGENCY. Any pound, shelter, or humane society organization,
whether public or private.
      SPAY. To remove the ovaries of a female dog or cat in order to render
said animal unable to reproduce.
      STERILIZATION. To spay or neuter a dog or cat.
   (B)   Spaying or neutering as condition for release of certain animals. All
dogs or cats adopted from the Hobart Animal Control Shelter shall not be
released unless said animal has been surgically spayed or neutered or unless
the adopting party agrees to have the animals sterilized and deposits a sum of
$40 with the releasing agency.
   (C)   Refund of deposit upon proof of spaying or neutering.
      (1)   The funds deposited with the releasing agency shall be refunded to
the adopting party upon the adopting party’s presentation of a written
statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted animal has been
spayed or neutered.
      (2)   However, no refunds shall be made unless said animal was spayed or
neutered within 60 days of adoption in the case of adult animals; or, in the
case of infant animals, within 30 days of the date the female animal detained
the age of six months, or a male animal attained the age of eight months.
   (D)   Sterilization agreement.
   This Agreement is made and entered into this     day of
                     , 20      , by and between:
   (Releasing Agency)                (New Owner)
   Name                         Name
   Address                      Address
   City Telephone                   City Telephone
In consideration of the releasing of said animal, and in further consideration
of mutual obligations herein, Releasing Agency releases the following animal to
the New Owner:
   (describe animal)
1.   Releasing Agency agrees to release the above listed animal into the care
of the New Owner and refund the New Owner’s spay/neuter deposit provided that:
   1.   The animal is sterilized by a graduate licensed veterinarian
by                            
                                                 (give date)
   2.   A written statement signed by the veterinarian performing the
sterilization, that the animal has been sterilized by the stated date is given
to the Releasing Agency.
2.   New Owner accepts the above listed animal and agrees:
   1.   To have the animal sterilized by a graduate licensed veterinarian by
                            
                                                    (give date)
   2.   To provide written evidence to the Releasing Agency from the
veterinarian performing the sterilization that the animal has been sterilized
by the above date listed.
This agreement shall be binding upon the assigns, heirs, executors, and
administrators of the respective parties.
The parties hereto have hereunto set their hands the day and year first above
written.
Releasing Agency (Signature of Agent)       New Owner (Signature of)
   (E)   Extension of time to spay or neuter. Upon presentation of a written
report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life of health of an
adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery, the releasing agency shall grant
a 30-day extension of the period within the spay or neuter surgery would
otherwise be required. Further extensions may be granted upon additional
veterinary reports stating that necessity.
   (F)   Death of adopted animal - refund of deposited funds. If requested to
do so, releasing agencies shall refund deposited funds to the adopting party
upon reasonable proof being presented to the releasing agency by the adopting
party that the adopted animal died before the expiration of the period during
which the spaying or neutering was required to be completed.
   (G)   Disposition of forfeited funds - record of accounts.
      (1)   Funds which have been forfeited by adopting parties shall be placed
in a separate account, which shall be an interest-bearing account whenever
feasible and releasing agencies shall allocate funds from said account to
programs which directly promote, subsidize, or otherwise reduce the cost of
spaying or neutering animals of the releasing agency.
      (2)   The releasing agency shall maintain accurate records of accounts
which fund spay/neuter programs.
   (H)   Adoption standards.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions and purposes of the Dog and Cat
Sterilization Act, being 4 O.S. §§ 499 et seq., and laws of the State of
Oklahoma, releasing agencies may establish adoption standards for pets in their
care.
      (2)   Provided, however, that in the case of public facilities said
standards must be reasonably related to the prevention of cruelty to animals,
the responsible management of dogs and cats in the interest of preserving
public health and welfare, and shall be applied in a fair and equal manner to
all potential adopters.
(Prior Code, § 4-138) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-12-2020)
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
§ 90.065 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to pour on, or
apply to an animal, any drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the animal;
or knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or knowingly to
neglect an animal belonging to him or her or in his or her custody in a cruel
or inhumane manner.
   (B)   The premises on or in which any animals are kept shall be subject to
inspection by the Health Officer or any of his or her representatives, at any
reasonable hour of the day, for the purpose of enforcing this subchapter.
   (C)   Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter the premises
where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to
examine such animal and take possession of such animal when, in his or her
opinion it requires humane treatment.
(Prior Code, § 4-140) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals, see 21 O.S. § 1685
§ 90.066 POISONING ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or other animal
except a noxious, non-domesticated animal, or knowingly to expose poison so
that the same may be taken by such an animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-141) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.067 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT.
   It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight between
animals; or to encourage one animal to attack, pursue, or annoy another animal
except a noxious, non-domesticated animal, or to keep a house, pit, or other
place used for fights between animals.
(Prior Code, § 4-142) Penalty, see §
90.999
PROCLAMATION OF RABIES
§ 90.080 DOGS AND CATS CONFINED.
   (A)   When the Health Officer or Chief of Police determines and certifies
that a dog, a cat, or other animal in the city or within five miles of the city
is or was infected with rabies, and that an epidemic of rabies threatens the
city, the Council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined, and if
deemed desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time to be
determined by the Council. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its passage
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and
shall go into effect on the day following such publication unless the
resolution prescribes a later time.
   (B)   While such resolution is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to
permit a dog or cat to be at large in violation of such resolution, or for any
dog or cat to be at large in violation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-170) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.081 QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS FOR OBSERVATION.
   (A)   The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a
person shall be promptly furnished to the Animal Control Officer and the County
Health Department. The animal, regardless of its immunization status, shall be
securely quarantined at a veterinary hospital of the owner’s choice at the
owner’s expense. The animal shall be observed by a licensed veterinarian for a
period of ten days, and may not be released until such reasonable determination
has been made that the animal is not infected with rabies, unless the bite was
a severe bite by an unimmunized animal. In circumstances of a severe bite (bite
on the head, face, neck or upper extremities; or deep laceration; or multiple
bite wounds) by an unimmunized animal, the biting animal should be humanely
killed immediately, without damaging the head, and the head removed and
shipped, under refrigeration, for examination at the Oklahoma State Department
of Health. If the animal is not immediately available for testing, the
individuals exposed should consult with their physician concerning the need for
immediate initiation for rabies prophylaxis. In case of animals whose ownership
is unknown, such quarantine shall be at the City Animal Shelter. If an owner
becomes known, the animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of
rabies, and such owner shall then pay any related charges for confinement.
Signs of rabies in wild animals cannot be interpreted reliably; therefore, any
wild animal that exposes a person should be killed at once (without unnecessary
damage to the head) and the head submitted for examination for evidence of
rabies.
   (B)   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian, or other practitioner
to report to the Animal Control Officer the names and addresses of persons
treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as
will be helpful in rabies control.
   (C)   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal
Control Officer his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or her to be
a rabid suspect.
(Prior Code, § 4-171) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.082 SECURING SUPPORT INFORMATION ON DIAGNOSED ANIMALS.
   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is
suspected of having rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and dies while under
such observation, the Animal Control Officer, veterinarian, the City Health
Officer, or other designated emissary shall immediately send the necessary part
of such animal to the State Health Department for pathological examination and
shall notify the proper public health officer of any reports of human contact.
(Prior Code, § 4-172)
§ 90.083 RABIES CRISIS DECLARATION.
   When a report gives a suspected or a positive diagnosis of rabies, or when
the city, county, or state health officials feel that a rabies crisis may be
imminent, the health officials may recommend to the Mayor city-wide quarantine,
and upon the invoking of such quarantine by the Mayor no animal shall be taken
into the streets or permitted to be in the streets, except for short periods of
exercise under leash and control of a competent adult. During the quarantine,
no animal may be taken or removed from the city without written permission of
the Animal Control Officer. This declaration must be made by notice in a
general circulated newspaper of the community and will last as long as health
officials determine the situation requires such action.
(Prior Code, § 4-173) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.084 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS UNDER CRISIS PERIOD.
   (A)   During the period of rabies quarantine as mentioned in §
90.083, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be
forthwith destroyed, or at the owner’s expense and option, shall be treated for
a rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian. The period of quarantine may be
extended from time to time.
   (B)   In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring
during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended
for an additional six months.
   (C)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting or
scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor to remove same from the city
limits without written permission from the Health Officer of the city or the
Animal Control Officer.
   (D)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be
surrendered to the Animal Control Officer.
   (E)   The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
(Prior Code, § 4-174) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.085 SURRENDER OF ANIMALS UNDER SUSPECT.
   No person shall remove from the city any animal suspected of having been
exposed to rabies, or any animal which has bitten a human, except as herein
provided. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall be surrendered
to the Animal Control Officer upon demand, and the Animal Control Officer shall
direct disposition of the animal. No person shall refuse to surrender any
animal for quarantine or destruction when such demand is lawfully made by the
Animal Control Officer.
(Prior Code, § 4-175) Penalty, see §
90.999
BIRD SANCTUARY
§ 90.100 BIRD SANCTUARY ESTABLISHED.
   The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
designated as a bird sanctuary.
(Prior Code, § 4-180)
§ 90.101 UNLAWFUL TO HURT BIRDS IN SANCTUARY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot or molest in
any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests.
However, if birds other than pigeons or starlings are found to be congregating
in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or
menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of
the city, then the health authorities shall meet with representatives of the
Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club, or Humane Society, or as many of the
clubs as are found to exist in the city after having given at least three days
actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of
the clubs. If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is found
to abate such nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in
such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the
supervision of the Chief of Police of the city.
   (B)   Pigeons and starlings may be destroyed as deemed necessary and
advisable by the City Council upon finding by the City Council and supervision
by the Chief of Police or Health Authorities.
(Prior Code, § 4-181) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.102 CHICKEN OR LAYING HENS - LAND USE.
   (A)   Except as provided otherwise, chickens or laying hens may be kept on
residential lots in excess of 5,000 square feet, so long as:
      (1)   Such chickens or laying hens are maintained on land upon which the
owner or occupant resides;
      (2)   Roosters are not allowed;
      (3)   No slaughtering of chickens or laying hens is permitted;
      (4)   The number of chickens or laying hens allowed on a residential lot
shall be governed by the following land use parameters:
         (a)   A minimum of two chickens or laying hens to be kept within a
minimum of four square feet of run space and 18 inches of coop space per
chicken or laying hen as set out in division (A)(9) below. The maximum amount
of chickens or laying hens shall be governed by residential lot size as
divisible by the aforementioned metrics, except there shall be no more than
eight chickens or laying hens on any residential lot of 5,000 square feet to
one acre;
         (b)   For residential lots in excess of one acre, but less than five
acres, provided that the provisions of this section can be met, the following
limit on the number of chickens and laying hens is permitted:
            1.   Excess of one to two acres: Maximum of 12;
            2.   Excess of two to three acres: Maximum of 18;
            3.   Excess of three to four acres: Maximum of 24; and
            4.   Excess of four to five acres: Maximum of 30.
      (5)   The owner or occupant of the land upon which such chickens or
laying hens are kept maintained is responsible to erect and maintain a suitable
barrier sufficient to insure compliance with the land use distance requirements
set out in this section. Appropriate screening of the coop and run from
adjacent neighbors shall be provided by the owner or occupant of the
residential lot housing chickens or laying hens;
      (6)   Such chickens or laying hens shall be kept within a designated coop
and run, which shall be located in the rear or backyard of the property, and no
coop or run shall be located in the side or front yard;
      (7)   The coop and run shall be attached and shall be located no closer
than five feet from any side or rear property line and no closer than 25 feet
from any dwelling unit other than the owner/occupants. Moveable chicken
enclosures are permitted as long as they meet the specifications indicated in
this section;
      (8)   From dusk until dawn, chicken or laying hens shall be kept within
the coop. During the other hours of the day, chickens or laying hens shall have
access to run in a coop; and
      (9)   The following coop and run requirements are met:
         (a)   A coop is a permanent structure that in addition to protecting
human health and safety, provides the chickens or laying hens with protection
from the elements and predators, and must include suitable clean ventilated
air, bedding, nest boxes, and roost space. Roosts should provide 18 inches of
surface area, and have rounded corners and be free of splinters. One nest box
per every four chickens or laying hens;
         (b)   Coops shall be predator resistant and any open wall or windows
shall be designed and screened to prevent access by predators;
         (c)   Minimum size for a coop shall be four square feet per chicken or
laying hen;
         (d)   A run is an attached enclosed area where the chickens or laying
hens are safe from predators, but free to be outside the coop, but also
protects human health and safety;
         (e)   Minimum size for a run shall be eight square feet per chicken or
laying hen;
         (f)   Water and food shall be provided onsite and accessible at all
times;
         (g)   Coop shall have a suitable run attached and all areas of the
coop should be easily accessible for proper cleaning and to prevent odor and
build-up of food or bedding. Coops shall be located in areas that are not
susceptible to storm water run-off onto neighboring properties;
         (h)   All areas where chickens or laying hens are present shall be
cleaned daily to prevent an accumulation of food, fecal matter, bedding or
nesting material so as to prevent a nuisance or unsanitary condition due to
odor, vermin, debris, or decay. All waste not composted shall be properly
bagged and placed in garbage containers; and
         (i)   Any electrical or heat sources shall comply with the City
Building Code.
   (B)   This section is not intended to be construed in derogation of or in
conflict with any restrictive covenant that may be applicable to any property.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to keep chickens or laying
hens within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit
therefor in compliance of the provisions of this section, excluding those
persons whose property is zoned for agricultural purposes or is over five acres
in size. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to make, adopt, and amend rules
and regulations necessary for permit applications, issuance, expiration, record
keeping, and revocation. The permit fee for said permit shall be $25.
(Prior Code, § 4-182) (Ord. 2020-03, passed 6-16-2020) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any ordinance or
provision of this chapter, or who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out
any reasonable order made by the Health Officer pursuant to this chapter,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
10.99. The penalties provided for herein shall be in addition to other remedies
of the city and aggrieved persons and shall not be construed as exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 4-185)
   (B)   Violations of §
90.030 are punishable under the general penalty provisions at §
10.99. Each day or any portion of a day during which a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense, provided that the cumulative amount
shall not exceed $5,000. Any such fine, at the discretion of the Municipal
Court, may be offset by payments made by the dog owner to any victim of an
attack by the dog. Insurance premiums, however, may not be considered as an
offset.
(Prior Code, § 4-125)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
90.102 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as defined in
division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 4-182)
(Ord. 1103, passed 9-24-1991; Ord. 01-27, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 10-09, passed
2-8-2010; Ord. 2020-03, passed 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Policy
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Applicability
   
91.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
91.05   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
91.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
91.07   Exemption
   
91.08   Administration
   
91.09   Education and conciliation
   
91.10   Enforcement
   
91.11   Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence
   
91.12   Enforcement by private persons
   
91.13   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
91.14   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations,
for fair housing throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-801) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
91.04,
91.05, and
91.06.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 5-802) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, and §
91.07, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
set forth in this chapter shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by
division (B) below.
   (B)   Nothing in §
91.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale, or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (B)(1) shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided
further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest
in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one
time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from the applications of this chapter only if such house is
sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or
salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker,
agent, salesperson, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of §
91.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families
living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purpose of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sales of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Prior Code, § 5-803) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
91.03, and except as exempted by §
91.03(B) and §
91.07, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, or familial status;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, handicap, or familial status;
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on race, sex, color, religion, or national origin, handicap, or familial status
or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; and
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons, of a particular race, sex, color,
religion or national origin, handicap, or familial status.
(Prior Code, § 5-804) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, construction, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other
financial assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated
with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or
of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the
dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial
assistance is to be made or given, provided, that nothing contained in this
section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in §
91.03(B).
(Prior Code, § 5-805) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to, or membership or
participation in, any multiple listing service, rental, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial
status.
(Prior Code, § 5-806) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such person, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color,
national origin, handicap, or familial status. Nor shall anything in this
chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its
members.
(Prior Code, § 5-807) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering the act shall be in
the City Manager of the city.
   (B)   The City Manager may delegate any of these functions, duties, and
powers, to employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including
functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating,
hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as
to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. The City Manager shall by
rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his or her hearing
examiners or to himself or herself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance
with law.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the City Manager to further such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-808) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.09 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the City Manager shall
commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the
housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the
provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it
and shall endeavor, with their advice, to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 5-809) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the City Manager. Complaints shall be in
writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the City
Manager requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the City Manager shall
furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or
about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days
after receiving a complaint, or within 30 days after the expiration of any
period of reference under division (C) below, the City Manager shall
investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved
whether he or she intends to resolve it. If the City Manager decides to resolve
the complaints, he or she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the
alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference,
conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such
informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the persons
concerned.
   (B)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the aggregations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and with the leave of the City Manager, which shall be
granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his or her
answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   (C)   If within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the City Manager,
the City Manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this
chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a complaint
with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The City
Manager will assist in this filing.
   (D)   If the City Manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance
within 30 days of the complaint, the persons aggrieved may, within 30 days
hereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the
respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected
by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint.
If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is
about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such
practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the
City Manager shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary
compliance.
(Prior Code, § 5-810) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In conducting an investigation, the City Manager shall have access at
all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other
evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and copy such
materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as
are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided
however, that the City Manager first complies with the provisions of the fourth
amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The City Manager may
issue subpoenas to complete his or her access to or the production of such
materials, or the appearance of such person, and may issue interrogatories to a
respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations that would
apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a
civil action in the United States district court for the district in which the
investigation is taking place. The City Manager may administer oaths.
   (B)   Upon written application to the City Manager, a respondent shall be
entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name
of the City Manager to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as
subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent and shall show on their face
the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued
at this request.
   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the City Manager shall be entitled
to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the
United States district courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena
issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her. Within five
days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the
City Manager to revoke or modify the subpoena. The City Manager shall grant the
petition if he or she finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance
at unreasonable time or place, that it does not relate to any matter under
investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the
evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other
good reason.
   (D)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the City Manager
or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement
in the municipal or state court for the district in which the person to whom
the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business.
   (E)   Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence,
if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
of the City Manager shall be subject to the penalties in §
91.99. Any person who, with intent to mislead the City Manager, shall make or
cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account,
record, or other document submitted to the City Manager pursuant to his or her
subpoena or other order or shall wilfully neglect or fail to make or cause to
be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or
other documents or shall wilfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means
falsify any documentary evidence shall be subject to the penalties in §
91.99.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the City
Manager participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-811) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   The rights granted by §§
91.03 through
91.06 may be enforced by civil action in state or local courts of general
jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided however, that the
court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or §
91.10(D) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes
that the conciliation efforts of the City Manager are likely to result in
satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice complaint made
to the City Manager and which practice forms the basis for the action in court;
and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance, or tenant without actual
notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the
provisions of this chapter shall not be affected.
   (B)   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may
award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000 punitive
damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees in the case of
a prevailing plaintiff. Provided, that the said plaintiff in the opinion of the
court is not financially able to assume said attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 5-812) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.13 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
91.03 through
91.06. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
(Prior Code, § 5-813) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.14 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, or familial status and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of person from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status, in any of
the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division
(A) above or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be fined as set forth in §
91.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-814) (Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any employee of the City Manager who shall make public any information
in violation of §
91.10(A) shall be, upon conviction, fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not
more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 5-810)
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of §
91.11(E) shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both.
(Prior Code, § 5-811)
   (D)   Whoever violates §
91.14 shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both; and if bodily injury results, shall be fined not more than $200 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both; and if death results, shall be
subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Prior Code, § 5-814)
(Ord. 05-08, passed 4-11-2005)
CHAPTER 92: MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Section
   
92.01   Adoption of state statutes and rules
   
92.02   Medical marijuana establishments for commercial purposes
   
92.03   Medical marijuana growing facilities for personal use
   
92.04   Inspections
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES AND RULES.
   The city hereby adopts by reference all regulations now contained or
hereafter contained in 63 O.S. §§ 420 through 430, inclusive, concerning
Medical Marijuana Control Program now contained or hereafter contained in Title
310, Chapter 681 of the Oklahoma Administrative Code.
(Prior Code, § 18-101) (Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-16-2020; Ord. 2020-02, passed 8-
11-2020)
§ 92.02 MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   State license required. No medical marijuana growing operation,
processing facility, dispensary, or research facility shall be permitted or
maintained unless there exists a valid license issued by the State of Oklahoma
for the particular use at the particular location.
   (B)   Permit. All operators of retail medical marijuana dispensaries,
commercial growing facilities, and processing facilities, are required to
obtain a permit from the Municipal Clerk. The permit fee shall be $600 per year
for retail medical marijuana dispensaries. The permit fee shall be $1500 for
commercial growing facilities and processing facilities. The permits fees shall
be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration, and enforcement of medical marijuana businesses.
   (C)   Retail medical marijuana dispensaries.
      (1)   Location. The location of any retail medical marijuana dispensaries
shall be limited to commercial zoning districts, however, such location is
specifically prohibited if it is less than 1,000 feet of any public or private
school entrance or within 300 feet of any church. Such facilities shall not be
permitted on any property zoned residential.
      (2)   Measurement of distance. For the distance requirement outlined in
division (C)(1) above, the distance shall be computed by direct measurement in
a straight line from the main entrance of the retail marijuana dispensary to
the main entrance of the public or private school or church.
      (3)   Regulations. A licensed dispensary shall conform to all regulations
set forth for those zoning districts, along with all other applicable building
and development codes adopted by the city. All licensed dispensaries shall
comply with all other applicable city, county, and state regulations.
      (4)   Home occupation prohibited. Dispensing of medical marijuana as a
home occupation is prohibited.
      (5)   Sales. Only a state-licensed medical marijuana retail dispensary
may conduct retail sales of marijuana, or marijuana derivatives in the form
provided by state licensed processors, and these products can only be sold to a
state licensed medical marijuana patient or caregiver.
      (6)   Hours of operation. Retail medical marijuana dispensaries may only
be open to the public during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Sunday.
   (D)   Medical marijuana growing facilities.
      (1)   Location. The location of any commercial medical marijuana growing
facility may be permitted in any commercial, industrial, or agricultural zoning
district; however, such location is specifically prohibited if it is less than
1,000 feet of any public or private school entrance or within 300 feet of any
church. Such facilities shall not be permitted on any property zoned
residential.
      (2)   Regulations. A commercial medical marijuana growing facility shall
conform to all regulations set forth for those zoning districts, along with all
other applicable building and development codes adopted by the city. All
growing facilities shall comply with all other applicable city, county, and
state regulations.
      (3)   Visibility. A commercial medical marijuana growing facility must be
constructed in such a manner that growing of the marijuana plants cannot be
seen by the public from a public right-of-way.
      (4)   Building standards. A commercial medical marijuana growing facility
must be reasonably secured from unauthorized access and the facility must
maintain ventilation systems designed to minimize unreasonable offsite odors.
Facilities must comply with municipal building and fire codes.
      (5)   Public nuisance. Growing marijuana for commercial purposes shall
not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public
nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare,
heat, noise, odor, or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety,
or welfare or interferes with reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (E)   Medical marijuana processing facilities.
      (1)   Location. The location of any medical marijuana processing facility
may be permitted in any commercial, industrial, or agricultural zoning
district; however, such location is specifically prohibited if it is less than
1,000 feet of any public or private school entrance or within 300 feet of any
church. Such facilities shall not be permitted on any property zoned
residential.
      (2)   Regulations. A processing facility shall conform to all regulations
set forth for those zoning districts, along with all other applicable building
and development codes adopted by the city. All processing facilities shall
comply with all other applicable city, county, and state regulations.
      (3)   Visibility. A medical marijuana processing facility must be
constructed in such a manner that the growing of the marijuana plants, if any,
cannot be seen by the public from the public right-of-way.
      (4)   Building standards. A medical marijuana processing facility must be
reasonably secured from unauthorized access and the facility must maintain
ventilation systems designed to minimize unreasonable offsite odors. Facilities
must comply with municipal building and fire codes.
      (5)   Public nuisance. Growing marijuana for commercial purposes shall
not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public
nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare,
heat, noise, odor, or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety,
or welfare, or interferes with reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (F)   Paraphernalia. Any device used for the consumption of medical
marijuana shall be considered legal to be sold, manufactured, distributed, and
possessed by a properly licensed and permitted medical marijuana facility. No
merchant, wholesaler, manufacturer, or individual who has the proper license or
prescription may unduly be harassed or prosecuted for selling, manufacturing,
or possession of medical marijuana paraphernalia.
(Prior Code, § 18-102) (Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-16-2020; Ord. 2020-02, passed 8-
11-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR PERSONAL USE.
   (A)   All owners of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use
are required to obtain a permit from the Municipal Clerk. Marijuana growing
facilities for personal medical use permit fee shall be $200 per year. The fee
shall be used to offset municipal expenses, covering costs related to
licensing, inspection, administration, and enforcement of marijuana growing
facilities for personal medical use.
   (B)   All marijuana growing facilities for personal use shall be subject to
security provisions as stated herein prior to the granting of a permit. Failure
to comply with security provisions as stated herein will result in revocation
of permit.
   (C)   Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for marijuana
cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key or
equivalent, at all times except when the residential facility is actively being
supervised in person by the permit holder.
   (D)   Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to the
interior of a single private residence.
   (E)   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
   (F)   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing, or electrical
components used shall comply with municipal building and fire codes, the
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold, or
other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light. The
use of gas products (CO2, butane, and the like) or CO2 and ozone generators in
the growing area is prohibited.
   (G)   Growing marijuana for personal use shall not be conducted in a manner
that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if
growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor, or vibration that
is detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare or interferes with
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (H)   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is
grown shall remain at all times a residence with legal and functioning cooking,
eating, sleeping, and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress and
egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will
impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping, or sanitation/
bathing.
   (I)   If the residence is rented, consent of the property owner shall be
obtained prior to any cultivation commencing. This consent must be evidenced by
a signed and notarized statement from the property owner permitting the growth
of marijuana in a residence.
(Prior Code, § 18-103) (Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-16-2020; Ord. 2020-02, passed 8-
11-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All permits outlined in this chapter will be subject to inspection by
an authorized Municipal Inspector prior to issuance.
   (B)   The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the Municipal Inspector.
   (C)   The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
   (D)   After a medical marijuana facility permit has been issued under this
chapter, the city’s permitting authority, or agent thereof, shall be authorized
to enter upon and inspect the operations being conducted therein to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspection shall take
place during regular business hours of such facility and upon reasonable notice
to the operator of such facility.
(Prior Code, § 18-104) (Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-16-2020; Ord. 2020-02, passed 8-
11-2020)
§ 92.99   PENALTY.
   Penalties for violations or this chapter shall be, in the city’s discretion,
a fine not to exceed $200 per day of violation, or revocation of permit, or
both.
(Prior Code, § 18-110) (Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-16-2020; Ord. 2020-02, passed 8-
11-2020)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances
   
93.002   Persons responsible
   
93.003   Time does not legalize
   
93.004   Remedies against public nuisances
   
93.005   Remedies against private nuisances
   
93.006   City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances
   
93.007   Certain public nuisances in the city defined
   
93.008   Summary abatement of nuisances
   
93.009   Abatement by suit in district court
   
93.010   Nuisance unlawful
   
93.011   Health nuisances; abatement
   
93.012   Toilet facilities required; nuisance
   
93.013   Procedure cumulative
   
93.014   Code Enforcement Officer to remove dilapidated buildings
Junked, Wrecked Motor Vehicles
   
93.025   Nuisance
   
93.026   Definitions
   
93.027   Abandoned, wrecked autos prohibited
   
93.028   Citation; notice
   
93.029   Public hearing
   
93.030   No junked vehicle to be reconstructed or made operable
   
93.031   Notice to Transportation Department
   
93.032   Administration and supervision
   
93.033   Disposal of abandoned vehicles
   
93.034   Orders from Municipal Court
   
93.035   Immediate removal of vehicle obstructing traffic
Weeds and Trash
   
93.050   Permitting trash, weeds, or other accumulations to create a nuisance
   
93.051   Definitions
   
93.052   Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds, or trash on property
   
93.053   Receipt of report, notice, hearing, and summary abatement
   
93.054   Right of entry, work done by employees or contract
   
93.055   Determination and assessment of costs
   
93.056   Lien on the property; civil remedy
   
93.057   Council may designate officer to perform duties; appeals
   
93.058   Unlawful to deposit rubbish
   
93.059   Burning refuse
   
93.060   Removal of dead animals
   
93.061   Unlawful to litter
   
93.062   Unlawful to litter from automobiles
   
93.063   Litter not to accumulate on property
Enforcement
   
93.075   County Health Department designated to enforce health ordinances
   
93.076   Obstructing health officer
   
93.077   Violations
 
   
93.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 NUISANCE DEFINED; PUBLIC NUISANCES; PRIVATE NUISANCES.
   (A)   A NUISANCE is unlawfully doing an act or omitting to perform a duty or
is any thing or condition which either:
      (1)   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street, or other public property; or
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   (B)   A PUBLIC NUISANCE is one which affects at the same time an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be
unequal.
   (C)   Every nuisance not included in division (B) above is a PRIVATE
NUISANCE.
(Prior Code, § 8-301)
Statutory reference:
   Nuisances, see 50 O.S. §§ 1 et seq.
§ 93.002 PERSONS RESPONSIBLE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is
liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.
(Prior Code, § 8-302) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.003 TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(Prior Code, § 8-303)
§ 93.004 REMEDIES AGAINST PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The remedies against a public nuisance are:
   (A)   Prosecution on complaint before the Municipal Court;
   (B)   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
   (C)   Civil action; or
   (D)   Abatement:
      (1)   By a person injured as provided in 50 O.S. § 12; or
      (2)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-304)
§ 93.005 REMEDIES AGAINST PRIVATE NUISANCES.
   The remedies against a private nuisance are:
   (A)   Civil action; or
   (B)   Abatement:
      (1)   By a person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and 15; or
      (2)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-305)
§ 93.006 CITY HAS POWER TO DEFINE AND SUMMARILY ABATE NUISANCES.
   As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city has power to determine what is and
what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the
protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply,
outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city
has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner
and an opportunity for him or her to be heard, if this can be done.
(Prior Code, § 8-306)
§ 93.007 CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES IN THE CITY DEFINED.
   (A)   In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of
this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   The sale or offering for sale of unwholesome food or drink; or the
keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made;
      (2)   The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor
in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation
of the state law or ordinance of the city;
      (3)   The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures,
books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents, or objects; or the keeping of a
place where such are exposed, displayed, sold, or distributed;
      (4)   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punchboards, or otherwise;
      (5)   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced;
      (6)   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law
or ordinance are practiced or carried on;
      (7)   The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the
ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held;
      (8)   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
      (9)   The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons
or ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
      (10)   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others;
      (11)   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which
causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be
authorized by law or ordinance;
      (12)   Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow
to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk;
      (13)   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies, or containers of water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed,
formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (14)   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse,
or other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist;
      (15)   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay, or other condition;
      (16)   Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed,
conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (17)   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
      (18)   Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace,
health, morals, safety, or welfare;
      (19)   Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any
trailer without a current vehicle plate as required by law for vehicles used on
the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district;
      (20)   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become
obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the city, by reason of any noise or
noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance;
      (21)   The keeping of any dog kennels within this city for the breeding
and raising of dogs that shall become offensive or annoying to the public by
reason of the barking and noise made by the animals therein contained;
      (22)   Any vault, cesspool, or sink used to receive human excrement,
slops, garbage, refuse, or other filthy substance;
      (23)   Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure, decayed or decaying
vegetable matter, left, kept, or maintained in such condition as to endanger
the public health;
      (24)   Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing,
leaking, or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious or
annoying to the comfort, health, and welfare of any resident of this city;
      (25)   Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any exposed or
open place within the limits of this city;
      (26)   Any unclean, foul, leaking, or broken or defective ditch, drain,
gutter, slop, garbage, or manure barrel, box, or other receptacle;
      (27)   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay, and other cause, or shall become hazardous from
fire, by reason of age, decay, or construction, location, or other cause, or
shall be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of this city or its
inhabitants from any cause; and
      (28)   Any water or putrid substances, whether animal or vegetable, to
accumulate so as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom, or to
become in a condition injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood.
   (B)   The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative
and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private
nuisances either in more general or more specific terms.
(Prior Code, § 8-307) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.008 SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   Some nuisances are of such nature so as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of one or
more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances
may be such so as to justify, and even to require, the Mayor or other
appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and
proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the
danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of Police, the City
Attorney, the Building Inspector, The Electrical Inspector, the Plumbing
Inspector or any other officer who is subordinate to the Mayor may submit
through or with the consent of the Mayor to the City Council, a statement as to
the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city of law,
and a request or recommendation that it be abated. The Mayor himself or
herself, the Health Officer, and the City Council, or any resident or residents
of the city, may submit such a statement and request a recommendation to the
Council.
   (C)   The Council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a
nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the
City Council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers
and other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or have it abated,
the City Council shall give notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to
the owner of any property concerned and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if
such notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the
owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by
service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the
names or addresses are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation within the city.
   (D)   If the Council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to
abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons
responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified
time, the Council shall direct the Mayor to abate the nuisance or to have it
abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The
City Clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just
under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid,
such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts to the
city may be collected.
(Prior Code, § 8-308)
§ 93.009 ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT.
   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance the
city may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is
located, as provided in 50 O.S. § 17.
(Prior Code, § 8-309)
§ 93.010 NUISANCE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, including but not limited to any owner,
leasee, or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his or her control within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 8-310) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.011 HEALTH NUISANCES; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the Health Officer
shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in
the city to remove from such premises, at his or her own expense, any source of
filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or
rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease/or any other
condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within
such other time as may be in writing and may be served personally on the owner
or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the Health Officer
or by a police officer or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of
abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the
premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is
unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy
thereof on the premises or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper
having a general circulation in the city.
   (B)   If the order is not complied with, the Health Officer may cause the
order to be executed and complied with and the cost thereof shall be certified
to the City Clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be
added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if
he or she is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility
service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it
is added and shall become due and payable, and subject to the same regulations
relating to delinquency in payment as the utility bill itself. If such owner or
occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after
certification to the City Clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any
other debt due the city may be collected.
(Prior Code, § 8-311)
§ 93.012 TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED; NUISANCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HUMAN EXCREMENT. The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
      SANITARY PIT PRIVY. A privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as
to conform with the specifications approved by the State Health Department; and
      SANITARY WATER CLOSET. The flush type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the
contents at all times.
   (B)   Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside,
are employed, or congregate within this city shall install, equip, and maintain
adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a
sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets hereby
required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within 200
feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto and of the sanitary water
closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the
water closet type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A
septic tank system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only if it meets
the standards of and is approved by the State Health Department.
   (C)   All human excrement disposed of within this city shall be disposed of
by depositing it in closets and privies of the type provided for in this
section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit the
disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to
dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner.
   (D)   All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the
covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the
privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other that
human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement
from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel
disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Health
Officer.
   (E)   All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner
different from that required by this section and all privies and closets so
constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as
such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense and each
day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-312) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.013 PROCEDURE CUMULATIVE.
   The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and
by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative onto any other
penalties or procedures authorized.
(Prior Code, § 8-313)
§ 93.014 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TO REMOVE DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.
   The City Council hereby designates the Code Enforcement Officer to carry out
the duties of the City Council in removing dilapidated buildings. The property
owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Council from any order of the
Code Enforcement Officer. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice
of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days after receipt of the order.
(Prior Code, § 8-314) (Ord. 99-10, passed 5-3-1999)
JUNKED, WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 93.025 NUISANCE.
   Motor vehicles which are abandoned, dismantled, partially dismantled,
wrecked, junked, inoperative, or discarded, or left about the city in places
other than authorized junkyards or other areas authorized by the City Council
and which tend to do any one or more of the following, are hereby declared to
be a nuisance:
   (A)   Impede traffic in the streets;
   (B)   Reduce the value of private property;
   (C)   Create fire hazards;
   (D)   Extend and aggravate urban blight; or
   (E)   Result in a serious hazard to the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-401)
§ 93.026 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, which does not have lawfully affixed
thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current motor vehicle
safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not PUBLIC PROPERTY as defined below.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, alley, or highway which shall include the
entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly owned or
maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and also any other publicly
owned property or facility.
(Prior Code, § 8-402)
§ 93.027 ABANDONED, WRECKED AUTOS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE includes
any motor vehicle or vehicle which is abandoned, dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, junked or unlicensed, or which does not possess a current inspection
sticker or equipment as required by state law.
   (B)   No person in charge or control of any property within the city limits
of the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise shall
allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or unlicensed
vehicle to remain on such property longer than seven days. No person shall
leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than
seven days. This section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an
enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise, or a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-403) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.028 CITATION; NOTICE.
   The Police Chief, upon the complaint of any citizen or upon the violation of
any officer of the Police Department, shall cause to be issued a citation for
nuisance to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the junked vehicle
is located and shall cause notice to be posted upon such vehicle that, if the
vehicle is not removed within ten days, the Chief of Police shall dispose of
said vehicle pursuant to §
93.033.
(Prior Code, § 8-404)
§ 93.029 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   The notice provided for in §
93.028 shall also advise those persons to whom notices are directed of their
right to request a hearing within ten days of the delivery of the notice. The
hearing shall be before the City Manager.
   (B)   After a request for hearing is filed with the city, the City Manager
shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing.
   (C)   If no hearing is requested, or if, after a hearing, it is determined
that the existence of the violation is established, the Chief of Police, or his
or her designee shall have the right to take possession of the vehicle and
remove it from the premises for disposal consistent with §
93.033.
(Prior Code, § 8-405) (Ord. 06-05, passed 5-8-2006, effective 6-7-2006)
§ 93.030 NO JUNKED VEHICLE TO BE RECONSTRUCTED OR MADE OPERABLE.
   No vehicle removed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
reconstructed or made operable.
(Prior Code, § 8-406) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.031 NOTICE TO TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT.
   Notice shall be given by the Chief of Police to the State Department of
Transportation within five days of the date of removal identifying the
abandoned vehicle or part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-407)
§ 93.032 ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION.
   Administration and supervision of the removal of vehicles or part thereof as
provided in this chapter shall be by the Chief of Police of the city except
that the removal of the abandoned vehicle or part thereof declared to be a
nuisance may be by any other person duly authorized by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 8-408)
§ 93.033 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   The Chief of Police shall dispose of abandoned vehicles or parts thereof by
removal to a scrapyard or demolished as scrap or salvage, but subject to the
provision of §
93.028, the Chief of Police may enter upon private property for the purposes
specified in this chapter relative to removal of abandoned vehicles to examine
vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles,
and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be
a nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-409)
§ 93.034 ORDERS FROM MUNICIPAL COURT.
   The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have authority to issue all orders
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-410)
§ 93.035 IMMEDIATE REMOVAL OF VEHICLE OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the provisions permitting
immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.
(Prior Code, § 8-411)
WEEDS AND TRASH
§ 93.050 PERMITTING TRASH, WEEDS, OR OTHER ACCUMULATIONS TO CREATE A NUISANCE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any lot, tract, or
yard in the city, including the easements, sidewalks, or the spaces abutting
thereon, to the center of the street or to the center of any alley, to become
covered or overgrown with weeds or other noxious injurious growth or to allow
trash to exist or accumulate thereon.
      (2)   Any lot, tract, or yard, including the easements, sidewalks, or
spaces abutting thereon, which shall become covered with trash or overgrown
with weeds or other accumulation that is noxious, detrimental to the general
health, or offensive or likely to cause or spread disease, is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each person owning or renting property within
the city limits to cut down and remove, or cause to be cut down and removed, to
the center of the street or alley, a public nuisance as defined in this
section. Any person refusing or neglecting to do the same, with or without
notice, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in §
93.999.
(Prior Code, § 8-101) (Ord. 08-05, passed 6-9-2008) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.051 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   TRASH. Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is
uncared for, discarded, or abandoned.
   WEEDS.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak, or poison
sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
         (a)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless
such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to
the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and community of a hazard to
traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of the WEEDS;
         (b)   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
         (c)   Harbors rodents or vermin;
         (d)   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
         (e)   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
         (f)   Is dead or diseased.
      (2)   The term  WEED does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for
other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 8-102)
§ 93.052 REPORTS OF ACCUMULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS, OR TRASH ON PROPERTY.
   Any officer or employee of this city who discovers an accumulation of trash
or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any premises
within the limits of the city, shall report the condition to the City Clerk if,
as a result of the accumulation or growth the premises appear to be:
   (A)   Detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and the
community;
   (B)   A hazard to traffic;
   (C)   A fire hazard to property; or
   (D)   Any two or more of these conditions.
(Prior Code, § 8-103)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see 11 O.S. § 22-111
§ 93.053 RECEIPT OF REPORT, NOTICE, HEARING, AND SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Upon receiving the report provided for in §
93.052, or upon receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source, the
Council shall cause the notices prescribed herein to be given. If any of the
conditions specified in §
93.052 exist upon the property, the notice shall order the property to be
cleaned of trash or order weeds or grass to be cut, removed, or destroyed
within ten days from the date of mailing the notice.
   (B)   The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of
trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass, as appropriate. The notice shall
further state that, unless the work is performed within ten days, the city will
do the work and a notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk against
the property for the costs due and owing the municipality. The notice also
shall state that any accumulation of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on
the property occurring within six months of this notice may be summarily abated
by the city.
   (C)   The owner may request a hearing. An appeal from the decision regarding
the existence of hazard as listed in §
93.052 may be appealed to the City Council by filing written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk within the ten-day period cited above.
   (D)   The written notice required herein shall be forwarded by certified
mail with return receipt requested to the owner of the property at the address
shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the office of the Treasurer of the
county. The notice also shall be posted upon the property on the same date that
the notice is issued and mailed.
   (E)   If the owner has not cleaned and/or mowed the property within ten days
of the date of notice, the city will enter and perform the work. The city will
continue to perform the work for a six-month period without further notice.
(Prior Code, § 8-104) (Ord. 97-1122, passed 9-9-1997) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.054 RIGHT OF ENTRY, WORK DONE BY EMPLOYEES OR CONTRACT.
   (A)   Upon finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard as specified in §
93.052, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such
conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the
property to remove trash, mow weeds or grass, and perform necessary duties as a
governmental function.
   (B)   The work ordered to be performed under §
93.053 may be done by the employees of this city under supervision of the city,
or it may be let by contract in the manner for letting other contracts.
(Prior Code, § 8-105)
§ 93.055 DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under §
93.054, the City Clerk shall report the cost thereof to the City Council. The
City Council shall determine the actual costs of the cleaning or mowing and any
other expenses necessary in connection therewith, including actual cost of
labor, equipment, and maintenance. The City Clerk shall forward a statement and
demand payment of the total cost by certified mail with return receipt
requested to the owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax
rolls in the office of the Treasurer of the county in which the property lies.
(Prior Code, § 8-106)
§ 93.056 LIEN ON THE PROPERTY; CIVIL REMEDY.
   If the costs of the work performed under this chapter are not paid within 30
days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by §
93.055, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the
costs to the County Treasurer of the county in which the property upon which
the work was done is located, in order that the amount be levied upon the
property and be collected by the County Treasurer in the manner prescribed by
the law of this state. The lien is coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes
and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other
titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the cost
is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided in this section, the
city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and
interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward
to the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the
lien.
(Prior Code, § 8-107)
§ 93.057 COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE OFFICER TO PERFORM DUTIES; APPEALS.
   (A)   The City Council hereby designates the Code Enforcement Officer to
carry out the duties of the City Council in §§
93.051 through
93.056 of this chapter.
   (B)   The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Council
from any order of the Code Enforcement Officer. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days after
receipt of the order.
(Prior Code, § 8-108) (Ord. 99-10, passed 5-3-1999)
§ 93.058 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT RUBBISH.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place, or deposit any rubbish,
trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush, or any
other refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue, or in any ditch or
watercourse, or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in this
city, or in any dumpster or other waste container not owned by the person or
entity depositing such waste or without the consent of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 8-109) (Ord. 06-04-02, passed 2-13-2006) Penalty, see § 93.999
§ 93.059 BURNING REFUSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to burn any trash or refuse or any type of material
within the city, except as otherwise provided for in divisions (B) and (C)
below.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to burn trash, wastepaper, rubbish, or
refuse except under a permit issued by or in receptacles and conditions
approved by the State Health Department or U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   (C)   Upon preapproval from the Fire Chief, any outdoor recreational burning
must be conducted on a ten foot by ten foot noncombustible surface in a UL
approved burn container with a proper cover or a flue, including chimneys.
Violations of this section are subject to penalties under §
93.999.
(Prior Code, § 8-110) (Ord. 09-06, passed 10-14-2008) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.060 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city,
shall within 24 hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and
failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8-111) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.061 UNLAWFUL TO LITTER.
   (A)   LITTERING is defined as throwing any trash, refuse, wastepaper, tin
cans, bottles, or any other object or substance whatever upon the public
streets, alleys, roadways, and sidewalks of the city or upon any real property
owned or occupied by another.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to litter.
(Prior Code, § 8-112) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.062 UNLAWFUL TO LITTER FROM AUTOMOBILES.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw from any automobile or motor vehicle
being operated and driven upon and over the streets, alleys, and roadways of
the city any litter, trash, wastepaper, tin cans, or any other substance or
refuse whatever.
(Prior Code, § 8-113) (Ord. 00-17, passed 3-13-2000) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.063 LITTER NOT TO ACCUMULATE ON PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, occupying any
real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, wastepaper, litter
objects, bottles, tin cans, or any other used or disposed of objects to
accumulate upon such real property or premises being so occupied or rented to
such an extent as to constitute a littering nuisance.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation occupying any real
property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash, wastepaper,
litter objects, bottles, tin cans, or any other used or disposed of objects to
be carried from the occupied premises, either by the wind, elements, or
otherwise to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or occupied by the
offender.
(Prior Code, § 8-114) Penalty, see §
93.999
ENFORCEMENT
§ 93.075 COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT DESIGNATED TO ENFORCE HEALTH ORDINANCES.
   Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words  HEALTH OFFICER are used,
it may be construed to mean the Director of the County Health Department or his
duly designated representative unless another person is designated by the
Mayor. It is the intent and purpose of the Mayor and City Council to delegate
the enforcement of the health ordinances of this city as set out in this
section and any such decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to
review by the governing council upon an appeal from an offender.
(Prior Code, § 8-501)
§ 93.076 OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any
Health Officer or officer charged with the enforcement of the health laws of
this city.
(Prior Code, § 8-502) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.077 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully violate or refuse or omit to
comply with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule, or regulation of
the Board of Health or any officer charged with enforcement of such order,
direction, prohibition, rule, or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 8-503) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person, firm, or corporation found violating any provision of
this chapter for which no specific penalty is otherwise provide, shall, upon
conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided
in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 8-115)
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
93.025 through
93.035, by doing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or
declared to be an offense or misdemeanor thereby, is guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day upon which any such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-412)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §
93.059 is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations.
(Prior Code, § 8-603)
   (D)   The penalty for violation of §§
93.062 and
93.063, and to provide for no tolerance for the violation of these section, is
set at a fine from $50 to $75 at the discretion of the Municipal Judge based on
the amount of litter thrown from any motor vehicle upon and over the streets,
alleys, and roadways of the city, whether the litter be trash, wastepaper,
aluminum cans or any other substance or refuse whatever, or for allowing litter
to accumulate on real property occupied as set out in §
93.063(A) and (B).
(Prior Code, § 8-113)
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
93.075 through
93.077 or any law or code adopted by reference in this chapter is guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations
(Prior Code, § 8-504)
(Ord. 00-17, passed 3-13-2000; Ord. 08-03, passed 4-14-2008)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Park and Recreation Board
   
94.02   Biggers Park; hours permitted
Lakes
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Public property
   
94.17   General antipollution requirements
   
94.18   Sanitation
   
94.19   Hobart Lake
   
94.20   Hunter Lake
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Park and Recreation Board, consisting of
five members appointed by the City Council, for overlapping terms of five years
to serve until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified.
The initial members shall be appointed for terms of one year, two years, three
years, four years, and five years, with each member’s term being chosen by lot;
thereafter the terms shall be five years for all successor members of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-301)
   (B)   The Park and Recreation Board shall have charge of the care,
management, and control of all municipal parks and recreation areas. It may
make rules and regulations governing the parks, subject to the enaction of
ordinances by the City Council. It may also make such rules and regulations
governing its operations as it may deem necessary, subject to approval by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-302)
(Ord. 1092, passed 8-25-1987)
§ 94.02 BIGGERS PARK; HOURS PERMITTED.
   (A)   During the hours of darkness of every day, no people shall inhabit or
be upon the following described real estate in Hobart, Kiowa County, Oklahoma:
   Biggers Park, legally described as Blocks 13, 14, and 15 in Lamb’s Railroad
Addition to the City of Hobart, Oklahoma, and that part of platted Garfield
Street and Hendricks Street that are contiguous to and between said Blocks 13,
14, and 15 in Lamb’s Railroad Addition to the City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, HOURS OF DARKNESS begin each day with
the local hour of sunset and extends to the local hour of sunrise the following
day.
   (C)   (1)   Any legitimately organized group may request in writing,
addressed to the City Clerk, a waiver of this curfew for purposes of use of the
park by the group and invited guests, whereupon the Clerk shall issue a waiver
for time and date certain of the curfew without charge.
      (2)   The Chief of Police will be notified by the Clerk of the time and
date of any waivers granted.
(Prior Code, § 11-401) (Ord. 02-04, passed 12-9-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
LAKES
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUG LINE. A vertical line with hooks suspended from a nonmetallic or
nonglass device, drifting free or anchored left unattended for a means of
taking fish.
   LAKES. Means and includes Lake Hobart situated in township eight north of
range 18 W.I.M., in Washita County, Oklahoma, and Hunter Lake situated in
Hunter Park and adjacent to the northwest corner of the city limits of the
city.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Means and includes Lake Hobart situated in township eight
north of range 18 W.I.M., in Washita County, Oklahoma, and Hunter Lake situated
in Hunter Park and adjacent to the northwest corner of the city limits of the
city.
   THROW LINE. A line attached at one end and weighted at the other with hooks
along its length left unattended for the means of taking fish.
   TROTLINE. A line with hooks placed along its length placed in the water
attached at each end and left unattended for a means of taking fish.
   YO-YOS. A line with hooks attached to a self-activating retracting device
left unattended for the means of taking fish.
(Prior Code, § 11-101) (Ord. 05-07, passed 4-11-2005)
§ 94.16 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Destruction of property. No person shall disturb, destroy, remove,
deface, or injure any property at Hunter Lake or Hobart Lake including, but not
limited to, such property as buildings, structures, or signs.
   (B)   Deface property. No person shall cut, carve, paint, mark, paste, or
attach on any tree, fence, wall, building, monument, or other property at
Hunter Lake or Hobart Lake any sale bill, advertisement, or inscription.
   (C)   Cutting foliage. No person shall willfully or negligently pick, dig
up, cut, mutilate, destroy, injure, disturb, move, molest, burn, or carry away
any tree or plant or portion thereof including, but not limited to, flowers,
foliage, berries, nuts, fruit, grass, turf, humus, shrubs, vines, cones, and
deadwood except with written approval from the City Manager or his or her
designee.
   (D)   Disturbing earth. No person shall destroy, disturb, deface, mutilate,
or remove earth, sand, gravel, oil, minerals, rocks, or features except when
expressly authorized by due process established by state law and city
ordinances.
   (E)   Archeological finds. No person shall remove, injure, disfigure,
deface, or destroy any object of paleontological, archaeological, or historic
interest or value.
   (F)   Cutting trees. Cutting or gathering of trees or parts of trees and/or
the removal of wood from Hunter Lake or Hobart Lake is prohibited without
written permission of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 11-102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 GENERAL ANTIPOLLUTION REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall throw, place, or cast into the waters of either of the lakes
or leave upon the banks thereof or in the water district in which either of the
lakes is situated, any refuse or castaway flesh, bait, dead or decayed fish, or
flesh, or other decaying substances.
(Prior Code, § 11-103) (Ord. 05-07, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.18 SANITATION.
   (A)   Trash disposition. No person shall leave, place, or dispose of in any
manner garbage, peelings of vegetables or fruit, waste, refuse, rubbish, ashes,
can(s), bottle(s), wire, paper, carton(s), box(es), motor vehicle, bicycle, or
wagon parts, furniture, glass, oils, sewages, anything of an unsightly nature,
or anything of an unsanitary nature under or upon the lands and waters of
Hunter Lake or Hobart Lake except in the receptacle so designated for that
purpose.
   (B)   Littering prohibited. Campers, picnickers, and all other persons using
the areas and facilities of Hunter Lake or Hobart Lake shall keep their sites
free of trash and litter during the period of occupancy, shall remove all
personal equipment, and clean their sites upon departure.
   (C)   Sewage discharge prohibited. The discharge or placing of sewage,
galley waste, garbage, refuse, or pollutants onto the waters and lands of
Hunter Lake or Hobart Lake is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 11-104) (Ord. 05-07, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.19 HOBART LAKE.
   (A)   Camping and fires.
      (1)   Campsites. Camping at one or more campsites at Hobart Lake is
limited to a period no longer than 14 days consecutively.
      (2)   Permanent camping facilities. The installation of permanent camping
facilities is prohibited.
      (3)   Ground digging. The digging or leveling of any ground or
construction of any structure is prohibited.
      (4)   Quiet hours. Quiet hours will be enforced from 10:00 p.m. until 6:
00 a.m. Loud noises that may disturb the peace are prohibited during these
hours.
      (5)   Juvenile campers. No person who is a juvenile shall camp in any
area of Hobart Lake except when accompanying a parent or guardian or by
obtaining prior consent in writing from the City Manager or his or her
designee.
      (6)   Camping unit limits. Camping will be limited to no more than two
camping units per campsite.
      (7)   Improper disposal of burning material. Improper disposal of lighted
materials, matches, or other burning material is prohibited.
      (8)   Unattended fires. Fires shall not be left unattended and must be
completely extinguished prior to departure.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-1)
   (B)   Wading. No person shall wade in Hobart Lake without waders.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-2)
   (C)   Fishing.
      (1)   Open for fishing all year; exception. Subject to the provisions of
this subchapter, Hobart Lake shall be open to the public for fishing all year,
except for periods when fishing is prohibited by the game and fish laws of the
state.
      (2)   Federal, state and local laws. All federal, state, and local laws
governing fishing apply on Hobart Lake lands and waters.
      (3)   Fishing areas. No person shall at any time engage in fishing on
Hobart Lake in an area posted prohibiting fishing.
      (4)   Method of fishing generally.
         (a)   It is unlawful for any person to take, catch, or kill any fish
from the waters of Hobart Lake by any means, except with hook and line attached
to a pole or rod.
         (b)   It is unlawful for any person to take, catch, or remove from the
waters of Hobart Lake any game fish with any sort of net trammel, net seine,
gun, trap, wire, pot, spear, or gig.
         (c)   Fishing by trotlines, jug lines, throw lines, limb lines, and
yo-yos are prohibited in all areas of Hobart Lake.
      (5)   Bait. Any type of live or artificial bait may be used without
restriction.
      (6)   Sale of catch prohibited. No person shall sell or offer for sale
any fish caught by him or her from Hobart Lake, but shall use the same
exclusively for consumption by himself or herself and his or her immediate
family or guests. Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, or have in his
or her possession for the purpose of selling, any fish caught by him or her or
any other person from the lake shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (7)   Fishing may be prohibited during spawning season. The Mayor and
City Council may, at their discretion, close the lake during that period of the
year which is commonly known as the “spawning season.” In the event the lakes
are so closed, any person regardless of whether or not he or she has a fishing
permit for such period will not be permitted to fish during such period.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-3)
   (D)   Boating. Boats and canoes may be operated on Hobart Lake but swimming,
skiing, tubing, and personal watercrafts are specifically prohibited on Hobart
Lake.
   (E)   City not liable for accidents. Any person using a canoe or boat of any
kind on Hobart Lake shall do so at his or her own risk. He or she shall assume
all risks due to conditions of the lake and the city shall not be liable to him
or her or to any other person who may be riding with him or her in such boat or
canoe, for any accidents arising from any cause whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-5)
   (F)   Vessels.
      (1)   Oklahoma Boating Safety Regulation Act. All vessels and operators
of vessels on the waters of Hobart Lake shall comply with the rules and
regulations set forth in the Oklahoma Boating Safety Regulation Act, 1993,
being 63 O.S. §§ 4200 et seq.
      (2)   Personal flotation device/requirements.
         (a)   No person shall operate, or give permission to operate, any
vessel on the waters of Hobart Lake unless such vessel is equipped with a Coast
Guard approved, wearable, personal flotation device for each person on board
and of a size suitable to the person who is or will be wearing it.
         (c)   In addition, every vessel must be equipped with at least one
type IV throwable personal flotation device.
         (d)   All personal flotation devices must be in good and serviceable
condition.
         (e)   All personal flotation devices must be placed so as to be
readily accessible.
      (3)   Personal flotation device/required for children. No person shall
operate, or give permission to operate, any vessel on the waters of Hobart Lake
without requiring all persons on board who have not reached the age of 13 years
to wear a Coast Guard approved personal flotation device of the proper size
while underway.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-6)
   (G)   Control of animals.
      (1)   Physical restraint of animals. No person shall bring or allow dogs,
cats, or other pets or animals into any area of Hobart Lake unless penned,
caged, on a leash under six feet in length, or otherwise physically restrained.
      (2)   Swimming. Swimming on Hobart Lake is prohibited.
      (3)   Animal waste. Persons bringing or allowing pets in designated
public areas shall be responsible for proper removal and disposal in sanitary
facilities of any waste produced by these animals.
      (4)   Livestock. No person shall bring or allow horses, cattle, or other
livestock in camping, picnicking, or other recreation areas except in those
areas designated for this use.
      (5)   Livestock use of lands and water. Ranging, grazing, watering, or
allowing livestock on Hobart Lake lands and waters is prohibited except where
authorized in writing by the City Manager or his or her designee.
      (6)   Impoundment of animals. Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject
to immediate impoundment and removal in accordance with city ordinances and an
impoundment fee levied. This fee shall be paid before the impounded animal is
returned to its owner(s).
      (7)   Field trial or game dogs. Training or working field trial or game
dogs under the control of a handler in a designated area shall not require a
leash while engaged in either a training or field trial activity.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-7)
   (H)   Alcoholic beverages/beer.
      (1)   Alcohol/alcoholic beverages. No person who has not reached the age
of 21 years shall possess, display, or consume any alcohol or alcoholic
beverage in any area of Hobart Lake.
      (2)   Public intoxication. No person shall appear in public in any area
of Hobart Lake who is intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or any
substance included in the uniform controlled dangerous substance act.
      (3)   Alcohol/alcoholic beverages furnished to underage persons. No
person shall give, sell, or otherwise furnish any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
for human consumption to any person who has not reached the age of 21 years, in
any area of Hobart Lake.
      (4)   Sale of alcohol/alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, or
permit any person to sell any alcohol or alcoholic beverage for human
consumption in any area of Hobart Lake. The sale of alcoholic beverages is
permitted within the confines of a business licensed by the state and the city
and authorized to conduct such business by the city.
      (5)   Alcohol/alcoholic beverages; special events. No person shall give,
sell, or otherwise furnish, or shall give permission to any person to give,
sell, or otherwise furnish, any alcohol or alcoholic beverage for human
consumption to any person at any regatta, tournament, public celebration, or
other similar special event without proper license, if required, and without
first obtaining a special events permit from the City Manager or his or her
designee specifying dates, times, areas, and the type of beverage.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-8)
   (I)   Special events.
      (1)   Special events prohibited without permission. Special events
including, but not limited to, water carnivals, boat regattas, music festivals,
fishing tournaments, or other special recreation programs are prohibited unless
written permission has been granted by the City Manager or his or her designee.
      (2)   Fees. The public shall not be charged any fee by the sponsor of
such event unless the City Manager or his or her designee has approved in
writing the proposed schedule of fees.
(Prior Code, § 11-105-9)
(Ord. 05-07, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.20 HUNTER LAKE.
   (A)   Picnicking, camping, and fires.
      (1)   Picnic areas. Picnicking is allowed only in those areas so
designated by the posting of appropriate signs.
      (2)   Day use. Day use of a park area shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 10:00
p.m. Violation of park hours shall be from 10:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m.
      (3)   Camping permit. No person shall camp in any area of Hunter Lake
unless a special use camping permit is obtained and then only in conjunction
with exhibitors at special civic gatherings.
      (4)   Ground digging. The digging or leveling of any ground or
construction of any structure is prohibited.
      (5)   Quiet hours. Quiet hours will be enforced from 10:00 p.m. until 6:
00 a.m. Loud noises that may disturb the peace are prohibited during these
hours.
      (6)   Use of fires. No person shall kindle, build, maintain, or use a
fire other than in places provided or designated for such purposes.
      (7)   Improper disposal of burning material. Improper disposal of lighted
materials, matches, or other burning material is prohibited.
      (8)   Unattended fires. Fires shall not be left unattended and must be
completely extinguished prior to departure.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-1)
   (B)   Wading. No person shall wade in Hunter Lake without waders.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-2)
   (C)   Fishing.
      (1)   Open for fishing all year; exception. Subject to the provisions of
this section, the lake shall be open to the public for fishing all year, except
for periods when fishing is prohibited by the game and fish laws of the state.
      (2)   Limits. All federal, state, and local laws governing fishing apply
on Hunter Lake lands and waters.
      (3)   Fishing areas. No person shall at any time engage in fishing on
Hunter Lake in an area posted prohibiting fishing.
      (4)   Method of fishing generally.
         (a)   It is unlawful for any person to take, catch, or kill any fish
from the waters of Hunter Lake by any means, except with hook and line attached
to a pole or rod.
         (b)   It is unlawful for any person to take, catch, or remove from the
waters of Hunter Lake any game fish with any sort of net trammel, net seine,
gun, trap, wire, pot, spear, gig, or trotline.
         (c)   Fishing by trotlines, jug lines, throw lines, limb lines, and
yo-yos is prohibited in all areas of Hunter Lake.
      (5)   Bait. Any type of live or artificial bait may be used without
restriction.
      (6)   Sale of catch prohibited. No person shall sell or offer for sale
any fish caught by him or her from Hunter Lake, but shall use the same
exclusively for consumption by himself or herself and his or her immediate
family or guests. Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, or have in his
or her possession for the purpose of selling, any fish caught by him or her or
any other person from the lake shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (7)   Fishing may be prohibited during spawning season. The Mayor and
City Council may, at their discretion, close the lake during that period of the
year which is commonly known as the “spawning season.” In the event the lake is
so closed, any person regardless of whether or not he or she has a fishing
permit for such period will not be permitted to fish during such period.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-3)
   (D)   Boating prohibited. The use of any type of boat, canoe, or other
watercraft on Hunter Lake is strictly prohibited. Any person so using a
watercraft described herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. However, persons
may fish from the bank or by using waders or float tubes in Hunter Lake.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-4)
   (E)   Control of animals.
      (1)   Physical restraint of animals. No person shall bring or allow dogs,
cats, or other pets or animals into any area of Hunter Lake unless penned,
caged, on a leash under six feet in length or otherwise physically restrained.
      (2)   Animal waste. Persons bringing or allowing pets in designated
public areas shall be responsible for proper removal and disposal in sanitary
facilities of any waste produced by these animals.
      (3)   Impoundment of animals. Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject
to immediate impoundment and removal in accordance with city ordinances and an
impoundment fee levied. This fee shall be paid before the impounded animal is
returned to its owner(s).
      (4)   Field trial or game dogs. Training or working field trial or game
dogs under the control of a handler in a designated area shall not require a
leash while engaged in either a training or field trial activity.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-5)
   (F)   Alcoholic beverages/beer.
      (1)   Alcohol/alcoholic beverages.
         (a)   No person shall possess, display, or consume any alcohol or
alcoholic beverage in any area of Hunter Lake designated as a children’s
playground.
         (b)   No person who has not reached the age of 21 years shall possess,
display, or consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage in any area of Hunter
Lake.
      (2)   Public intoxication. No person shall appear in public in any area
of Hunter Lake who is intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or any
substance included in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act.
      (3)   Alcohol/alcoholic beverages furnished to underage persons. No
person shall give, sell, or otherwise furnish any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
for human consumption to any person who has not reached the age of 21 years, in
any area of Hunter Lake.
      (4)   Sale of alcohol/alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, or
permit any person to sell any alcohol or alcoholic beverage for human
consumption in any area of Hunter Lake, except that the sale of alcoholic
beverages is permitted within the confines of a business licensed by the state
and the city and authorized to conduct such business by the city.
      (5)   Alcohol/alcoholic beverages; special events. No person shall give,
sell, or otherwise furnish, or give permission to any person to give, sell, or
otherwise furnish, any alcohol or alcoholic beverage for human consumption to
any person at any regatta, tournament, public celebration, or other similar
special event without proper license, if required, and without first obtaining
a special events permit from the City Manager or his or her designee specifying
dates, times, areas, and the type of beverage.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-6)
   (G)   Special events.
      (1)   Special events. Special events on or near Hunter Lake including,
but not limited to, water carnivals, boat regattas, music festivals, fishing
tournaments, or other special recreation programs are prohibited unless written
permission has been granted by the City Manager or his or her designee.
      (2)   Fees. The public shall not be charged any fee by the sponsor of
such event unless the City Manager or his or her designee has approved in
writing the proposed schedule of fees.
(Prior Code, § 11-106-7)
(Ord. 05-07, passed 4-11-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC LIBRARY
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Public library created
   
95.03   Damaging, defacing, or failing to return books or other property
   
95.04   Expenditure of funds
   
95.05   Acceptance of donations
Board of Directors
   
95.20   Creation; members
   
95.21   Directors not compensated
   
95.22   Removal of directors
   
95.23   Vacancies
   
95.24   Election of officers
   
95.25   General powers and duties
   
95.26   Authority to recommend appointment of librarian and assistants
   
95.27   Bylaws, rules, and regulations
   
95.28   Annual report
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD or BOARD OF DIRECTORS. The Library Board of Directors created herein.
   DIRECTOR. A member of the Board of Directors created herein.
   LIBRARY. The public library created herein.
(Prior Code, § 11-201)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal libraries, see 11 O.S. §§ 31-101 et seq.
§ 95.02 PUBLIC LIBRARY CREATED.
   There is hereby created a public library with reading rooms for the use and
benefit of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-202)
§ 95.03 DAMAGING, DEFACING, OR FAILING TO RETURN BOOKS OR OTHER PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall destroy or deface any book, periodical, or other
property of the library, or who shall fail to return any such book, periodical,
or other property at such time as the same is due to be returned, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 11-211) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   All moneys received for the library shall be deposited in the treasury
of the city to the credit
of the Library Fund, shall be kept separate and apart from other money of the
city and shall be paid out only upon properly authenticated vouchers of the
Board.
   (B)   The Board shall have control of the expenditure of all moneys
collected and placed to the credit of the Library Fund.
   (C)   For the purpose of maintaining and augmenting collections other than
collections of printed books and periodicals, the Board may, in its discretion,
expend moneys or incur obligations not exceeding in any one year 10% of the
whole amount paid into the Library Fund for such year.
(Prior Code, § 11-212)
§ 95.05 ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or
real estate for the benefit of the library, or for the establishment,
maintenance, or endowment of public lectures in connection with the library,
upon any subject designated by the donor in the field of literature, science,
and the arts (except that lectures in the interest of any political party,
politics, or sectarian religion are expressly prohibited), shall have the right
to vest the title of the money, personal property, or real estate so donated in
the city, to be held and controlled by the city, when accepted, according to
the terms of the deed, devise or bequest of such property. As to such property,
the city shall be held and considered to be special trustee.
   (B)   The city shall have power to accept, or in its discretion to decline,
donations tendered as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 11-213)
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 95.20 CREATION; MEMBERS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Directors for the government and
control of the library, to consist of nine members, appointed by the Mayor by
and with the consent of the Council.
   (B)   The Directors shall hold office for a period of three years; provided
that only three Directors’ terms of office shall regularly expire each year,
and before May 1 in each year, three directors shall be appointed to take the
place of the retiring Directors.
(Prior Code, § 11-203)
§ 95.21 DIRECTORS NOT COMPENSATED.
   The Directors shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 11-204)
§ 95.22 REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS.
   The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the Council, remove any Director
for misconduct or neglect of duty.
(Prior Code, § 11-205)
§ 95.23 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies in the Board of Directors occasioned by removals, resignations, or
otherwise shall be reported to the Mayor and Council and be filled in like
manner as original appointments.
(Prior Code, § 11-206)
§ 95.24 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   The Directors shall, immediately after appointment, meet and organize by the
election of one of their number as President and by the election of such other
officers as they may deem necessary.
(Prior Code, § 11-207)
§ 95.25 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have control of the library building, and of the
supervision, care, and custody of the grounds, rooms, or buildings constructed,
leased, or set apart for that purpose, and shall, in general, carry out the
spirit and intent of this chapter. The Board shall have power, with the
approval of the Mayor and Council, to recommend purchase of grounds and a
suitable building for the use of the library.
(Prior Code, § 11-208)
§ 95.26 AUTHORITY TO RECOMMEND APPOINTMENT OF LIBRARIAN AND ASSISTANTS.
   The Board shall have the power to recommend appointment of a suitable
librarian and necessary assistants, and their compensation.
(Prior Code, § 11-209)
§ 95.27 BYLAWS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Board shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules, and regulations for
its own guidance and for the government of the library and reading rooms, or
either of them, as may be expedient, not inconsistent with this chapter.
   (B)   The library or reading room established under this chapter shall
always be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the Board may
adopt, in order to render the use of such library and reading room, or either
of them, of the greatest benefit to the greatest number, and the Board may
exclude from the use of the library or reading room, or either of them, any and
all persons who shall willfully violate such rules.
   (C)   Any person who shall wilfully violate any rules or regulations
regularly adopted by the Board for the government, care, and use of the library
or reading room shall be deemed guilty of an offense and be punished
accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 11-210) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.28 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board of Directors shall make, on or before July 31 in each year, an
annual report to the Mayor and Council, stating the condition of its trust on
June 30 of the year; the various sums of money received from the Library Fund
and other sources and the amount of money expended and for what purposes; the
number of books and periodicals on hand and the number added by purchase, gift,
or otherwise during the year; the number lost or missing; the number of persons
attending the library; the number of books loaned out; the general character
and kind of such books; and such other statistics, information, and suggestions
as the Board may deem of general interest.
(Prior Code, § 11-214)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Use and Obstruction of Streets and Sidewalks
   
96.01   Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed
   
96.02   Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery
   
96.03   Unlawful to obstruct streets and sidewalks with merchandise
   
96.04   Unlawful to obstruct pedestrians or traffic
   
96.05   Open doors, gratings on street or sidewalk
   
96.06   Street Department material prohibited on private property
   
96.07   Playing on streets prohibited
   
96.08   Vehicle washing on street prohibited
   
96.09   Water, mud from vehicle not to drain into street
   
96.10   Water from filling stations and other businesses
   
96.11   Unlawful for owner or occupant to permit sidewalk to become a hazard
   
96.12   Notice to clean or repair; violation
   
96.13   Obstruction not to interfere with drainage
   
96.14   Defacing of walk forbidden
   
96.15   Unlawful to injure or drive loaded vehicle over curbing and crossings
   
96.16   Owner of vehicle responsible for damage to street
   
96.17   When sidewalks may be obstructed
   
96.18   Removing sidewalk, street materials
   
96.19   Planting trees in sidewalk areas, restrictions
Street Openings and Excavations
   
96.30   Permit required for opening or excavation
   
96.31   Application; bond
   
96.32   Tunneling under streets for utility crossings
   
96.33   Excavations to be guarded
   
96.34   Emergency excavations
   
96.35   Warning lights for building materials in streets
 
   
96.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Removal of barricades, see §
134.11
USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 96.01 TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO BE TRIMMED.
   (A)   The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this city shall
trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking area between the sidewalks
and the roadway of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks, or any street or alley, in such
manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such premises
are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the
trees and shrubbery in the same manner as herein required of the owner. Such
trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage
shall not be lower than ten feet above the roadway of a street or alley, nor
lower than eight feet above the sidewalk.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse, or neglect to trim trees
and shrubbery as provided in division (A) above, after receiving five days’
notice from the head of the department in charge of streets to do so, shall be
guilty of an offense against the city. Every day that the owner or occupant
shall fail, refuse, or neglect to trim the trees or shrubbery, after the
expiration of the five days’ notice, shall be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-101) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.02 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or
alley in the city; provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper
care and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
(Prior Code, § 14-102) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT STREETS AND SIDEWALKS WITH MERCHANDISE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place upon or permit
to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets, and alleys of the city any
goods, wares, articles of merchandise, or any other obstruction, and leave same
thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade.
(Prior Code, § 14-103) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT PEDESTRIANS OR TRAFFIC.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use or obstruct the
sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian
traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in
any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
(Prior Code, § 14-104) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 OPEN DOORS, GRATINGS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave or keep any cellar door, manhole, or
grating of any kind open in or upon any street or sidewalk, or permit the same
to be left or kept open.
(Prior Code, § 14-105) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 STREET DEPARTMENT MATERIAL PROHIBITED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No material or equipment owned by the city and under the control or custody
of the Street Department shall be used on private property.
(Prior Code, § 14-106) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.07 PLAYING ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to play on the main-traveled portion of the
streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 14-107) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.08 VEHICLE WASHING ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the city is
hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 14-108) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.09 WATER, MUD FROM VEHICLE NOT TO DRAIN INTO STREET.
   No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city
where the water, dirt, mud, or other substances removed therefrom by or during
the washing thereof or other work thereon, shall drain into or upon any street
or sidewalk of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-109) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.10 WATER FROM FILLING STATIONS AND OTHER BUSINESSES.
   It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place
of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease,
or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over, or across any sidewalk,
parking area, street, alley, or other public way.
(Prior Code, § 14-110) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.11 UNLAWFUL FOR OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO PERMIT SIDEWALK TO BECOME A HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a
sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property
to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk, or sidewalk area.
(Prior Code, § 14-111) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.12 NOTICE TO CLEAN OR REPAIR; VIOLATION.
   If any property owner, occupant, or agent of such property shall fail or
refuse to repair or clean off the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the property
owned or occupied by him or her within 72 hours after notice served on him or
her by any police officer, health officer, or any other agent of the city, the
property owner or occupant or agent so failing or refusing after notice so to
do, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-112) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.13 OBSTRUCTION NOT TO INTERFERE WITH DRAINAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to obstruct any street,
sidewalk, or alley, by placing any approach driveway or other obstruction or
substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water,
into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back any water upon
the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter.
(Prior Code, § 14-113)
§ 96.14 DEFACING OF WALK FORBIDDEN.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to cut, carve, paint,
mark, engrave, or inscribe upon any sidewalk, curbing, pavement, or other
public part of any street, any sign, mark, advertisement or effigy, other than
to show sidewalk contractor’s nameplate.
(Prior Code, § 14-114) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.15 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE OR DRIVE LOADED VEHICLE OVER CURBING AND CROSSINGS.
   Any person who shall willfully or wantonly cut or break or remove, or in any
manner displace any curbing, guttering, or who shall recklessly or
intentionally, drive any vehicle loaded with asphalt materials, lumber, or
building materials of any kind, into or on the curbing, or concrete guttering
of any paved street, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-115) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.16 OWNER OF VEHICLE RESPONSIBLE FOR DAMAGE TO STREET.
   The owner, driver, operator, or mover of any vehicle over any street or
alley of the city and specifically vehicles of a load weight in excess of
passenger automobiles and light delivery trucks, shall be responsible for all
damages which streets or alleys may sustain as a result of the use thereof by
such vehicles. This shall not be applicable to deterioration caused by normal
vehicular use of such streets and alleys. The amount of such damage may be
recovered in an action in the court of proper jurisdiction in the name of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 14-116)
§ 96.17 WHEN SIDEWALKS MAY BE OBSTRUCTED.
   It is lawful for an owner or occupant of premises abutting on a sidewalk in
the city to store on the sidewalk goods, wares, and merchandise of a space at
least six feet in width, is left clear for passage of traffic or pedestrians.
Such goods, wares, and merchandise may not be stored or displayed on the
sidewalk in such a manner that vehicles parking at the curb could be damaged
thereby. Such goods, wares, and merchandise must be removed by the owner or
occupant of the premises at least once during each 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 14-117) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.18 REMOVING SIDEWALK, STREET MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to injure, remove or
displace any earth, stone, gravel, sand, or other material forming a part of
any public highway or street or alley, sidewalk, or road or crosswalk within
the corporate limits of the city, without permission from the Mayor and City
Council to do so.
(Prior Code, § 14-118) Penalty, see §
96.99
Cross-reference:
   Excavations and permits, see §§
96.30 through
96.35
§ 96.19 PLANTING TREES IN SIDEWALK AREAS, RESTRICTIONS.
   Any merchants, businesses, or persons within the city are hereby granted
permission to plant and grow trees in the sidewalks of the city under the
following rules and conditions.
   (A)   Any person desiring to plant and grow trees in the sidewalks of the
city shall submit a written request to the Mayor and City Council for
permission to do so. The application shall contain a drawing showing the exact
location of where trees are to be planted and the variety of tree to be
planted.
   (B)   It is the duty and responsibility of the applicant to bear the total
expense of the cutting of the sidewalk, which shall be done in a manner as
approved by the Mayor and City Council, planting of the trees and the care and
pruning of the trees in the future.
   (C)   Any person, firm, or business attempting to plant a tree in the
sidewalk within the city, without the express prior approval of the Mayor and
City Council, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day in violation
thereof will be a separate offense.
   (D)   Any applicant planting a tree in the sidewalk of the city, shall
maintain and prune the tree. If the tree is not pruned and taken care of in a
proper manner, then the city shall have the power to properly care for or prune
the tree and may tax the cost thereof on the water bill of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 14-119) (Ord. 1069, passed 4-28-1981) Penalty, see §
96.99
STREET OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS
§ 96.30 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPENING OR EXCAVATION.
   (A)   No person may make any opening or excavation in any street, road,
sidewalk, or right-of-way or in any paving, or remove or tear out any curbing,
without first applying to the city for a permit to do so, providing all
required information, paying the permit fee, and making an acceptable deposit
or bond, as set by the city, to insure good workmanship, repair, and
replacement of the excavated area.
   (B)   All openings made in the public streets or alleys must be made as
carefully as possible and all materials excavated from the trenches shall be
removed or placed where the least inconvenience to the public will be caused.
   (C)   All openings must be replaced in precisely the same condition as
before the excavation started and all rubbish and materials must be removed at
once, leaving the street or sidewalks clean and in perfect repair. All curbing
shall be replaced or removed as approved by the city.
   (D)   All openings shall be marked with sufficient barriers. Warning devices
shall be maintained around the opening at night and all other precautions shall
be taken by the excavator to protect the public from damage to person or
property.
(Prior Code, § 14-201) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.31 APPLICATION; BOND.
   (A)   Application for permit for excavation shall include or be accompanied
by plans and specifications or a description of the proposed opening or
excavation adequate to enable the city officials to understand the proposal.
The city may issue a permit therefor, if it thinks the request reasonable and
justified under the circumstances. If the city refuses a permit, the applicant
may appeal, within one month, to the Council, and the city shall issue the
permit, if the Council approves the application. The Council’s decision shall
be final.
   (B)   Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant shall
deposit with the City Clerk an amount of money estimated by the city to be
adequate to compensate the city for restoring the street, sidewalk, or other
area properly, if the applicant fails to do so promptly. If the applicant
restores the street, sidewalk, or area promptly and properly, the amount
deposited shall be returned to him or her; if not, the city shall retain as
much of the amount deposited as is adequate to compensate the city for making
the restoration.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an opening or excavation
in a street, sidewalk, or other public area without a permit issued under this
chapter, or to make such an opening or excavation except as indicated by the
plans and specifications or description submitted, or as approved by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-202) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.32 TUNNELING UNDER STREETS FOR UTILITY CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Unless specifically authorized in writing by the city, all utility
crossings across streets or other public ways under paved surfaces shall be
made by boring or tunneling under the street or public way in such a manner
that the strength of the paved surface is not affected. Such written authority
will only be given when streets are unpaved, in very poor condition, or when it
is shown that the underlying strata will not allow boring or tunneling.
   (B)   Unless specifically authorized in writing by the city, all utilities
buried after November 14, 1989, including, but not limited to gas lines,
electric lines, telephone lines, and cable television lines shall be buried a
minimum depth of 24 inches from the point of their inception in the alley or
street to the point of their entering the dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 14-203) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.33 EXCAVATIONS TO BE GUARDED.
   All excavations upon the front or side of any lot, adjoining the street or
avenue or alley or under any sidewalk in the city, shall be securely and
properly guarded and protected by the person or persons having charge of the
same, so as to prevent the same being or becoming dangerous to life or limb.
Failure to do so shall be an offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-204) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.34 EMERGENCY EXCAVATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person, firm, or
corporation opening any pipe lines, conduits, or any public utility in any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground, by virtue of laws, ordinances,
or permits, as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when
necessity may arise, during such hours as the offices of this city are closed.
However, the person, firm, or corporation making such excavation shall make
application and receive from the city a permit therefor within four hours after
the offices of this city are first opened subsequent to the making of such
excavations.
(Prior Code, § 14-205) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.35 WARNING LIGHTS FOR BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREETS.
   Every person who shall use or occupy any part of a street or avenue of the
city for building material shall cause one or more warning devices to be kept
on from sunset to sunrise on the front and at each side in such manner as to
give notice of danger to all possible means of approach, so long as such
material remains. Those who fail to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-206) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of §§
96.01 through
96.19 shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99
(Prior Code, § 14-120)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
96.30 through
96.35, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 14-207)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   FIREWORKS
      
114.   GARAGE SALES
      
115.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
      
116.   JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
      
117.   PAWNBROKERS
      
118.   TAXICAB LICENSES
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEES
Section
   
110.01   License required, fee levied on certain occupations
   
110.02   Separate licenses required
   
110.03   License to be displayed
   
110.04   License may be revoked
   
110.05   Transfer of license prohibited
   
110.06   Duplicate license
   
110.07   Issuance and execution
   
110.08   Licenses subject to state law and city ordinances
   
110.09   No fee or tax to be prorated
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE LEVIED ON CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, exercise, or pursue any
business, profession, trade, occupation, privilege, or other activity for which
a license is required or a license fee or tax is levied by any provision of
this code, or other ordinance of the city, without paying the license fee or
tax and securing and possessing a valid license therefor.
   (B)   A license fee is levied on every person engaging in, exercising, or
pursuing any of the businesses, professions, trades, occupations, or privileges
in this city, as provided in this title.
   (C)   (1)   In order to receive a license under this chapter, every person,
firm, or corporation regulated pursuant to this section is required to possess
a valid and current state sales tax permit if such person, firm, or corporation
is a vendor subject to collection of sales taxes under the Sales Tax Code of
the city and state.
      (2)   A copy of this permit shall be provided by the applicant for a
license to the City Clerk prior to issuance of the city license.
   (D)   All annual occupation licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
(Prior Code, § 9-101) Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   Alcohol and beer licenses, see §§
111.01 through
111.17
   Electricians, see §§
150.040 through
150.047
   Plumbers, see §§
150.020 through
150.026
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority to tax and regulate occupations, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-106,
22-107
§ 110.02 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED.
   Every person who engages in, exercises, or pursues a business, profession,
trade, occupation, or privilege for which a license is required, at or from
more than one place in the city, or who engages in, exercises, or pursues more
than one such business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, shall pay
the fee, and secure a separate license, for each such place or for each such
business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege.
(Prior Code, § 9-103) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   (A)   Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a
business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, shall conspicuously
display the license at all times in some part of his or her place of business
or activity where a person who has entered the place may readily see it. If the
license holder has no particular place of business or activity, he or she shall
carry the license and shall display it to any person who requests to see it.
   (B)   In lieu of the manner of displaying such licenses provided in division
(A) above, when licenses are required for coin-operated music or amusement
devices, vending machines, and similar devices and equipment, the license may
be placed on or attached to such device or equipment in such position and
manner that it will be clearly visible, and shall be so placed or attached if
the license so states on its face.
   (C)   It is unlawful to fail or refuse to display the license as required in
this section.
(Prior Code, § 9-104) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 LICENSE MAY BE REVOKED.
   Any license issued by the city to any person to engage in, exercise, or
pursue any business, profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, may be
revoked by the City Council after adequate opportunity for a hearing.
(Prior Code, § 9-105)
§ 110.05 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   The assignment or transfer of licenses shall not be permitted in this city.
(Prior Code, § 9-106)
Statutory reference:
   License may not be transferred, see 11 O.S. § 22-107
§ 110.06 DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   Whenever any license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege, has been lost or destroyed without
any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, the City Clerk, on application,
shall issue a duplicate license for the unexpired time. Before the duplicate is
issued, the holder shall make and file with the City Clerk, an affidavit that
the licensee has in fact lost or destroyed the license without any wrongful act
or connivance by the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 9-107)
§ 110.07 ISSUANCE AND EXECUTION.
   The City Clerk shall issue a license required by this code or other
ordinance, when the applicant has filed a proper application therefor, paid the
required tax or fee, and complied with all other requirements prescribed for
obtaining such license. Each such license so issued shall be signed by the
Mayor and City Clerk, and the corporate seal of the city shall be affixed
thereto. Such license shall be in suitable form and express the purpose for
which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 9-108)
§ 110.08 LICENSES SUBJECT TO STATE LAW AND CITY ORDINANCES.
   All licenses shall be issued subject to the ordinances of the city and the
laws of the state. No license shall be construed as authority to do or omit to
do any act in violation of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 9-109)
§ 110.09 NO FEE OR TAX TO BE PRORATED.
   No license fee or tax prescribed by this code or other ordinance shall be
prorated for any reason, unless otherwise specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 9-110)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
title by doing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or
declared to be an offense or misdemeanor thereby, or who shall fail to do any
act required by any such provision, or who shall fail to do any act when such
provision declared such failure to be unlawful or to be an offense or
misdemeanor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in §
10.99. Each day upon which any such violation continues shall constitute a
separate misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9-901)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Alcoholic Beverages and Taxation
   
111.01   Definitions and interpretations
   
111.02   Occupation tax levied
   
111.03   Payment required
   
111.04   Annual report
   
111.05   Application for certificate; investigations
   
111.06   Issuance of certificate of zoning and certificate of compliance
   
111.07   Package stores; location
   
111.08   Condition of sale
   
111.09   Where consumption prohibited
   
111.10   Prohibited sales, possession by minors
   
111.11   Transporting beverages
   
111.12   Prohibited employment, minors not to enter
   
111.13   Dates and times when sales prohibited
   
111.14   Intoxicated person prohibited in café, restaurant, club, or place of
recreation
   
111.15   Signs and advertising
   
111.16   Separate premises required
   
111.17   Consumption and intoxication in public place
Beer and/or Wine-Tasting Gardens
   
111.30   Definitions
   
111.31   Permit required
   
111.32   Application for permit
   
111.33   Continuing compliance
Nonintoxicating Beverages
   
111.45   Definitions
   
111.46   License required; license fee levied
   
111.47   Compliance with law; expiration of license
   
111.48   Revocation of license
   
111.49   Prohibited location
   
111.50   Sale to and purchase by minors
   
111.51   Persons under 18 not to be employed
   
111.52   Minors possessing nonintoxicating beverages; minors not permitted in
bars
   
111.53   Place where nonintoxicating beverages sold not to allow intoxicated
persons, gambling, or disorderly conduct
   
111.54   Drinking in public
   
111.55   Hours of sale
   
111.56   Transporting open container
 
   
111.99   Penalty
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TAXATION
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   Word, phrases, and terms used in this subchapter shall have the meaning
prescribed by, and be construed in conformity with, the definitions of the same
set forth in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et
seq., with the same force and effect as if the definitions were set forth in
full in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning
or constructions.
(Prior Code, § 3-101)
Cross-reference:
   State laws adopted by reference, see §
130.11
§ 111.02 OCCUPATION TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   An annual occupation tax may be levied on persons engaging in the
following businesses or occupations within the city in the amounts respectively
indicated in §
35.01 of this code, and as amended from time to time by ordinance or
resolution.
   (B)   The occupation tax for those service organizations which are exempt
under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(19) for bottle club license shall be $500 per year.
   (C)   If a brewer or a Class B wholesaler also holds a license from the
state to manufacture or wholesale any nonintoxicating malt beverage then the
occupation tax for such brewer or Class B wholesaler shall be reduced by 75%.
(Prior Code, § 3-102)
§ 111.03 PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any state licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein
listed shall pay the tax therefor at the office of the City Clerk on or before
the date upon which he or she enters upon such occupation. The licensee shall
provide a copy of his or her current state license before payment of an
occupation tax will be accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax
annually on or before the first day of July.
   (B)   Upon payment of the occupation tax, the City Clerk shall issue a
receipt to the state licensee, which the licensee shall post in a conspicuous
place on the premises wherein he or she carries on his or her occupation.
(Prior Code, § 3-103) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The City Clerk shall make an annual report to the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement (ABLE) Commission, covering the fiscal year, showing the number of
licensees subject to the occupation tax and the amount of money collected from
the tax.
(Prior Code, § 3-104)
§ 111.05 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire,
health, and safety codes of the city required by 37A O.S. shall apply at the
office of the Clerk by:
      (1)   Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office;
and
      (2)   Paying a verification and certification fee in such amount as set
by the Council at the time of filing.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance the
Mayor shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises
proposed for licensed operations comply with the provisions of the zoning
ordinance and any health, fire, building, and other safety codes applicable to
it.
   (C)   The Mayor shall act in all such applications within 20 days of receipt
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-105) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ZONING AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall
be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (B)   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in
compliance with all applicable fire, safety, and health codes, a certificate of
compliance shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (C)   The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the Mayor or
by the City Clerk.
   (D)   A conditional certificate may be granted if construction,
modification, or alteration of the premises proposed for licensed operations is
not completed. The conditional certificate shall indicate that the proposed
premises will comply with city zoning, fire, safety, and health codes. A
certificate in accordance with divisions (A) and (B) above shall be issued
within ten days after all final inspections are complete.
(Prior Code, § 3-106)
§ 111.07 PACKAGE STORES; LOCATION.
   (A)   No package store or any other business licensed by this chapter shall
be located or operated at any place except at locations permitted by the city’s
zoning or planning laws.
   (B)   The location of a package store is specifically prohibited within 300
feet from any church property primarily and regularly used for worship services
and religious activities, or a public school. However, if any such church or
school shall be established within 300 feet of any licensed retail premises
after such premises have been licensed, this shall not be a bar to the renewal
of such license so long as it has been in continuous force and effect. The
distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest property
entrance door of the premises of such package store along the street right-of-
way line providing the nearest direct route usually travelled by pedestrians
between such points. For the purpose of determining measured distance, property
situated on the opposite side of the street from such church or school shall be
considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with such
church or school. A license shall not be issued for a location on any block
where a school or church is located.
(Prior Code, § 3-107) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 4-103
§ 111.08 CONDITION OF SALE.
   (A)   No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages out of any retail
alcoholic beverage store other than:
      (1)   In retail containers;
      (2)   At ordinary room temperatures;
      (3)   In the original package; and
      (4)   For consumption off the premises.
   (B)   No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in the
maintenance and operation of such a store shall suffer, or permit any alcoholic
beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be opened
on the premises of such a store.
(Prior Code, § 3-108) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 WHERE CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drink or consume in any manner any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of a package store nor in any other public place. Neither shall a
person open or break the seal of any original package or retail container
containing alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such beverage store.
(Prior Code, § 3-109) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.10 PROHIBITED SALES, POSSESSION BY MINORS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic
beverages, at any place within the city limits to any person who is a minor.
Neither shall any minor misrepresent his or her age verbally or in writing, or
present false documentation of age or otherwise for the purpose of inducing any
other person to sell him alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
the possession of any alcoholic beverage while such person is upon any public
street, road, or highway, or in any public building or public place.
   (C)   No person shall sell, deliver, or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverage
or beverages within the city to an intoxicated person or to any person who has
been adjudged insane or mentally deficient.
(Prior Code, § 3-110) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 TRANSPORTING BEVERAGES.
   It is unlawful to transport any alcoholic beverage, unless the same is:
   (A)   In an unopened original container with seal unbroken, and the original
cap or cork not removed from the container; or
   (B)   In the trunk or other closed compartment or container out of public
view and out of reach of and not accessible to the driver or any occupant of a
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-§ 111) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.12 PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT, MINORS NOT TO ENTER.
   No minor shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution, or
other handling of alcoholic beverages at any place within the city. No person
shall employ or assist or aid in causing the employment of any minor at any
place within the city in the selling, manufacture, distribution, or other
handling of alcoholic beverages. No minor shall be permitted to remain within
or to loiter about the premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store. Violation
of this provision shall subject the owner or proprietor, as well as the
underage person, to prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 3-112) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.13 DATES AND TIMES WHEN SALES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall open for business or keep open for business or sell or
deliver alcoholic beverages, as defined herein, to any person at a retail
alcoholic beverage store in the city on any Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas
Day, or while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary, run-off
primary or special election, whether national, state, county, or city, or any
other day except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (B)   No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages, and no officer, agent, or
employee of such a dealer shall sell or deliver to any retail alcoholic
beverage store within the city any amount of spirits or wines on Saturday of
any week, on Sunday of any week, on New Year’s Day, on Memorial Day, on the
Fourth of July, on Labor Day, on Veteran’s Day, on Thanksgiving Day, on
Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open on the day of any general, primary,
run-off primary, or special election, whether national, state, county or city.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.14 INTOXICATED PERSON PROHIBITED IN CAFÉ, RESTAURANT, CLUB, OR PLACE OF
RECREATION.
   No person operating a café, restaurant, club, or any place of recreation
within this city, and no employee engaged in connection with the operation of
such a café, restaurant, club, or place of recreation shall permit any person
to be drunk or intoxicated in the place of business.
(Prior Code, § 3-114) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.15 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, in any manner, other
than as authorized by law, the sale of alcoholic beverages within the limits of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-115) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.16 SEPARATE PREMISES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall maintain, operate, or assist, in any manner, the
maintenance or operation of a retail alcoholic beverage store or package store
in premises which are not separated from adjoining premises on which any other
goods, wares, or merchandise are sold or services are rendered by
nontransparent walls, broken only, if at all, by a passageway to which the
public is not admitted.
   (B)   No person shall take any alcoholic beverage through any passageway
described in division (A) above for the purpose of selling or reselling such
beverage, or for the purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of
such beverage.
(Prior Code, § 3-116) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.17 CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   No person within this city shall drink intoxicating liquor or alcoholic
beverage in any public place, nor shall any person be intoxicated in a public
place within this city, nor shall any owner, operator, or manager of any
business or public place to which the public is generally invited allow an
intoxicated person to remain in or upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-117) Penalty, see §
111.99
BEER AND/OR WINE-TASTING GARDENS
§ 111.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER AND/OR WINE-TASTING GARDEN. An open area where beer is served and
consumed and/or where wine-tasting is allowed.
   DESIGNATED AREA. The premises/location approved by the city for operation of
a beer and/or wine-tasting garden.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, or corporation,
whether conducted for profit or not for profit.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. The property owned or leased by the city, or any other
governmental entity.
(Prior Code, § 3-402) (Ord. 10-10, passed 5-10-2010)
§ 111.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall hereafter keep, maintain, conduct, or operate any beer and/
or wine-tasting garden in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor
and paying the required fee.
(Prior Code, § 3-401) (Ord. 10-10, passed 5-10-2010) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for beer and/or wine-tasting garden permit shall be made
to the City Clerk and may be granted upon satisfying the conditions set forth
in this subchapter. Said application shall be made upon forms approved by the
City Clerk and contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. The
applicant shall be the actual person who will operate the proposed beer and/or
wine-tasting garden;
      (2)   A site plan showing the proposed designated area for the beer and/
or wine-tasting garden. Said site plan shall include a statement from the
sponsoring organization of the community-wide activity approving the proposed
location of the beer and/or wine-tasting garden;
      (3)   The dates when the beer and/or wine-tasting gardens shall be
operated;
      (4)   A copy of the applicant’s current on-premises low-point beer
license issued by the city;
      (5)   A certificate of liability insurance coverage, including host
liquor liability, with limits for personal injury and property damage not less
than the city’s limits of liability under the Governmental Tort Claims Act,
being 51 O.S. §§ 151 et seq.;
      (6)   A statement, signed by the applicant, certifying that if a permit
is approved, the applicant agrees to abide by all applicable laws and
ordinances of the city and to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and
all liability arising out of the use or condition of the premises or operation
of the beer and/or wine-tasting garden; and
      (7)   Such other information as the City Clerk deems appropriate.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for a beer and/or wine-tasting garden unless
application for the same is submitted to the City Clerk’s office at least three
working days in advance of the community-wide activity. The City Clerk shall
consider applications for beer and/or wine-tasting gardens in the order
received.
   (C)   The designated area of a beer and/or wine-tasting garden shall be
restricted to the location approved by the permit application process. Nothing
in this subchapter shall be construed to require the city to close any
property, street, or streets during any community-wide activity. The designated
area of a beer and/or wine-tasting garden shall not be located within 150 feet
of any property which is zoned for residential use.
(Prior Code, § 3-403) (Ord. 10-10, passed 5-10-2010) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 CONTINUING COMPLIANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a beer and/or
wine-tasting garden except in continuous conformity with the following
regulations.
   (A)   A sign shall be posted at the entrance to the beer and/or wine-tasting
garden notifying the public that no person under the age of 21 will be allowed
in the garden, and that the beer may not be taken out of the garden and must be
consumed in specified area as described in the permit.
   (B)   Signs shall be posted at the ingress/egress points of the garden
indicating the allowed consumption area.
   (C)   No beer and/or wine-tasting garden may operate between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 9:59 a.m. of the following day.
   (D)   All electrical wiring shall comply with applicable electrical codes.
   (E)   All beverages shall be sold or dispensed in non-glass containers. All
combustible rubbish shall be stored in noncombustible covered trash
receptacles.
   (F)   Each beer and/or wine-tasting garden, while in operation, shall be
conducted in conformance with all applicable city, county, and state laws
regulating the dispensing and consumption of low-point beer, and the tasting of
wine, plus all other applicable laws and ordinances.
   (G)   The permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be kept on the
premises of the beer and/or wine-tasting garden during all hours of operation
and shall be made available for inspection upon request of law enforcement
authorities of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-404) (Ord. 10-10, passed 5-10-2010) Penalty, see §
111.99
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES
§ 111.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MINOR. A person who has not yet attained the age at which a person is
permitted to consume nonintoxicating beverages under state law.
   NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES. All beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol
by volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   RETAIL DEALER. Any person, firm, corporation, association, or concessionaire
who sells, distributes, or dispenses at retail, any nonintoxicating beverage
within the corporate limits of the city, without regard as to any place where
such beverages may be consumed or used.
(Prior Code, § 3-201)
Statutory reference:
   Regulations on nonintoxicating beverages, see 37 O.S. §§ 163.1 et seq.
§ 111.46 LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE FEE LEVIED.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether
permanent or temporary, to sell, distribute, or dispense any nonintoxicating
beverages without having first received a municipal license as herein required.
(Prior Code, § 3-203)
   (B)   Fee.
      (1)   There is hereby levied upon each retail dealer in nonintoxicating
beverages for consumption on or off the premises an annual occupation tax of
$100, and an annual license fee of $50 for sale of nonintoxicating beverages
which are in original packages and are not for consumption on the premises.
      (2)   All such municipal license fees taxes shall be paid to the City
Clerk at the time of issuance of license and in the manner prescribed herein.
      (3)   All license fees levied under the provisions of this subchapter
shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 3-202)
Statutory reference:
   State license requirements, cities not to levy more than state license, see
37A O.S. § 4-104
§ 111.47 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW; EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   No municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the City Clerk
without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state and
county permits required by law, and has in all other respects complied with the
state and local alcoholic beverage control requirements. No license shall be
transferable.
(Prior Code, § 3-204)
§ 111.48 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council shall have power, after public hearing, to revoke any
license granted hereunder for violation of law or ordinance by the license
holder.
(Prior Code, § 3-205)
§ 111.49 PROHIBITED LOCATION.
   It is unlawful for any place licensed to sell nonintoxicating beverages for
on premise consumption to be located within 300 feet from any public school or
church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities. If any public school or church shall be established within 300 feet
of any place which sells nonintoxicating beverages for on-premise consumption
after such place has been licensed, this shall not be a deterrent to the
renewal of such license so long as there has not been a lapse of more than 60
days. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest
property line of such public school or church to the nearest public entrance
door of the premises of any place licensed to sale such nonintoxicating
beverages for on-premise consumption along the street right-of-way line
providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such
points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the
opposite side of the street from such public school or church shall be
considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the school
or church. The above restrictions shall not affect premises already licensed as
of the initial effective date of this section to sell nonintoxicating beverages
for on-premise consumption or premises which may presently or in the future be
licensed to sell nonintoxicating beverages for on-premise consumption even
though a school or church is subsequently established within 300 feet of such
license premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-206) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.50 SALE TO AND PURCHASE BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, offer for sale,
give away, procure for, or otherwise dispense to any minor any nonintoxicating
beverage; or for any minor to purchase, receive, or procure any nonintoxicating
beverage.
(Prior Code, § 3-207) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.51 PERSONS UNDER 18 NOT TO BE EMPLOYED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator, or employee of a
place where nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises
to employ a person under 18 years of age to work in such place; or for any
person under 18 years of age to work in such place. This division (A) shall not
apply to any licensed premises where sales of nonintoxicating beverage do not
exceed 25% of the gross sales of the licensee.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work in
any capacity whatsoever in the separate or enclosed bar area of a place where
the main purpose of the area is the sale or consumption of nonintoxicating
beverages. This division (B) shall not apply to any area which has as its main
purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of nonintoxicating
beverages, in which sales or serving of nonintoxicating beverages are
incidental to the main purpose.
(Prior Code, § 3-208) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-102A2
§ 111.52 MINORS POSSESSING NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES; MINORS NOT PERMITTED IN
BARS.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any minor to be in possession of any
nonintoxicating beverages while such person is on any public street, road or
highway, or in any public building or place.
(Prior Code, § 3-209)
   (B)   (1)   The owner of any bar, beer hall, tavern, or other place wherein
any nonintoxicating beverage is dispensed for consumption on the premises shall
not permit any minor to be admitted to, enter, or to remain in a separate
enclosed bar area of the licensed premises which has as its main purpose the
selling or serving of nonintoxicating beverages for consumption of the premises
unless the person’s legal guardian or parent is present, nor shall any minor
enter or remain about such separate or enclosed bar area.
      (2)   This section shall not prohibit minors from being admitted to,
entering, or remaining in an area which has as its main purpose some objective
other than the sale or serving of nonintoxicating beverages, in which sales or
serving of nonintoxicating beverages are incidental to the main purpose, if the
minors are not sold or served or do not consume nonintoxicating beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3-210) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.53 PLACE WHERE NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES SOLD NOT TO ALLOW INTOXICATED
PERSONS, GAMBLING, OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of a place where
nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises to sell or
otherwise furnish such beverages to an intoxicated person or to permit an
intoxicated person to remain or loiter therein.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein gambling, betting, or operation of a lottery; sale, furnishing,
or drinking of intoxicating liquor; disorderly conduct; loud or disturbing
language, noise, or music; profane language; or any other violation of the laws
of the state or of the ordinances of the city, or for any person to engage in
any such activity or conduct in such a place.
   (C)   It is unlawful for the owner, manager, or operator of such a place to
permit therein fighting, boxing, wrestling, or other contests of physical
strength; or for any person to fight, box, wrestle, or engage in other contests
of physical strength in such a place.
(Prior Code, § 3-211) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.54 DRINKING IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, whether a minor or of age, to drink any
nonintoxicating beverage while such person is upon any public street, alley, or
other public highway, or in any public building or other public place within
the city.
   (B)   This section shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking
such beverage in a place licensed to sell it for consumption on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-212) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.55 HOURS OF SALE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell nonintoxicating
beverages for consumption on the premises to sell the same between the hours of
2:00 a.m. Sunday morning and 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday; and on other
days of the week between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
day.
(Prior Code, § 3-213) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 3-125
§ 111.56 TRANSPORTING OPEN CONTAINER.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving
vehicle upon a public highway, street, or alley any nonintoxicating beverage
except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from
which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed unless the opened
container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment. The rear trunk or
compartment shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or
panel truck or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGE shall be as
defined in §§
111.01 and
111.45.
(Prior Code, § 3-214) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by §§
111.01 through
111.17 without paying the occupation tax imposed therefor in advance of such
operation, is guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 3-103)
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
111.01 through
111.17 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 3-118)
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
111.30 through
111.33, or who allows or attempts to allow a beer and/or wine tasting garden
permit to be used by another person to operate a beer and/or wine-tasting
garden, or who applies for a permit with the intent to transfer or attempt to
transfer said permit, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined up to $100 plus costs.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§
111.30 through
111.33, or any provision of those sections in connection with operation of a
beer and/or wine-tasting garden, shall not be eligible to receive a beer and/or
wine-tasting garden permit for a period of one year following said conviction.
(Prior Code, § 3-405)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
111.45 through
111.56 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 3-215)
(Ord. 10-10, passed 5-10-2010)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   License tax levied on various amusements
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   License required to operate family amusement center
   
112.04   Filing and contents of application
   
112.05   Age and citizenship of applicant
   
112.06   Action on application by Chief of Police and Code Enforcement Officer
   
112.07   Issuance or denial
   
112.08   Revocation
   
112.09   Not to be operated where nonintoxicating beverages sold for on-
premises consumption
   
112.10   Visibility from street or sidewalk
   
112.11   Gambling prohibited
   
112.12   Closing hours
§ 112.01 LICENSE TAX LEVIED ON VARIOUS AMUSEMENTS.
   A license tax is hereby levied on every person conducting, engaging in,
exercising, or pursuing any of the following businesses, professions, trades,
occupations, privileges, or activities within the city, in the amounts set by
the Council by motion or resolution:
   (A)   For each skating rink;
   (B)   For each itinerant show, exhibition, or entertainment of any kind
which charges admission (including all activities under its auspices), provided
that this shall not apply to circuses, menageries, street fairs, and carnivals;
   (C)   For each circus with street parade, without street parade, and for
street parade of circus when circus is held outside of city limits;
   (D)   For each street fair or carnival (including all activities under its
auspices);
   (E)   For each shooting gallery;
   (F)   For each skill or strength game, or similar game, such as knife
boards, rag or wooden images, or other thing or things at which rings, balls,
or other things are thrown, pitched, or shot, lung-testing or striking machine
or similar device, provided that this shall not apply to games under the
auspices of street fairs, carnivals and circuses;
   (G)   For each ferris wheel, merry-go-round, small car or similar apparatus,
when not under the auspices of a street fair, civic club, carnival or circus;
   (H)   For professional wrestling matches; and
   (I)   For each medicine show.
(Prior Code, § 9-301) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any mechanical device which, upon the
payment or insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, causes or permits, or
is the incentive for, the propelling or motivating of any ball, marble, or
other gadget or object that produces or creates, or makes possible the
production or creation, of a game of skill, amusement, entertainment, or test
of strength.
   COIN-OPERATED MUSIC DEVICE. Any music device which is operated, motivated,
released, or played by or upon the payment or insertion of a coin, token, or
similar object, whether there is one or more boxes or devices in a family
amusement center for the reception of such coin, token, or similar object.
   FAMILY AMUSEMENT CENTER. A place where games of skill or music devices,
including regular or coin-operated, are maintained and operated for a profit
and offered to persons of all ages and either sex.
   GAMES OF SKILL. Regular or coin-operated pool tables, snooker tables,
billiard tables, pinball machines, ping-pong tables, table tennis, and
shuffleboard tables.
   MUSIC DEVICES. Any and all mechanical devices which render, cause to sound,
or release music where it may be heard by one or more public patrons, and each
separate loudspeaker, phonograph, jukebox, or outlet from which such music
emits shall each be construed to be a separate MUSIC DEVICE as herein defined,
except in the case where the music emits from more then one speaker
transmitting from the same music producing mechanism, in which case the several
outlets or speakers in each family amusement center shall be collectively
considered one such MUSIC DEVICE.
(Prior Code, § 9-302)
Statutory reference:
   Family recreation centers, coin-operated devices, see 68 O.S. §§ 1501 et
seq.
§ 112.03 LICENSE REQUIRED TO OPERATE FAMILY AMUSEMENT CENTER.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a family amusement center without
first having procured a license therefor issued under the terms of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-303) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.04 FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made, in duplicate, to
the City Clerk upon a form supplied for that purpose by the City Clerk. Such
application shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, age, date, and place of birth of the applicant;
   (B)   Prior convictions of the applicant, if any;
   (C)   The place where the family amusement center is to be located; and
   (D)   A description of amusement and recreational devices to be located in
the family amusement center.
(Prior Code, § 9-304)
§ 112.05 AGE AND CITIZENSHIP OF APPLICANT.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter to any applicant unless he or
she shall be at least 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States
(Prior Code, § 9-305) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.06 ACTION ON APPLICATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE AND CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall refer a copy of an application for a license
under this chapter to the Chief of Police and to the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of an application for a license under this
chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the specified location and
shall determine whether or not the structure is safe for occupancy and for use
as a family amusement center, and is in a location free from conditions which,
morally or physically, would render it unsuitable as a place for wholesome
family recreation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also determine whether or
not the applicant is of good moral character and whether or not the
requirements of this chapter have been met, except those to be reported upon by
the Electrical Inspector. He or she shall report his or her findings and, based
upon them, recommend whether the application should be granted or denied.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a copy of an application for a license under this
chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect all electric wiring and
connections in the building, and all electrically operated machines to be
played or operated by the patrons of the family amusement center, and shall
determine whether or not all electrical installations and devices on the
premises comply with the electrical code of the city. He or she shall report
his or her findings and, based upon them, recommend whether the application
should be granted or denied.
   (D)   The reports of the Chief of Police and of the Code Enforcement Officer
referred to in this section shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 9-306)
§ 112.07 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   If the Chief of Police and the Building Official concur in recommending
issuance of a license applied for under this chapter, the City Clerk shall
issue the same. If either or both recommend denial of the license, the Clerk
shall notify the applicant of the adverse recommendation, and shall permit the
applicant to make copies of the reports filed pursuant to §
112.06. The applicant, within five days after such notice, may request a
hearing by the City Council, which shall afford the same with due opportunity
to the applicant to show compliance with the conditions for a license. The
Council shall determine the matter upon the proof at the hearing and shall
order that the license be issued or denied. The Council’s decision shall be
final, subject to judicial review as provided in the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 9-307)
§ 112.08 REVOCATION.
   Any person having a license issued under this chapter who shall be convicted
more than once of a violation of the terms of this chapter, or whose employees,
in the operation of the licensed establishment, shall twice be so convicted,
shall have his or her license revoked and cancelled by the Mayor. Such licensee
shall have a right of appeal to the City Council, which shall hear and
determine the matter on proof presented at a hearing, and its decision shall be
final, subject to judicial review as provided in the statutes of this state.
(Prior Code, § 9-308) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.09 NOT TO BE OPERATED WHERE NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES SOLD FOR ON-
PREMISES CONSUMPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to maintain, have, or operate a family
amusement center in any room or building in which nonintoxicating beverages, as
defined by this code, are sold for consumption on the premises, or in any room
which is connected to such a place by a door, hall, or other facility for
ingress or egress.
(Prior Code, § 9-309) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.10 VISIBILITY FROM STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No family amusement center shall be maintained or operated in a building,
unless the games located therein and the persons playing the same shall be
clearly visible from the sidewalk or street adjacent to the building.
(Prior Code, § 9-310) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.11 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for the proprietor, licensee, or any person in charge of a
family amusement center, or for any servant or employee of such proprietor,
licensee, or any other person in charge of such recreation center, or any
public patron, to play, for money or any other representative thing of value,
upon the recreational games or to play any game of chance for money or thing of
value in such family amusement center.
(Prior Code, § 9-311) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 112.12 CLOSING HOURS.
   Every person operating a family amusement center shall close such place of
business at 12:00 midnight and shall not reopen for business before 7:00 a.m.
on all days, except Sunday. Such places shall be closed from 12:00 midnight
Saturday until 1:00 p.m. Sunday, and shall be closed at 12:00 midnight Sunday.
No playing of any kind shall be allowed during the hours herein specified as
closing hours.
(Prior Code, § 9-312) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 113: FIREWORKS
Section
    
113.01   Scope of chapter
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Manufacture of fireworks prohibited
   
113.04   Sale of fireworks prohibited; exceptions
   
113.05   Discharge of fireworks prohibited; exceptions
   
113.06   Sale of fireworks at stand, permits required
   
113.07   Application for fireworks stands permits
   
113.08   Application filing period and site inspection process
   
113.09   Display of permit
   
113.10   Location of fireworks stand; determination of location
   
113.11   Size and construction of fireworks stand and access requirements
   
113.12   Business hours and days of retail fireworks stands
   
113.13   Operations of fireworks stands
   
113.14   Display of fireworks; permit required
   
113.15   Bonds and responsibility for fireworks displays and retail fireworks
stands
   
113.16   Disposal of unfired fireworks
   
113.17   Use and operation of model rockets
   
113.18   Notice of noncompliance; seizure of fireworks held in violation
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
   Fireworks regulated, see §
132.02
§ 113.01 SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to fireworks as herein defined except as
provided in this section.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any resident
wholesaler, dealer, or jobber from selling at wholesale such fireworks as are
not herein prohibited; or the retail sales as otherwise provided in this
chapter; or the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies
for signal purposes or illumination or the sale or use of blank cartridges for
a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports,
or for use by military organizations. Such wholesalers, dealers, jobbers, or
retailers shall store their supplies of fireworks in accordance with the Fire
Prevention Code, latest edition, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 9-801)
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
Statutory reference:
   Bombs and explosives, see 21 O.S. § 1767.1
   Fireworks generally, see 68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.
   Power of city to regulate fireworks, see 11 O.S. § 22-110
   State fireworks licenses, see 68 O.S. § 1625
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or
any substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols,
toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of
unmanned balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers, or other devices
of like construction and any devices containing any explosive substance.
FIREWORKS shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of
an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in
accordance with the Department of Transportation regulations for packing and
shipping as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at
all times.
   FIREWORKS DISPLAY. Any supervised discharge of fireworks for public view by
fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of
individuals.
   FIREWORKS STAND. Any structure which meets the requirements of these
regulations, which is temporary in nature, and is used as a retail sales outlet
for the distribution of fireworks to the public.
   PLOT PLAN. A drawing to scale and fully dimensioned, showing the proposed
location of fireworks stand or stands, center line of streets, right-of-way
line, property boundary lines, or dimensioned area to be released, areas of
ingress and egress, parking and circulation, areas nearest adjacent fire
hydrant, location of refuse containers, and the location of any adjacent
structures or property under different ownership.
(Prior Code, § 9-802) (Ord. 99-09, passed 4-5-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Definition of fireworks, see 68 O.S. § 1622
§ 113.03 MANUFACTURE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-803) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.04 SALE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or
use or explode any fireworks except as provided in this chapter and the city’s
Fire Prevention Code, as amended and adopted.
(Prior Code, § 9-804) Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
   Offenses, see §
132.02
§ 113.05 DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The discharge of fireworks shall not be permitted except in areas and
times designated by the City Manager or his or her designated representative.
   (B)   Wholesalers and retailers of fireworks may discharge fireworks for the
purpose of training their employees on the proper care, handling, and discharge
of fireworks. However, the date, time, and location for the discharge of
fireworks for training purposes shall be approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department 48 hours prior to such discharge. For the purposes of this
subsection only, a written request shall be submitted to the Fire Chief, and
the request shall include the date, time, and location for such discharge of
fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 9-805) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.06 SALE OF FIREWORKS AT STAND, PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell fireworks at retail within the city except at stands
operated for such purpose and after being issued a permit therefor as provided
herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-806) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.07 APPLICATION FOR FIREWORKS STANDS PERMITS.
   (A)   Application for permits for fireworks stands shall be submitted to the
city on or before 5:00 p.m., May 15, annually, and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name of applicant;
      (2)   Business and residence address;
      (3)   Telephone number of applicant between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:
00 p.m.;
      (4)   Address of fireworks stand; and
      (5)   Date of application.
   (B)   A plot plan shall be submitted for each application which contains all
requirements indicated in §
113.02.
   (C)   Any other information required in the application form.
(Prior Code, § 9-807)
§ 113.08 APPLICATION FILING PERIOD AND SITE INSPECTION PROCESS.
   (A)   Applications for the operation of a fireworks stand must be submitted
no later than 5:00 p.m., May 15 to be considered.
   (B)   Following the filing of the complete application with the city, city
staff shall conduct its review of the application and inspection of the
proposed site. Staff will complete its review and either approve or disapprove
the application no later than June 1.
   (C)   If the application is approved, a permit shall be issued by the city
upon payment of a $50 fee and the filing of bonds and insurance coverage under
§
113.15. No fees will be accepted prior to application approval.
(Prior Code, § 9-808)
§ 113.09 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Permits, when issued, must be permanently displayed at all times on the
stand for which they were issued and at the site of display.
(Prior Code, § 9-809) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 113.10 LOCATION OF FIREWORKS STAND; DETERMINATION OF LOCATION.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued for any stand that is located less than 150
feet from any structure or property under a different ownership excluding
streets, alleyways, easements, or rights-of-way. Fireworks stands may only be
located in agricultural, commercial, or industrial zoning districts, unless the
stand’s location has had an approved application by the same applicant for each
of the five years preceding the adoption of these regulations, and must meet
appropriate setback requirements from any public right-of-way, except that
stands are prohibited on areas developed or used as parking lots.
(Prior Code, § 9-810)
   (B)   (1)   In determining whether or not a proposed site or location for a
fireworks stand should be
approved, the Fire Chief shall cause each application to be fully reviewed by
the following city staff:
         (a)   Code Enforcement Officer, to determine if the proposed location
is properly zoned, meets appropriate setback requirements from adjacent public
rights-of-way, has proper ingress and ingress and provides appropriate area for
parking and maneuvering;
         (b)   Code Enforcement Officer, to determine accessibility from the
public street, any conflicts with adjacent intersections, or turning movements
which would be hazardous to oncoming traffic; and
         (c)   City Attorney, to determine compliance with §
113.15, pertaining to bonding and insurance requirements.
      (2)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall consider the density of the
population in the area, the condition of the premises, the existence of any
surrounding structures, the availability of firefighting facilities and any
other safety factors which he or she deems important.
(Prior Code, § 9-811)
§ 113.11 SIZE AND CONSTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS STAND AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Fireworks stands shall be at least 50 feet apart and shall not exceed
a length of 36 feet nor a width of eight feet. Stands shall be constructed of
wood or metal or other material approved by the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (B)   Construction of stands from materials such as cardboard, paper,
canvas, or other flammable materials is prohibited. Stands must be open to the
front and have an exit door either to the rear or on the end. Each stand shall
have at least one, two and one-half gallon or greater capacity water pump tank
or other fire-fighting apparatus which is UL or EM approved. The firefighting
apparatus shall be maintained in operating condition at all times, and the type
and operating capability shall be determined solely by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Access to the premises of the fireworks stand from a public street
shall be from an existing opening, or if an existing opening is not available,
a temporary curb mount may be constructed using a “cold lay” asphalt material
at the approved points of access. No other material or device may be used for
this purpose and all such material must be removed, with street surface, curb,
and gutter returned to their original condition within 48 hours of the
fireworks stand ceasing operation. Further, the applicant shall include by
reference coverage issued under the requirements of §
113.15(B) of these regulations. The purpose of this requirement is to indemnify
and hold harmless the city from liability arising from any property damage or
personal injury or death resulting from the construction of the temporary curb
mounts. In locations where no street curb exists, ingress and egress areas
shall be clearly identified and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
applicant shall be responsible for insuring that approved access points are
used as the sole points of ingress and egress during the period that the
fireworks stand is open for business.
   (D)   Access from a state highway shall be from an approved opening. Any
modification pertaining to access shall require Oklahoma Department of
Transportation approval. No temporary access as described above shall be
authorized from an existing state highway.
(Prior Code, § 9-812) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 113.12 BUSINESS HOURS AND DAYS OF RETAIL FIREWORKS STANDS.
   Retail fireworks stands shall close no later that 11:00 p.m. of each day and
shall not reopen until 8:00 a.m. on each day except Sunday, when they shall not
be reopened until 12:00 noon. The only period when stands are permitted to be
opened for sales is June 25 through 11:00 p.m. July 5, of each year.
(Prior Code, § 9-813) Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 113.13 OPERATIONS OF FIREWORKS STANDS.
   (A)   A responsible person of 18 years of age or older must be in charge of
the stand at all times it is open for business. Smoking shall be prohibited
within 50 feet of any stand, and the permit holder shall display “No Smoking”
signs in prominent places on or about the stand. Metal refuse containers of
adequate size and number and with tight-fitting lids must be provided on the
premises. All trash, rubbish, and debris shall be collected from time to time
so as not to become unsightly or blow upon the premises of others. Fireworks
shall not be sold to an individual under the age of 16 years. Stand operators
shall require identification and proof of age as deemed necessary to meet the
requirements of this section.
   (B)   Each stand which is approved will be required to furnish with each
sale a single printed sheet to each purchaser, stating that the exploding or
discharging of fireworks within the city is prohibited except as provided in §
113.05; and that a violation thereof is punishable as provided in §
10.99. There shall be permanently displayed on or about each stand at all times
a sign, to be prepared by the city, stating that the exploding or discharging
of fireworks within the city limits is prohibited except as provided in §§
113.05 and
113.14 of this chapter; and that violations thereof may be punishable as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 9-814) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.14 DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The Chief of the Fire Department may adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for granting permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of
individuals. Such permits may be granted upon application to the Chief of the
Fire Department and the filing of a bond by the applicant as provided in §
113.15. Every such display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by
the Chief of the Fire Department and shall be of such composition and character
and so located, discharged, or fired as, in the opinion of the Chief of the
Fire Department, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person.
(Prior Code, § 9-815) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.15 BONDS AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR FIREWORKS DISPLAYS AND RETAIL FIREWORKS
STANDS.
   (A)   Before a permit for fireworks display or retail fireworks stand is
issued, the applicant for such display or stands, as the case may be, shall
deposit with the city a surety bond in the amount of $3,000 for each display
site or $1,000 for each fireworks stand. The bond shall be issued by a surety
bonding company authorized to do business in Oklahoma, and shall be made
payable to the city in the event the applicant fails to comply with the
provisions of this section. In the event the permit holder of such display or
fireworks stand does not clean such display site or fireworks stand by July 10,
the city shall clean or cause to be cleaned, without notice to the permit
holder, the display site or fireworks stand, and the actual cost of such
cleaning shall be paid for from the bond so deposited with the city. Failure to
comply with this requirement shall be cause for rejection of any future
application for a permit.
   (B)   At the time of the application for a permit, or prior to the issuance
of a permit, for a fireworks display or fireworks stand, the person or persons
making such application for a permit shall provide physical evidence of
property damage and personal injury insurance coverage for each licensed
fireworks display or fireworks stand. Such insurance coverage shall provide for
each display site or each retail stand a minimum coverage of $250,000 for
property damages, personal injuries, or deaths arising from the operation of
such fireworks display or fireworks stands.
   (C)   The permit holder shall assume full responsibility for any property
damages, personal injuries, or death arising from such fireworks display or
from the operation or sale of such fireworks from the retail fireworks stands.
The coverage required under division (B) above and the requirements in §
113.11 of this chapter shall be used to indemnify and hold harmless the city,
its officials and employees from any liability arising from the conduct,
operation, or sale of such fireworks at each of the display sites or at each of
the retail fireworks stands, to include place of ingress or egress.
(Prior Code, § 9-816) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.16 DISPOSAL OF UNFIRED FIREWORKS.
   Any fireworks that remain unfired after a display is concluded shall be
immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks
remaining.
(Prior Code, § 9-817) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.17 USE AND OPERATION OF MODEL ROCKETS.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department may adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for the use of model rockets. The design, construction, and use of
model rockets shall be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence that
the design, construction, and use of model rockets is in accordance with the
applicable standard specified for the section of the Fire Prevention Code, as
amended, shall be evidence that such design, construction, and use provides
reasonable safety to persons and property.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any firework classified as a “bottle
rocket,” which is prohibited under state law and in the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-820) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Bottle rockets prohibited, see 68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.
§ 113.18 NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE; SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS HELD IN VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be given
reasonable notice, which shall mean for the purpose of these regulations, eight
hours from the time and date first notified to comply with the provisions of
this chapter. If, after reasonable notice has been provided, compliance is
still not achieved, the permit for the operation of the fireworks stand shall
be revoked by the Chief of the Fire Department. The revocation of any fireworks
stand permit shall not bar any other relief or penalties otherwise applicable.
(Prior Code, § 9-819)
   (B)   The city shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale,
stored, or held in violation of this chapter or the Fire Prevention Code, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 9-818) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 114: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definition
   
114.03   Permit required
   
114.04   Permit conditions
   
114.05   Exemptions
   
114.06   Sales tax permit
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Unregulated garage sales within the residential areas of the city have
created problems of appearance and congestion.
   (B)   This chapter is intended to regulate the term and frequency of garage
sales to better preserve the residential environment within the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-601) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 114.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALES. Shall include all general sales, open to the public, conducted
from or on a residential premises in any residential area, for the purpose of
selling or disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to, all
sales called “garage,” “lawn,” “yard,” “attic,” “porch,” “room,” “backyard,”
“patio,” “carport,” “flea market,” “rummage” or “estate” sale, not otherwise
exempt in §
114.05.
(Prior Code, § 9-602) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 114.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person holding, conducting, or participating in a garage sale
shall obtain a permit from the city. A separate permit shall be obtained for
each location at which a garage sale is to be held.
   (B)   No fee will be charged for the permit.
(Prior Code, § 9-603) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   The permit shall set forth the time, date(s), and location of each garage
sale. Neither individual nor any location shall have more than one permit or
sale in any calendar month. No garage sale shall last more than three
consecutive days. All cleanup following a garage sale shall be completed within
24 hours of the end of the sale.
(Prior Code, § 9-604) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Sales pursuant to a valid court order;
   (B)   Sales by merchants or business people from locations permitted by the
zoning regulations of the city; and
   (C)   Sales by bona fide charitable, educational, cultural, or governmental
institutions or organizations when the proceeds from the sale are used directly
for the institution or organization’s charitable purposes and the property is
not sold on a consignment basis.
(Prior Code, § 9-605) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 114.06 SALES TAX PERMIT.
   (A)   Sales tax should be collected and remitted on the gross receipts for
all “garage,” “lawn,” “yard,” “attic,” “porch,” “room,” “backyard,” “patio,”
“carport,” “flea market,” “rummage” or “estate”not otherwise exempt in §
114.04.
   (B)   A blank sales tax form will be provided to the seller with the garage
sale permit.
   (C)   When completing the form, the seller should write in Hobart where the
sale occurred so that tax revenue will be apportioned back to the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-606) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, agency, corporation, or business entity found guilty of
violating this chapter shall be subject to punishment as set forth in
Appendix A to
Chapter 33 of this code.
   (B)   Each day the violation continues shall be separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-607) (Ord. 06-01, passed 7-11-2005)
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License requirement
   
115.03   Application procedure
   
115.04   Standards for issuance
   
115.05   Revocation procedure
   
115.06   Standards for revocation
   
115.07   Appeal procedure
   
115.08   Exhibition of identification
   
115.09   City policy on soliciting
   
115.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
115.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
115.12   Prohibited solicitation
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the city and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the city.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the city.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels, by any means, from place to place taking
or attempting to take orders for sales of goods to be delivered in the future
or for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is
not a peddler.
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.
   (B)   The fee for the licenses required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the City Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the City Clerk. This application shall be signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the
president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
the applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) above,
has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each
offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the City Clerk, credentials from the person,
if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business authorizing the
applicant to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence of the following will constitute valid reasons
for disapproval of an application:
         (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
         (2)   The applicant has made willful misstatements in the application;
         (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
         (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
         (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.
§ 115.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the city
after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
115.06 of this code. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or
her last known address at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 115.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way so as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general
welfare of the public.
§ 115.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
115.04 or
115.06 of this code shall have the right to appeal to the city. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the city, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The city shall set the time and
place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to such person
in the same manner as provided in §
115.05 of this code.
   (B)   The order of the city after the hearing shall be final.
§ 115.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed
Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license, and the
number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such
time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.09 CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants of the
residences in the city shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall
be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 115.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows: “NO SOLICITORS INVITED.”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least 1/3-inch in height. For the purpose of
uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the city to persons requesting, at
the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 115.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises
in the city upon which a residence is located, to first examine the notice
provided for in §
115.10 of this code, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the
solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
115.10 of this code.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 116: JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
   
116.01   License required
   
116.02   Register of property
   
116.03   Open to inspection
   
116.04   Purchases forbidden
   
116.05   Daily report to police
§ 116.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall carry on or engage in business as a junk dealer or keeper of
a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods, without first obtaining a license
therefor. A SECONDHAND DEALER shall be construed to mean any person who shall,
in any established place of business in the city, purchase any kind of
previously used good.
(Prior Code, § 9-401)
Statutory reference:
   Junk dealers, see 2 O.S. §§ 11-90 et seq.
§ 116.02 REGISTER OF PROPERTY.
   Every junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods,
shall keep at his or her place of business a register in which he or she shall
enter in writing a minute description of all property taken, purchased, or
received by him or her, together with the time and name and place of residence
(giving street and number if within the city), of the person from whom the
property is purchased, which register shall be kept clean and legible. He or
she shall make such entry within one hour of the receipt or purchase of such
property. Every entry shall be made in ink and shall not in any manner be
obliterated or erased.
(Prior Code, § 9-402) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.03 OPEN TO INSPECTION.
   The register so kept shall at all times be kept open to the inspection of
the Chief of Police, any officer of the police force of the city, the City
Attorney, and anyone authorized in writing for that purpose by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, which authority shall be exhibited to the junk
dealers or keeper of any junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods. The junk
dealer or keeper of a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods, shall upon
request, show and exhibit to such person or officer for inspection any article
or articles purchased by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 9-403) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.04 PURCHASES FORBIDDEN.
   No junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods, shall
purchase or receive any article or property of or from a minor, or owned by any
minor or from any person under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs,
or stolen property or property which for any cause he or she may have reason to
believe or suspect cannot be lawfully or rightfully sold by the person offering
it.
(Prior Code, § 9-404) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.05 DAILY REPORT TO POLICE.
   Every junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods in
the city must, before the hour of 12:00 p.m. of every day except Sunday make
and deliver to the Chief of Police or to the front desk at the Police
Department one copy of the records described in §
116.02 covering each article or thing received by such junk dealer or keeper of
a junk shop or dealer in secondhand goods during the 24-hour period ending as
of the next previous midnight. The report made on each Monday shall include all
articles or things received from and after the report made and delivered on the
Saturday preceding. If no article or thing has been received, a report must be
made to that effect.
(Prior Code, § 9-405) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 117: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
117.01   Pawnbroker defined
   
117.02   License required; fee; eligibility
   
117.03   Application for license
   
117.04   Investigation by police
   
117.05   Bond required
   
117.06   Contents of license; one location only
   
117.07   Display of license
   
117.08   Pawn tickets to be furnished; separate ticket for each item
   
117.09   Records to be kept
   
117.10   Daily report to police
   
117.11   Safekeeping of pledges and items purchased for resale
   
117.12   Forfeiture of pawn
   
117.13   Disposal of goods during redemption period restricted
   
117.14   Employment of minors prohibited
   
117.15   Transactions with minors, intoxicated persons, narcotics addicts, and
felons
§ 117.01 PAWNBROKER DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property or
deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of
selling the same back to the pledger or depositor, or who loans or advances
money on personal property by taking mortgage security thereon, and takes or
receives such personal property into his or her possession.
(Prior Code, § 9-501)
Statutory reference:
   State regulations, see 59 O.S. §§ 1501 et seq.
§ 117.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; ELIGIBILITY.
   No person shall conduct or transact a pawnbroking business or pawnshop in
the city without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter
provided. The fee for such license shall be as provided in the fee schedule. No
license shall be issued to any person whose license has been revoked under the
provisions of this chapter for a period of one year after the date of
revocation. No person who has been convicted of a felony shall be eligible to
receive such license at any time.
(Prior Code, § 9-502) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a pawnbroker’s license shall be made to the city. The
application shall state the name of the person, and in case of a firm or
corporation, the names of the persons comprising such firm, or the officers and
stockholders of such corporation; also the place, street, and number where such
business is to be carried on; and such other information as may be deemed
pertinent by the licensing officer or the Chief of Police.
   (B)   At the time of filing the application for a pawnbroker’s license, the
applicant shall deposit with the city the fee required for the license.
(Prior Code, § 9-503)
§ 117.04 INVESTIGATION BY POLICE.
   All applications for pawnbrokers’ licenses or renewals thereof shall be
referred to the Chief of Police, or his or her authorized representative, for
his or her approval. In no case shall a license be issued or renewed by the
city when the application has been disapproved by the Chief of Police. An
application or renewal which is disapproved by the Chief of Police may be
submitted for appeal and final action at the next regular Council meeting if
the applicant files a written request for such appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days after the Chief renders his or her decision.
(Prior Code, § 9-504)
§ 117.05 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before such license is issued, the applicant shall file a bond running to
the city conditioned for the faithful performance of all provisions of the
ordinances of the city concerning pawnbrokers, which bond must remain in effect
during all of the time that the applicant is engaged in such business. This
bond shall be in the sum as set in the bond schedule. To such bond shall be
attached a justification to the effect that the sureties are residents within
the county and each is worth the amount specified in such bond, over and above
all just debts and liabilities, and exclusive of property exempt from
execution. In lieu of the above-mentioned bond, there will be a surety bond of
a company licensed to do business in the state and otherwise acceptable.
(Prior Code, § 9-505)
§ 117.06 CONTENTS OF LICENSE; ONE LOCATION ONLY.
   (A)   The license issued herein shall state the name of the person to whom
issued, the street and number where such business is located, and other
appropriate information. Such license shall entitle the person receiving it to
do business at the place so designated in such license.
(Prior Code, § 9-506)
   (B)   A pawnbroker’s license shall authorize the operation of such business
only at the location described in such license.
(Prior Code, § 9-507) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   No person shall conduct or transact a pawnbroking business or pawnshop in
the city unless he or she shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the
business premises a current license certificate therefor relating to
pawnbrokers and pawnshops.
(Prior Code, § 9-508) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.08 PAWN TICKETS TO BE FURNISHED; SEPARATE TICKET FOR EACH ITEM.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker or keeper of a pawnshop shall furnish to the pledger
a printed receipt clearly showing the amount loaned with a specific detailed
description of the pledged property pawned or received, date or receipt
thereof, time and date of redemption and the name of the pledger. The
pawnbroker shall affix to each article or thing a copy of the pawn ticket given
to the pledger. All pawn tickets shall be inscribed with a number, of legible
characters, and all numbers shall correspond and shall be entered in the
records required herein to be kept.
(Prior Code, § 9-509)
   (B)   Every pawnbroker shall prepare and deliver to the pledger at the time
a separate pawn ticket for each and every item pledged with the information
thereon as prescribed herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-510)
§ 117.09 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep records on forms approved by the Police
Department, upon which shall be entered and legibly written in ink, in the
English language, at the time of each loan, receipt, or purchase of personal
property, an accurate account and complete description, to include:
      (1)   Model and serial numbers as well as any identifying marks, of the
goods, articles, or things pawned, purchased, or received;
      (2)   The number of the pawn ticket given to the pledger;
      (3)   The time and date redeemable;
      (4)   The time and date of pawning, receiving, or purchasing such goods,
articles, or things;
      (5)   The name, residence, age, sex, and race of the pledger or seller;
and
      (6)   Such other information as might be required by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   No entry on the forms shall be erased, obliterated, or defaced. The
records, as well as every article or thing pawned, pledged, or deposited, or
purchased, shall be open to the inspection of any police officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-511) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.10 DAILY REPORT TO POLICE.
   Every pawnbroker or pawnshop keeper in the city must, before the hour of 12:
00 p.m. noon of every day except Sunday make and deliver to the Chief of Police
or to the front desk at the Police Department one copy of the records described
in §
117.09 of this code covering each article or thing pawned or received by such
pawnbroker or pawnshop keeper during the 24-hour period ending as of the next
previous midnight. The report made on each Monday shall include all articles or
things pawned or received from and after the report made and delivered on the
Saturday preceding. If no article or thing has been pawned or received, a
report must be made to that effect.
(Prior Code, § 9-512) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.11 SAFEKEEPING OF PLEDGES AND ITEMS PURCHASED FOR RESALE.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall provide a safe place for keeping of the pledges
received by him or her and shall have sufficient insurance on the property held
in pledge, for the benefit of the pledgers, in case of destruction by fire or
other catastrophe.
   (B)   All persons, firms, or corporations engaged in the business of
pawnbrokers are hereby required to hold separate and apart, for a period of
three days, all goods or chattels purchased (except purchases made directly
from wholesalers or manufacturers) before mixing with other goods already in
stock in such establishment.
(Prior Code, § 9-513) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.12 FORFEITURE OF PAWN.
   The pawnbroker shall retain in his or her possession every pledge or pawn
for a period of not less than 30 days after the last payment of interest. If
the pledger fails or neglects to redeem the pawned property, or payment of
interest is not made within the 30 days, the pawnbroker may sell any such
property held for redemption.
(Prior Code, § 9-514)
§ 117.13 DISPOSAL OF GOODS DURING REDEMPTION PERIOD RESTRICTED.
   Prior to the expiation of the redemption period, no property received in
pledge by any pawnbroker shall be removed from his or her place of business,
except when redeemed by the owner thereof, or confiscated by any police
officer, when an item is actually stolen property and will be used as evidence.
If any police officer of the city shall put a hold on any article, goods, or
things that have been pawned or pledged, the pawnbroker or pawnshop keeper
shall not release or resell the articles, goods, or things until the Police
Department has released the items.
(Prior Code, § 9-515) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.14 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No pawnbroker shall employ any clerk or person under the age of 18 years to
receive any pledge or make any loan.
(Prior Code, § 9-516) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.15 TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS, INTOXICATED PERSONS, NARCOTICS ADDICTS, AND
FELONS.
   (A)   No pawnbroker, pawnshop keeper, or his or her servant or employee
shall receive any goods, articles, or things in pawn or pledge from, or
purchase from, or advance money upon any thing or article of value to, or have
any dealings respecting the title of property in the possession of, any person
under the age of 18 years without the written consent of the parents or
guardian of such person.
   (B)   No pawnbroker, pawnshop keeper, or his or her servant or employee
shall purchase, take, or receive in pledge or by gift or on deposit, or accept
possession of any article of property of or from any intoxicated person, from
any person appearing to be under the influence of intoxicating liquors or
drugs, from any person who is known as an habitual user of drugs of any kind,
or from any person who is known to have been previously convicted of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 9-517) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 118: TAXICAB LICENSES
Section
   
118.01   Taxicab defined
   
118.02   License
   
118.03   Insurance
§ 118.01 TAXICAB DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle operated on, over, or upon the streets of the
city, for the transportation of passengers for hire, and not operated over a
fixed route or on a fixed schedule.
(Prior Code, § 9-701)
§ 118.02 LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a taxicab within the city, unless such taxicab is
currently licensed in accord with the provisions of this code. The annual fee
for such license is for each taxicab as set by the Council by motion or
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 9-702) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.03 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Before any taxicab is operated upon the city streets, the owner
thereof shall file with the City Clerk a policy of public liability and
property damage insurance, issued by a good and solvent company authorized to
do business in the state, which policy shall cover the taxicab with liability
coverage of at least $100,000 for the injury or death of one person, $300,000
for the injury or death of more than one person, and $50,000 for property
damage, all in any one accident which occurs by reason of negligence or
carelessness in the operation of the taxicab. Such insurance policy must be
approved by the City Attorney, in writing on the policy.
   (B)   No taxicab shall be operated within the city unless the insurance
required by this section is in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 9-703) Penalty, see §
110.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS, HEALTH, WELFARE, AND MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
      
135.   TOBACCO; SMOKING IN PUBLIC
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Attempt to commit an offense
   
130.03   Aiding in an offense
   
130.04   Penalty not to excuse offense
   
130.05   Capacity to commit offense
   
130.06   Intoxication no defense
   
130.07   Witness, self incrimination
   
130.08   Nuisances
   
130.09   Conspiracy
   
130.10   Limitations of actions
   
130.11   State laws adopted
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFENSE. Whenever used in this title or in any chapter or ordinance of the
city means the unlawful act of doing, or failing to do, some particular act or
thing construed therein to be detrimental to the general welfare, morals,
peace, health, or safety of the inhabitants of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-103)
   VIOLATION. The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to
do any of the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully specified and
set forth by any provision of this title or any chapter hereof, or future
ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be an offense against the good
order, public peace, morals, health, proper government, and welfare of the city
and unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 10-104)
§ 130.02 ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself.
(Prior Code, § 10-101) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 AIDING IN AN OFFENSE.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 10-102) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 PENALTY NOT TO EXCUSE OFFENSE.
   The imposition of one penalty for any offense shall not excuse it or permit
it to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties, should the
offenses be continued or permitted to continue.
(Prior Code, § 10-105)
§ 130.05 CAPACITY TO COMMIT OFFENSE.
   All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except
those belonging to the classes following:
   (A)   Children under the age of seven years;
   (B)   Children over the age of seven years, but under the age of 14 years,
in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the act or neglect
charged against them, they knew its wrongfulness;
   (C)   Persons determined to be incompetent to stand trial;
   (D)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under an
ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent. But ignorance
of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation;
   (E)   Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof,
involuntarily; and
   (F)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while
under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors.
(Prior Code, § 10-106)
§ 130.06 INTOXICATION NO DEFENSE.
   No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether
from liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his or her
being in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 10-107)
§ 130.07 WITNESS, SELF INCRIMINATION.
   No person otherwise competent as a witness, shall be incapacitated, excused,
or disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any
section, chapter or title of this code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted on
the ground that his or her testimony might incriminate him or her, but the
testimony which may be given by such witness shall in no case be used against
him or her.
(Prior Code, § 10-108)
§ 130.08 NUISANCES.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet,
or sanction a nuisance on or about any premise or premises owned by him or her
or under his or her control at any place within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 10-109) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 CONSPIRACY.
   Any two or more persons assembled, or who shall assemble with the intent to
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence, and shall make
any movement therefor against the property of the city or the person or
property of another person, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-110) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
   The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be for one year from the date of the commission or omission, or
in cases involving fraud, deception, or deceit, for one year from the discovery
of the fraud, deception, or deceit, unless otherwise provided by the statutes
of the state.
(Prior Code, § 10-111)
§ 130.11 STATE LAWS ADOPTED.
   All of the misdemeanor provisions relating to crimes and offenses contained
in Titles 21, 37, and 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes (21 O.S., 37 O.S., and 63
O.S.) are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, § 10-112)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this title is punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-701)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Petit larceny prohibited
   
131.02   Injuring automobiles and other vehicles
   
131.03   Destroying or injuring buildings and other property
   
131.04   Placing signs on property of another
   
131.05   Throwing objects at persons or property
   
131.06   Tampering with or damaging public utilities
   
131.07   Unlawful intrusion upon land
   
131.08   Illegal entrance
   
131.09   Throwing advertising on street prohibited
   
131.10   Throwing injurious substances
   
131.11   Injury to plants and trees
   
131.12   Public streets and trees
   
131.13   Trespass prohibited
   
131.14   Parking on property of another
   
131.15   Interference with fire hydrants
   
131.16   Injurious substances on streets
Cross-reference:
   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 96
   Scavenging provisions, see
Ch. 51
   Traffic accident duties and reporting, see
Ch. 70
§ 131.01 PETIT LARCENY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not
exceeding $50 accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive
another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property from the
“person” of another.
   (B)   Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 10-201) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Petit larceny defined, see 21 O.S. §§ 1704, 1706
§ 131.02 INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest,
enter, occupy, loiter in, or injure any automobile or other vehicle belonging
to another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-202) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest
any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use;
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use.
(Prior Code, § 10-203) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.04 PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint,
mark, write, or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement,
bill placard, device, or inscription upon any public or private building,
fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other
property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-204) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.05 THROWING OBJECTS AT PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot, or other
object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he or she is
likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or
shoot any stone, shot, or other object at any person, vehicle, structure,
electric light, or other property of another (whether public or private). An
exception to this section is where the prohibited acts are done in defense of
oneself, of another person, or of property.
(Prior Code, § 10-205) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.06 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire,
or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire, or other conductor carrying gas,
water, cable, or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether
publicly or privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him or her to
consume or use the gas, water, cable service, or electricity without it passing
through the meter or any other way so as to evade payment therefor. It is also
unlawful for any person to damage, molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe,
line, wire, meter, or other part of any public utility, including any telegraph
or telephone system.
(Prior Code, § 10-206) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.07 UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND.
   It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of
land within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or
to erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty, or other structure without
such license or authority, or to place, erect, or occupy within the bounds of
any street, alley, or avenue of the city, any hut, shanty, hovel, or other
structure without authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10-207) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.08 ILLEGAL ENTRANCE.
   It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into
an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area, or
structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by
signs or any notice, or when the property, area, or structure is enclosed,
except when such entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed, or tacit
consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or
ordinance. It is unlawful for any person to remain on the property of another
after having been given notice, written or verbal, to leave by the owner or
person in charge.
(Prior Code, § 10-208) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Trespass prohibited, see §
131.13
§ 131.09 THROWING ADVERTISING ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave, or deposit, or cause to be
thrown, left, or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter.
(Prior Code, § 10-209) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.10 THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw
upon the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive
or other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or urine,
with intent to injure or harass the person, property, or animal.
(Prior Code, § 10-210) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.11 INJURY TO PLANTS AND TREES.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully and without authority cut, pull,
pluck, or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs, or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or willfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut, or otherwise injure or destroy any
gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or willfully injure or destroy
any stand, bench, seat, or other property situated upon such park or ground.
Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of
an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-211) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.12 PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Willfully or wantonly cut, deface, or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys, or public places
within the city;
      (2)   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or
any wire to any live tree;
      (3)   Dig any hole, ditch, or trench in any public street, road, avenue,
or alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to, or under
the supervision or control of the city;
      (4)   Take or remove any dirt, earth, or any substance from any street,
road, alley, or other public place in the city, or to cut, break, or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb, or gutter therein; or
      (5)   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission
from the City Inspector so to do.
   (B)   Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under
the supervision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-212) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.13 TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any property other than public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. The property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
      TRESPASS.
         (a)   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or
other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the
implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
         (b)   Remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in
lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or
the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of
the premises.
         (c)   The act of remaining on private property at any time other than
during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate
such premises by a police officer. The provisions of this division shall not
apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is
authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises
nor shall the provisions of this sentence apply unless hours of business
operations are posted upon such premises.
         (d)   The act of returning to private property before the posted time
of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been
directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this division.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private property.
(Prior Code, § 10-213) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.14 PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge or by
authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10-214) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.15 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city
utility personnel or a member of the Fire Department to open, turn on or off,
interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire
hydrant or stop cock belonging to the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant
by placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt, or other thing, or in any
other manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 10-215) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.16 INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES ON STREETS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to purposely or wantonly place,
throw, or cause to be placed or thrown, in or upon any thoroughfare in the
city, any broken glass, tacks, nails, pieces of iron, bottles, or other
substances or things that might cut or puncture any pneumatic tire when passing
over the same or cause injury to persons or animals.
(Prior Code, § 10-216) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
Section
   
132.01   Disturbing the peace
   
132.02   Fireworks regulated
   
132.03   Storing or keeping explosives; nitroglycerine prohibited
   
132.04   Carrying weapons; exceptions
   
132.05   Reckless conduct
   
132.06   Discharging firearms; exceptions
   
132.07   Loud noise or music prohibited; amplified sound
§ 132.01 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in division (B) below.
   (B)   Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a
manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      (1)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent, or insulting language or conduct;
      (2)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      (3)   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      (4)   Lewdly exposing one’s person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      (5)   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or
not at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      (6)   Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      (7)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by
rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by profane, improper, or loud language,
or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
      (8)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      (9)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by
profane, improper, or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      (10)   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably
disturb or alarm the public.
(Prior Code, § 10-301) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 FIREWORKS REGULATED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, FIREWORKS shall have the meaning
prescribed by state law, 68 O.S. § 1622.
   (B)   The manufacture, sale, furnishing, storage, discharge, firing, or use
of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city is hereby prohibited,
except as provided in
Chapter 113 of this code.
   (C)   No permit granted under
Chapter 113 shall be transferable.
   (D)   Any fireworks that remain unfired after a display authorized by this
section is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the
particular type of fireworks remaining.
   (E)   The Chief of the Fire Department or any police officer shall seize,
take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks
of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 10-303) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
   Fireworks license and business regulations, see
Chapter 113
Statutory reference:
   Bottlerockets prohibited by state law, see 68 O.S. § 1624
   State fireworks licenses required, see 68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.
§ 132.03 STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES; NITROGLYCERINE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or
substance of any kind without having first complied with the laws of the state
and ordinance of the city for the purpose of selling, storing, or keeping such
items.
(Prior Code, § 10-304) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.04 CARRYING WEAPONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to have concealed upon or about his or her
person any pistol, revolver, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switch-blade
knife, spring-type knife, metal knuckle, or any other danger or deadly weapon
or instrument except when doing so in line of duty or as may be permitted by
law.
(Prior Code, § 10-305) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   State Firearms Act, see 21 O.S. §§ 1289.1 et seq.
§ 132.05 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in
his or her possession any shot gun, rifle, or pistol, such actions consisting
of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great
bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety
of another person.
(Prior Code, § 10-306) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.06 DISCHARGING FIREARMS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any species of firearm, in the city except
when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of
oneself, of another person, or of property, or when otherwise authorized by law
or ordinance.
   (B)   It is unlawful to discharge a rifle, firearm, or BB gun in the city
except that any person, firm, or corporation operating a business such as an
amusement park, sporting goods store, or any other legal business wherein
firearms or BB guns are sold, may secure a permit for the discharge of firearms
or BB guns in their place of business, upon the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   The person, firm, or corporation desiring to secure a permit for
the discharge of firearms or BB guns within their place of business, shall file
a written application with the Chief of Police, stating the address of their
place of business, the type of firearms or BB guns to be discharged in the
business, and requesting that the place of business be inspected by the Chief
of Police as to the safety of the building and operation;
      (2)   The Chief of Police, after receiving the written request, within
ten days after receiving the request, shall inspect the building or premises of
the applicant to determine the safety of the building and operation of the
business. If upon inspection of the premises, building, or operation of the
business, and in his or her sole discretion that it is not detrimental or a
health hazard to the citizens of the city, he or she may allow the applicant to
have a permit for discharging of firearms and/or BB guns in the place of
business. If the Chief of Police deems that it is unsafe for the discharging of
firearms and/or BB guns for any reason, then he or she shall deny the
application;
      (3)   A copy of the application, and the granting of the permit or the
dental of the permit, shall and be filed with the City Clerk; and
      (4)   If the permit is granted, the Chief of Police may at any time
thereafter deem that the operation is not a safe operation and hazardous to the
citizens of the city, at which time he or she shall have the right to
immediately terminate and cancel the permit.
(Prior Code, § 10-307) (Ord. 1072, passed 1-12-1982) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Throwing or shooting at persons or property, see §
131.05
§ 132.07 LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC PROHIBITED; AMPLIFIED SOUND.
   It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part
of the city by operating, having operated, or permitting to be operated, any
contrivance, whether electric or not, any motor vehicle, or any other device,
with or without a loud speaker, in such a manner as to emit loud music, noise,
or words. However, this section shall not prohibit religious bodies from
playing chimes, bells, carillons or other religious music.
(Prior Code, § 10-308) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS, HEALTH, WELFARE, AND MORALS
Section
   
133.01   Assault and battery prohibited
   
133.02   Public intoxication and drinking prohibited
   
133.03   Possession of intoxicating and nonintoxicating beverages by persons
under the age of 21
   
133.04   Intoxicating liquors
   
133.05   Permitting or allowing gatherings where minors are consuming alcoholic
beverages
   
133.06   Marijuana prohibited
   
133.07   Prostitution
   
133.08   Maintaining or leasing a disorderly house
   
133.09   Residents and visitors to disorderly house
   
133.10   Nudity; improper dress; indecent exposure
   
133.11   Prohibited obscene conduct
   
133.12   Vagrancy
   
133.13   Curfew for minors
   
133.14   Sleeping in public
   
133.15   Gambling prohibited; being in gambling place
   
133.16   Harmful deception
   
133.17   False or bogus checks
   
133.18   Swindling unlawful
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ASSAULT. Any intentional, willful, or unlawful attempt or offer with
force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another.
      BATTERY. Any intentional, willful or unlawful use of force or violence
upon the person of another, or by making any physical contact with another
without consent.
   (B)   Prohibition. It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and
battery within the jurisdiction of the city. Any person committing an assault
or an assault and battery within the jurisdiction of the city, shall be guilty
of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-501) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street,
alley, or other public place in the city in a state of intoxication.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a STATE OF INTOXICATION means the
condition in which a person is under the influence of any intoxicating,
nonintoxicating, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors, or of any narcotic or
drug, to such extent as to deprive the person of his or her full physical or
mental power, or in which a person is a danger to himself or herself or others.
(Prior Code, § 10-401) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING AND NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES BY PERSONS
UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any intoxicating or nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage while such
person is upon any public street, road, or highway or in any public place
within the city limits.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the age of
21 years to permit such person to be in possession of an intoxicating alcoholic
beverage.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section INTOXICATING BEVERAGE and
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGE shall be as defined in §§
111.01 and
111.45.
(Prior Code, § 10-402) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   It is unlawful:
   (A)   For any person to barter, sell, give away, or otherwise furnish to
another any intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind
except as permitted by law;
   (B)   To have in possession or under control any intoxicating or
nonintoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law, or to transport
or in any manner convey from place to place in the city any intoxicating or
nonintoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law;
   (C)   To loiter in a place where intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor is
sold, bartered, given away, or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
   (D)   To keep, maintain, aid, or abet in keeping or maintaining a place
where intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away, or
otherwise furnished in violation of law.
(Prior Code, § 10-403) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits or wine, from
whatever source by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and LOW POINT BEER as
defined herein.
      GATHERING. A party, gathering, or event, where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
      INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. Includes beverages containing more than 3.2%
alcohol by weight.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
the court.
      LOW POINT BEER. Means and includes beverages containing more than 0.5%
alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight, including, but not
limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt, or similar
products.
      MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent,
or stepparent of another person.
      PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
      RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement,
fire, or emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding
to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributable to such response(s);
         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
         (c)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged,
and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at,
or leaving the scene of a gathering; and
         (d)   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
   (B)   Consumption of alcohol by minor in public place, place open to public,
or place not open to public. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful
for any minor to:
      (1)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public,
alcoholic beverages; or
      (2)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage;
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where
minors consuming alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
      (1)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the
gathering by inspecting driver’s licenses or other government issued
identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages
while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the
gathering.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in division (C)(1) above.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her
parent or legal guardian.
      (4)   This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the State
of Oklahoma to dispense alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   Reservation of legal options. Violations of this section may be
prosecuted by the city criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as provided
by this code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs
associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures
provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the
authority of police officers or private citizens to make arrests for any
criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall
they limit the city’s ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense
arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this
section.
   (E)   Local authority. This section shall not apply where prohibited or
preempted by state or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 3-301) (Ord. 09-03, passed 7-28-2008) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 MARIJUANA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to:
      (1)   Manufacture, grow, harvest, cultivate, propagate, plant, compound,
convert, produce, process, test, pack, repack, store, distribute, dispense, or
possess with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marijuana;
      (2)   Use, have, inject, ingest, inhale, otherwise introduce into the
human body or possess marijuana;
      (3)   Use or possess drug paraphernalia or to deliver, possess, or
manufacture any such paraphernalia singly or in conjunction with any other
person; or
      (4)   Appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or
other public place in the city while under the influence of a controlled
dangerous substance or marijuana;
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, MARIJUANA shall have the meaning
prescribed by 63 O.S. § 2-101. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA shall have the meaning
prescribed by 63 O.S. § 2-101, including the factors to determine in 63 O.S. §
2-101.1.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to any marijuana lawfully obtained or
authorized by valid prescription order from a licensed physician while acting
in the course of his or her professional practice.
(Prior Code, § 10-404) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.07 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LETTING PREMISES FOR PROSTITUTION. The granting of the right of use or
the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice
of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with that
knowledge.
      PROSTITUTION. The giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for
hire or money.
      SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTES. The soliciting, inviting, inducing,
directing, or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of
promoting prostitution.
   (B)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Be a prostitute;
      (2)   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      (3)   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      (4)   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      (5)   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution; or
      (6)   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of
prostitution in the limits of city.
(Prior Code, § 10-405) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.08 MAINTAINING OR LEASING A DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   A DISORDERLY HOUSE means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the
people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
      (1)   The sale, distribution, possession, or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession, or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      (2)   The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of
this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession, or use of alcoholic
beverages including beer containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume;
      (3)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state
statute or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for
purposes of prostitution; or
      (4)   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
(Prior Code, § 10-406)
   (B)   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet, or assist in keeping
and maintaining a disorderly house.
   (C)   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership, or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home,
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise
permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house,
and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
(Prior Code, § 10-407) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.09 RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly
house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have
the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by
circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers
in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-408) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.10 NUDITY; IMPROPER DRESS; INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
   (B)   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent, or
lewd dress; or
   (C)   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
(Prior Code, § 10-409) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.11 PROHIBITED OBSCENE CONDUCT.
   (A)    Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC. The matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
      DISSEMINATE. To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
      KNOWINGLY. Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
      MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written
material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording,
transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other
articles, equipment, or machines.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
      OBSCENE. To the average person applying contemporary community standards:
         (a)   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e. shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion;
         (b)   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by 21 O.S.; or
         (c)   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
      PERFORMANCE. Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other
exhibition performed before an audience.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
      PROMOTE. To cause, permit, procure, counsel, or assist.
      SERVICE TO PATRONS. The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages; including but not limited to
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bar tending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining.
(Prior Code, § 10-410)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Knowingly disseminate, sell, offer for sale, publish, display,
distribute, make available to the public or buy any obscene material;
      (2)   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements, and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
      (3)   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public;
or
      (4)   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
         (a)   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region, or pubic hair region;
         (b)   Any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region, or
pubic hair region;
         (c)   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
         (d)   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
   (C)   Each complete or partial display or other material exhibition of any
motion picture film or
other material shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to a projectionist, assistant projectionist,
usher, or cashier provided that such person has no financial interest in the
motion picture theater so long as person is not acting as director or manager
of the theater.
(Prior Code, § 10-411) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.12 VAGRANCY.
   It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes
of this section, a VAGRANT means any person who loiters or remains in or
wanders about, a public or private place for any of the following purposes:
   (A)   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice, or other gambling
paraphernalia;
   (B)   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution
or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
   (C)   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any
building, property, or automobile of another;
   (D)   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting, or defacing any
property of another;
   (E)   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
   (F)   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that this
section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious,
charitable, or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such
organizations;
   (G)   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading, or otherwise
exchanging, procuring, or making available illegal drugs or contraband; or
   (H)   For the purpose of communicating with persons confined in the county
jail.
(Prior Code, § 10-412) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.13 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Citation. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
“Ordinance regulating the presence and conduct of minors on streets and public
places.”
   (B)    Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor as:
         (a)   A natural or adoptive parent;
         (b)   A legal guardian;
         (c)   A person who stands in loco parentis; or
         (d)   A person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A PUBLIC PLACE shall include
but not be limited to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, café,
theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center, and any other place devoted to
amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the
front or immediate area of the above.
      REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry, and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using
the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going
home.
      STREET. A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel, or in the case of
a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term STREET includes the legal
right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic lanes, the
curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other
grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a STREET.
      TIME OF NIGHT. The prevailing standard of time, whether central standard
time or central daylight saving time, generally observed at that hour by the
public.
      YEAR OF AGE. Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth to (but
not including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth birthday, making it
clear that 17 OR LESS YEARS OF AGE is herein treated as equivalent to the
phrase UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.
   (C)   Curfew times. It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or less years of
age (under 18) to be or remain in or upon the streets within the city at night
during the period ending 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
      (1)   At 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday; and
      (2)   At 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday nights.
   (D)   Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases a minor on a city
street during the nocturnal hours for which division (C) above is intended to
provide the maximum limits of regulation shall not, however, be considered in
violation of this section:
      (1)   When accompanied by a parent of such minor;
      (2)   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor
to take the parent’s
place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purpose
within a specified area;
      (3)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly.
Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise by possessing a
written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned, by a parent of
such minor and with their home address and telephone number, specifying when,
and where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night (during
hours when this section is otherwise applicable to the minor) in the exercise
of a First Amendment right specified in such communication;
      (4)   In case of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in the
minor’s possession a written communication signed by the minor, countersigned
by a parent of such minor evidencing their home address and telephone number,
and establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and
destination;
      (5)   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not communicating an
objection to the police officer;
      (6)   When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes
of the termination of) a school activity, or an activity of a religious or
voluntary association, provided the minor has a written communication in the
minor’s possession, countersigned by the parent indicating the home address and
telephone number, the purpose for the event, when, where, and in what manner
the minor will be on the streets at night;
      (7)   When authorized, by a regulation issued by the City Council, in
other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to
necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on
an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the City
Council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance
to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies
such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved not to extend more than 30
minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason for
finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the
public interest and the purposes of this section;
      (8)   When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly
identifying the minor, the addresses of his or her home and his or her place of
employment and his or her hours of employment or carries a valid proof of
employment which may include the latest payroll receipt not over 30 days old;
or
      (9)   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement
through the city, particularly on normal routes.
   (E)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent having
legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to
allow, such minor to be or remain upon any city street under circumstances not
constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this section.
The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent’s legal
custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up
to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
minor.
   (F)   Duty of police. A police officer of the city, upon finding or having
attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this
section, normally shall take the minor to the city police station, or other
place designated by the Chief of Police, where a parent shall immediately be
notified to come for such minor, whereupon they shall be interrogated. This is
intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant
facts, and to centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial, and uniform enforcement, and recording,
thus making available experienced supervisory personnel, the best of facilities
and access to information and records. In the absence of convincing evidence
such as a birth certificate, a police officer on the street shall in the first
instance use his or her best judgment in determining age.
      (1)   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to
a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example a minor
of tender age near home whose identity may readily be ascertained or are known.
      (2)   In any event such police officer shall within 24 hours file a
written report with the Chief of Police, or shall participate to the extent of
the information for which he or she is responsible; the report shall be treated
for purposes of juvenile records in accordance with state statutes.
      (3)   When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be
released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or
fail to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the
juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police
regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may
temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor, or other person who will on
behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of a parent.
      (4)   In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police
shall cause to be personally
delivered or by certified mail, send to a parent written notice of the
violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full
enforcement of this section including enforcement of parental responsibility
and of applicable penalties.
   (G)   Allowing minors in public place in violation of curfew. It shall be
unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to
knowingly allow, permit or suffer the presence of minors in violation of the
curfew established by this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-413) (Ord. 91-1102, passed 8-27-1991; Ord. 91-1104, passed
10-8-1991) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.14 SLEEPING IN PUBLIC.
   It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and
6:00 a.m., to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on any
property of another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or person
in charge of such place.
(Prior Code, § 10-414) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.15 GAMBLING PROHIBITED; BEING IN GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or agent or
employee thereof, to do any of the following:
      (1)   To play, to open, or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or
conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage, or other game played with dice, cards, or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other thing of value;
      (2)   To set up, operate, or permit to be operated, any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit, or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
      (3)   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
      (4)   To knowingly permit his or her or its premises, houses, lot, or
other property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful
in this section.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play
any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the
element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks, or
any other representatives of value.
(Prior Code, § 10-416)
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to be about in the immediate vicinity
where a person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a
slot machine or other device, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 10-417) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit gambling, 11 O.S. § 22-108
§ 133.16 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm, or injury of the person deceived or
of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 10-418) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.17 FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS.
   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain
or attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money, property
or valuable thing of the value of $50 or less by means of any false or bogus
check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious
coin. The term FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK shall include checks or orders given for
money or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the
maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing,
issuing or delivering of a check, draft, or order, payment of which is refused
by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the
knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with, such bank or other
depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due
thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or order shall be
presented for payment within 30 days after same is delivered and accepted.
(Prior Code, § 10-419) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.18 SWINDLING UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful to get money or property from any other person or persons or
businesses under false pretenses, deception, cheating, or by any other
fraudulent act.
(Prior Code, § 10-420) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
133.05 shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished for violation of a class A offense, with a
fine of $500, plus all court costs and statutory penalties.
(Prior Code, § 3-301)
   (C)   Violations of §
133.13 are punishable as follows:
      (1)   If after the warning notice pursuant to §
133.13 of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates §
133.13(E) (in connection with a second violation by the minor), this shall be
treated as an offense by the parent. The penalty upon a plea of guilty, nolo
contendere, or finding of guilt shall be punished as provided in §
10.99;
      (2)   Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of §
133.13 more than one time shall be reported to the juvenile court for the
treatment, supervision, and rehabilitation of such minor; or
      (3)   A like procedure, before the juvenile authorities, shall be
followed in any case where the imposing of a fine or fines upon a parent shall
not be effective, or where for any other reason the provisions of this section
cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-413)
(Ord. 91-1102, passed 8-27-1991; Ord. 91-1104, passed 10-8-1991; Ord. 09-03,
passed 7-28-2008)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
134.01   Resisting an officer
   
134.02   Refusing or failing to assist an officer
   
134.03   Operator of motor vehicle eluding police officer
   
134.04   Assault or battery upon police or other law officer
   
134.05   Resisting public officials
   
134.06   Rescuing prisoners
   
134.07   Escape of prisoners
   
134.08   Impersonating an officer or employee
   
134.09   False alarms
   
134.10   False representation to an officer
   
134.11   Removal of barricades
§ 134.01 RESISTING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   It is unlawful to resist, oppose, or assault, or in any way interfere
with a police officer or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the
officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his or her official
duties within the limits of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to
assist such other person to flee, escape, or evade an officer seeking to make
an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of
or in front of an approaching officer.
   (C)   Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to,
or obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity, and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to
know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting
in his or her official capacity.
   (D)   The words OBSTRUCTION OF shall, in addition to their common meaning,
include:
      (1)   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him or her and after notice is given that he or she is under
arrest;
      (2)   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and
before he or she is under arrest; or
      (3)   Refusal by the arrested party to give his or her name and make his
or her identity known to the arresting officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-601) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.02 REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER.
   (A)   An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to
suppress a riot, affray, or unlawful assembly, may call upon person or persons
to assist him or her in making such arrest, executing such process, or
suppressing such riot, affray, or unlawful assembly.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an
officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so.
(Prior Code, § 10-602) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.03 OPERATOR OF MOTOR VEHICLE ELUDING POLICE OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual
and audible signal, a red light, and a siren from a police officer driving a
motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car, directing the
operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, and who willfully increases his
or her speed or extinguishes his or her lights in an attempt to elude such
police officer, or who does elude such police officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-611) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.04 ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER LAW OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly commit any assault, battery, or
assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the
law while in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-603) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.05 RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
   (A)   Resist, oppose, or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other police
officer, the Municipal Judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his or her official duties;
   (B)   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official duties; or
   (C)   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or
indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-610) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.06 RESCUING PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty,
rescue, or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner or prisoners, from any
officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the
city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner
in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either before or after
conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(Prior Code, § 10-604) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.07 ESCAPE OF PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of
confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of
the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison, or custody.
(Prior Code, § 10-605) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.08 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee of the
city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions, or
powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to
do so.
(Prior Code, § 10-606) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.09 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in
any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department or Police
Department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident, or other emergency or knowingly to cause the Fire
Department or Police Department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run.
(Prior Code, § 10-607) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.10 FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent or
employee thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any
officer, employee, or agency of the city government in any official application
to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to
commit perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-608) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.11 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk, or other area.
(Prior Code, § 10-609) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: TOBACCO; SMOKING IN PUBLIC
Section
Smoking in Public
   
135.01   Title, authority, and purpose
   
135.02   Definition
   
135.03   Smoking in buildings
   
135.04   Smoking rooms; smoking spaces
   
135.05   Restaurants
   
135.06   Nursing facilities
   
135.07   Educational facilities
   
135.08   Private residence
   
135.09   State-owned vehicles
   
135.10   Posting signs; other owner responsibility
Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco
   
135.25   Title and authority
   
135.26   Purpose
   
135.27   Definitions
   
135.28   Furnishing, giving, or sale of tobacco products to minors
   
135.29   Receipt of tobacco products by a minor
   
135.30   Proper signage required
   
135.31   Notice to retail employees
   
135.32   Limited access to vending machines
   
135.33   Distribution of tobacco product samples
   
135.34   Transfer of any material or device used in smoking, chewing or
consumption of tobacco to minors prohibited
Sale and Access to Tobacco
   
135.45   Sale of tobacco products except in original sealed package
   
135.46   No public access of tobacco
Enforcement
   
135.60   Restrictions on manner of enforcement
   
135.61   Increase of fines; fee schedule
 
   
135.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Smoking prohibited near fireworks stands, see §
113.13
SMOKING IN PUBLIC
§ 135.01 TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Title and authority. This subchapter shall be known as the Hobart
Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplaces Ordinance. This section is
enacted pursuant to the municipal powers granted by the Constitution of the
State of Oklahoma and 11 O.S. § 14-101.
   (B)   Purpose. The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public
nuisance and dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such
possession is in any indoor place used by or open to the public, public
transportation, or any indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by
law.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDOOR WORKPLACE. Any indoor place of employment or employment-type service
for or at the request of another individual or individuals, or any public or
private entity, whether part-time or full-time and whether for compensation or
not. Such services shall include, without limitation, any service performed by
an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner, proprietor,
manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant, or
volunteer. An indoor workplace includes work areas, employee lounges,
restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any
other spaces used or visited by employees, and all space between a floor and
ceiling that is predominately or totally enclosed by walls or windows,
regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like.
The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to such indoor workplace at any
given time, whether or not work is being performed.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 135.03 SMOKING IN BUILDINGS.
   (A)   State buildings. All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated
by this state shall be designated as nonsmoking; provided, however, each
building may have one designated smoking room. As used in this paragraph,
BUILDINGS shall not include up to 25% of any hotel or motel rooms rented to
guests if the rooms are properly ventilated so that smoke is not circulated to
nonsmoking areas.
   (B)   County buildings. All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or
operated by a county government, at the discretion of the county governing
body, may be designated as entirely nonsmoking or may be designated as
nonsmoking with one designated smoking room.
   (C)   City buildings. All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated
by this city, shall be entirely nonsmoking.
   (D)   Smoking rooms. A smoking room as provided for in divisions (A) and (B)
above:
      (1)   Shall not be used for the conduct of public business;
      (2)   Shall be in a location which is fully enclosed, directly exhausted
to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape when a door
is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. No
smoking exhaust shall be located within 25 feet of any entrance, exit, or air
intake; and
      (3)   Shall be verified for compliance with the provisions of this
division (D) by the Department of Central Services for state buildings or by a
county entity designated by the Board of County Commissioners for county
buildings.
   (E)   Smoking near building entrance or exit. No smoking shall be allowed
within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of any building specified in divisions
(A), (B), or (C) above.
   (F)   Bar exemptions. The restrictions provided in this section shall not
apply to stand-alone bars, stand-alone taverns, and cigar bars. STAND-ALONE
BAR, STAND-ALONE TAVERN, and CIGAR BAR mean an establishment that derives more
than 60% of its gross receipts, subject to verification by competent authority,
from the sale of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer and no person under 21
years of age is admitted, except for members of a musical band employed or
hired as provided in 37A O.S. § 6-114(A)(1) and that is not located within, and
does not share any common entryway or common indoor area with, any other
enclosed indoor workplace, including a restaurant.
   (G)   Other exemptions. The restrictions provided in this section shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being
operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games;
      (2)   Up to 25% of the guest rooms at a hotel or other lodging
establishment;
      (3)   Retail tobacco stores predominately engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption
on the premises;
      (4)   Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or
the immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the
workplace, and the workplace has only incidental public access. INCIDENTAL
PUBLIC ACCESS means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who
is not an employee, present at the business to transact business or make a
delivery. It does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for
any part of their business;
      (5)   Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access;
      (6)   Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers;
      (7)   Workplaces within private residences, except that smoking shall not
be allowed inside any private residence that is used as a licensed child care
facility during hours of operation;
      (8)   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to
the research or treatment;
      (9)   A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the armed forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) when such
facility is utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the
conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event or
activity which is open to the public; and
      (10)   Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking shall
not be allowed within 15 feet of any exterior public doorway or any air intake
of a restaurant.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.04 SMOKING ROOMS; SMOKING SPACES.
   (A)   Smoking rooms. An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so may
elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for cleaning
and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking, provided
each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the outside in
such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area. No
exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within 15 feet of any entrance,
exit, or air intake.
   (B)   Smoking spaces. If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in
§
135.03(F) or (G) or in a smoking room pursuant to division (A) above, such
smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space or, if it
shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking space shall be
fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside, with no air from the smoking
space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative air pressure so
that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a door to an
adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room shall not be
exhausted within 15 feet of any entrance, exit, or air intake. Any employer may
choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including being totally smoke free.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.05 RESTAURANTS.
   Restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking areas and
designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such designated
smoking rooms which shall be in a location which is fully enclosed, directly
exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape
when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the
building. No exhaust from such room shall be located within 25 feet of any
entrance, exit, or air intake. Such room shall be subject to verification for
compliance with the provisions of this section by the State Department of
Health.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.06 NURSING FACILITIES.
   Except as specifically provided in the Smoking in Public Places and Indoor
Workplaces Act, being 63 O.S. §§ 1-1521 et seq., no person shall smoke in a
nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act, being 63 O.S.
§§ 1-1901 et seq., or in a child care facility licensed pursuant to the
Oklahoma Child Care Facilities Licensing Act, being 10 O.S. §§ 401 et seq. A
nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act may designate
smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be fully
enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative air
pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is
recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.07 EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, an educational
facility which offers an early childhood education program or in which children
in grades kindergarten through 12 are educated shall prohibit smoking, the use
of snuff, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco product in the
buildings and on the grounds of the facility by all persons including, but not
limited to, full-time, part-time, and contract employees, during the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., during the school session, or when class or any program
established for students is in session.
   (B)   Career and technology centers may designate smoking areas outside of
buildings, away from general traffic areas, and completely out of sight of
children under 18 years of age, for use by adults attending training courses,
session, meetings, or seminars.
   (C)   An educational facility may designate smoking areas outside the
buildings for use of adults during certain activities or functions, including,
but not limited to, athletic contests.
   (D)   For purposes of this section,  EDUCATIONAL FACILITY means a building
owned, leased, or under the control of a public or private school system,
college, or university.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit educational
facilities from having more restrictive policies regarding smoking and the use
of other tobacco products in the buildings or on the grounds of the facility.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.08 PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   A private residence is not a PUBLIC PLACE within the meaning of this
subchapter except that areas in a private residence that are used as a licensed
child care facility during hours of operation are PUBLIC PLACES within the
meaning of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 135.09 STATE-OWNED VEHICLES.
    Smoking is prohibited in all vehicles owned by the State of Oklahoma and
all of its agencies and instrumentalities.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.10 POSTING SIGNS; OTHER OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Posting requirements. The person who owns or operates a place where
smoking or tobacco use is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a
sign or decal, at least four inches by two inches in size, at each entrance to
the building indicating that the place is smoke-free or tobacco-free.
   (B)   Responsibility for posting signs. Responsibility for posting signs or
decals shall be as follows:
      (1)   In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is
in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible;
      (2)   In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility involved shall be responsible; and
      (3)   In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility shall be responsible.
   (C)   Additional owner responsibility. To prevent smoking in public places,
the state or local government agency or the person who owns or operates a
public place shall, at a minimum, in addition to posting the required signage,
ask smokers to refrain from smoking upon observation of anyone violating the
provisions of this Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplaces Act.
(Prior Code, § 10-421) (Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
§ 135.25 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Hobart Prevention of Youth Access to
Tobacco Ordinance. This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the municipal powers
granted by the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma and 11 O.S. § 14-101.
(Prior Code, § 10-430) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
§ 135.26 PURPOSE.
   Tobacco use by minors is a dangerous activity. The purpose of this
subchapter is to protect the public health and welfare by preventing youth
access to tobacco.
(Prior Code, § 10-431) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
§ 135.27 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18
years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the
individual and appears on its face to be valid.
   SAMPLE. A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost
for the purpose of promoting the product.
   SAMPLING. The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller checks, by means of a
transaction scan device, the validity of a driver’s license or other
government-issued photo identification.
   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of devices
used at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s license or other government-issued photo identification.
(Prior Code, § 10-432) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
§ 135.28 FURNISHING, GIVING, OR SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any manner
any tobacco product to another person who is under 18 years of age, or to
purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person.
Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for an employee under the age
of 18 years of age to handle tobacco products when required in the performance
of the employee’s duties.
   (B)   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall
demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary
person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser
might be less than 18 years of age.
   (C)   If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco
products has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient
who is not less than 18 years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof
of age shall not constitute a violation of division (B) above.
   (D)   (1)   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably
relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to
this section. A person cited for violating this section shall be deemed to have
reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not be found guilty
of such violation, if such person proves that:
         (a)   The individual who purchased or received the tobacco product
presented a driver’s license or other government-issued photo identification
purporting to establish that such individual was 18 years of age or older; and
         (b)   The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the
driver’s license or other government-issued photo identification presented by
such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan
device.
      (2)   Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any
person cited for a violation of this section if such person failed to exercise
reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture
appearing on the driver’s license or other government-issued photo
identification was that of the individual who presented it. The availability of
the defense described in this subsection does not affect the availability of
any other defense under any other provision of law.
   (E)   If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which
tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the
violation and shall be subject to fine as set forth in §
135.99. Each violation by any employee of an owner of a store licensed to sell
tobacco products shall be deemed a violation against the owner for purposes of
a license suspension pursuant to division (B) above. An owner of a store
licensed to sell tobacco products shall not be deemed to be in violation of
this section for any acts constituting a violation by any person, when the
violation occurs prior to actual employment of the person by the store owner or
the violation occurs at a location other than the owner’s retail store. For
purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or
business operations in multiple locations, for any violations of divisions (A)
or (B) above, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a
separate entity.
(Prior Code, § 10-433) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.29 RECEIPT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY A MINOR.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person who is less than 18 years of age to
purchase, receive, or accept receipt of, or have in their possession, a tobacco
product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which
is false or fraudulent, or not actually his or her own, for the purpose of
purchasing or receiving any tobacco product. Provided, however, it shall not be
unlawful for an employee who is less than 18 years of age to handle such
tobacco products when required in the performance of such employee’s duties.
   (B)   When a person violates division (A) above, he or she shall be guilty
of an offense and subject to the provisions of §
135.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-434) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.30 PROPER SIGNAGE REQUIRED.
   Every person who sells or displays tobacco products at retail shall post
conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign, as specified
by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission, stating the
following: “IT’S THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18
YEARS OF AGE.” The sign shall also provide the toll-free number operated by the
Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission for the purpose of
reporting violations of the Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act. The
notice required by this section shall be the only notice required to be posted
or maintained in any store that sells tobacco products at retail.
(Prior Code, § 10-435) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.31 NOTICE TO RETAIL EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products at a
retail store shall notify each individual employed by that person as a retail
sales clerk that state and local law:
      (1)   Prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products to any
person under 18 years of age and the purchase or receipt of tobacco products by
any person under 18 years of age; and
      (2)   Requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser
or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance
that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be less than 18 years of age.
   (B)   This notice shall be provided before the individual commences work as
a retail sales clerk. The individual shall signify that he or she has received
the requisite notice by reading and signing a notice stating the following:
   “I understand that state law prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco
products to persons less than 18 years of age and out-of-package sales, and
requires proof of age of purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would
conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser or recipient
may be under 18 years of age. I promise, as a condition of my employment, to
obey the law. I understand that violations by me may be punishable by fines,
suspension or non-issuance of my driver’s license. In addition, I understand
that violations by me may subject the store owner to fines or license
suspension.”
(Prior Code, § 10-436) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.32 LIMITED ACCESS TO VENDING MACHINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco products through a
vending machine unless the vending machine is located:
   (A)   In areas of factories, businesses, offices, or other places that are
not open to the public; and
   (B)   In places that are open to the public, but to which persons under 18
years of age are not admitted.
(Prior Code, § 10-437) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.33 DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT SAMPLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute tobacco
products or product samples to any person under 18 years of age.
   (B)   No person shall distribute tobacco products or product samples in or
on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is within 300 feet of any
playground, school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily
by persons under 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 10-438) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.34 TRANSFER OF ANY MATERIAL OR DEVICE USED IN SMOKING, CHEWING OR
CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any manner to
another person who is under 18 years of age any material or device used in the
smoking, chewing, or other method of consumption of tobacco, including
cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, and other
items designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
(Prior Code, § 10-442) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
SALE AND ACCESS TO TOBACCO
§ 135.45 SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL SEALED PACKAGE.
    It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original,
sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
(Prior Code, § 10-439) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.46 NO PUBLIC ACCESS OF TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for sale
tobacco products in any manner that allows public access to the tobacco product
without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco product or an
employee or the owner of the store. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to retail stores which do not admit into the store persons under 18 years
of age.
(Prior Code, § 10-440) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 135.60 RESTRICTIONS ON MANNER OF ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any conviction for a violation of any section within §§
135.25 through
135.34,
135.45, and
135.46, and any negative results from compliance checks performed by a police
officer pursuant to division (C) below, shall be reported in writing to the
ABLE Commission within 30 days of such conviction or compliance check. Such
reports shall be compiled in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining second or subsequent violations, both
the offenses penalized by the ABLE Commission as administrative fines and the
offenses penalized by the Municipality and reported to the ABLE Commission
shall be considered together in such determination.
   (C)   Persons under 18 years of age may be enlisted by the city to assist in
conducting compliance checks and enforcement; provided, such persons may be
used to test compliance only if written parental consent has been provided and
the testing is conducted under the direct supervision of the ABLE Commission or
conducted by another law enforcement agency if such agency has given written
notice to the ABLE Commission in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
This division (C) shall not apply to the use of persons under 18 years of age
to test compliance if the test is being conducted by or on behalf of a retailer
of cigarettes, as defined in 68 O.S. § 301, at any location the retailer of
cigarettes is authorized to sell cigarettes. Use of persons under 18 years of
age to test compliance shall be unlawful and punishable by assessment of an
administrative fine of $100.
(Prior Code, § 10-441) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
§ 135.61 INCREASE OF FINES; FEE SCHEDULE.
   All fines set forth within §
135.99 may be increased, to the extent allowed by state law, by resolution. It
is not necessary to amend §§
135.25 through
135.34,
135.45, and
135.46 each time the municipality deems it timely to increase fines and fees. A
resolution may be adopted by the City Council and filed accordingly. The Chief
of Police shall maintain a current schedule of all fees allowed under §§
135.25 through
135.34,
135.45, and
135.46 in the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 10-443) (Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly violates any provision of §§
135.01 through
135.10, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100.
(Prior Code, § 10-421)
   (B)   (1)   When a person violates §
135.28(A) or (B), he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine as follows:
         (a)   Not more than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not more than $200 for the second offense within a two-year
period following the first offense;
         (c)   Not more than $300 for a third offense within a two-year period
following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty, the store’s
license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for a period not exceeding 30
days; or
         (d)   Not more than $300 for a fourth or subsequent offense within a
two-year period following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty,
the store’s license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for a period not
exceeding 60 days.
      (2)   Pursuant to state law, when it has been determined by a Municipal
Court that a penalty shall include a license suspension, the ABLE Commission
will notify the Oklahoma Tax Commission, and the Tax Commission will suspend
the store’s license to sell tobacco products at the location where the offense
occurred for the period of time prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
      (3)   Upon failure to pay fines within 90 days of the assessment of such
fine, the following actions shall occur:
         (a)   Upon failure of the employee to pay the fine within 90 days of
the day of the assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall notify
the Department of Public Safety and the Department will, pursuant to state law,
suspend or not issue a driver’s license to the employee until proof of payment
has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
         (b)   Upon failure of a store owner to pay the administrative fine
within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall
notify the Oklahoma Tax Commission and the Tax Commission shall suspend the
store’s license to sell tobacco products until proof of payment has been
furnished to the Oklahoma Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 10-433)
   (C)   (1)   When a person violates §
135.29, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of:
         (a)   Not to exceed $100 for a first offense; and
         (b)   Not to exceed $200 for a second or subsequent offense within a
one-year period following the first offense.
      (2)   Upon failure of the individual to pay such fine within 90 days of
the day of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall notify the Department of
Public Safety and, by operation of state law, the Department shall suspend or
not issue a driver’s license to the individual until proof of payment has been
furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 10-434)
   (D)   When a person violates §
135.30, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $50 for each day a violation occurs. Each
day a violation is continuing shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-435)
   (E)   (1)   When a person violates any provision of §
135.33, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of:
         (a)   Not more than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not more than $200 for the second offense; and
         (c)   Not more than $300 for a third or subsequent offense.
      (2)   Upon failure of any individual to pay an administrative fine within
90 days of the assessment of such fine, the Municipal Court Clerk shall notify
the Department of Public Safety, and the Department, pursuant to state law,
shall suspend or not issue a driver’s license to the individual until proof of
payment has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 10-438)
   (F)   When a person violates §
135.34, an administrative fine of not more than $100 for each offense may be
imposed upon the person.
(Prior Code, § 10-442)
   (G)   When a person violates §
135.45, the Municipal Court Clerk shall assess such person an administrative
fine of not more than $200 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-439)
   (H)   When a person violates §
135.46, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $200 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-440)
(Ord. 10-08, passed 1-11-2010; Ord. 11-01, passed 9-13-2010)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
      
153.   PLANNING AND ZONING
      
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
155.   ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code and Regulations
   
150.001   Building codes adopted
   
150.002   Revisions to building code
   
150.003   Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.004   Building permit required; fee
   
150.005   Numbering of buildings
   
150.006   Fire limits defined
Plumbing Code
   
150.020   Adoption of plumbing code
   
150.021   Permit required for plumbing installations
   
150.022   Plumber’s registration required; bond
   
150.023   Compliance with regulations
   
150.024   Inspection of work; removal of defective installations
   
150.025   Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.026   Exemptions
Electrical Code
   
150.040   Adoption of electrical code
   
150.041   Permit required for electrical installation
   
150.042   Inspection fee
   
150.043   Electrician’s registration required; bond
   
150.044   Compliance with regulations
   
150.045   Inspection of work; removal of defective installations
   
150.046   Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.047   Exemptions
Gas Piping Code
   
150.060   Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code
   
150.061   Permits required
   
150.062   No connections until inspected
   
150.063   Meters
   
150.064   Requirements
Mechanical Code
   
150.075   Adoption of Mechanical Code
   
150.076   Permit required for mechanical installations
   
150.077   Mechanical registration required; bond
   
150.078   Compliance with regulations
   
150.079   Inspection of work; removal of defective installations
   
150.080   Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.081   Exemptions
Other Building Regulations
   
150.095   Swimming pools
   
150.096   Registration of roofing contractors
   
150.097   Liquefied petroleum gas
 
   
150.999   Penalty
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
§ 150.001 BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.
   The current editions of the International Building Code, the International
Residential Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Plumbing
Code, and the International Mechanical Code as published by the International
Code Council and the National Electrical Code are hereby adopted by the city to
provide standards pursuant to the codes to ensure the safety of the citizens.
(Prior Code, § 5-101) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 150.002 REVISIONS TO BUILDING CODE.
   The following sections of the International Building Code are hereby revised
as follows:
   (A)   Section 101.1 Insert city of Hobart, Oklahoma;
   (B)   Section 1612.3 Insert city of Hobart, Oklahoma;
   (C)   Section 1612.3 Insert May 14, 2008; and
   (D)   Section 3410.2 Insert May 14, 2008.
(Prior Code, § 5-102) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 150.003 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The city shall employ a Code Enforcement Officer to be appointed by the City
Manager, whose duties shall include the oversight and enforcement of this
chapter, as well as the oversight and enforcement of §§
93.050 through
93.063 “Weeds and Trash,” of this code including the authority to write
citations for violations under this chapter and §§
93.050 through
93.063. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also serve as the Zoning
Administrator with the responsibilities described in §
155.100 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-104) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 150.004 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be built, enlarged, altered, or
moved without a building permit as required by the building code and issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer as follows:
      (1)   Whenever changes to a building or other structure alter the outside
appearance;
      (2)   Whenever changes will amount to more than $1,000 in cost; or
      (3)   Whenever a building or structure is to be moved from without the
city to a location within the city or from one location in the city to another
location within the city.
   (B)   A person desiring a building permit shall submit an application
therefor to the Code Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall submit with the
application such reasonable information as the Code Enforcement Officer may
require to enable him or her to determine whether granting the permit would be
in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. Up to five
days should be allowed for the issuance of the permit.
   (C)   If the application is in accordance with the requirements of the
ordinances and laws, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the permit upon
the payment by the applicant of a building permit fee which may be set by
motion or resolution of the City Council. A current copy of the fee schedule
shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk.
   (D)   A building permit must be renewed if the project is not completed six
months from the date of issue.
(Prior Code, § 5-106) (Ord. 97-1119, passed 2-11-1997; Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-
2008) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.005 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Baselines for the numbering of buildings in the city shall be as
follows.
      (1)   First Street shall be taken as the east and west baseline. All
buildings north of the street shall be “north” and all buildings south of the
street shall be “south.”
      (2)   Main Street shall be taken as the north and south baseline. All
buildings east of the street shall be “east” and all buildings west of the
street shall be “west.”
   (B)   Buildings shall be numbered in both directions from the baselines
established in division (A) above. Each block shall contain numbers within the
100 assigned to the block, beginning with the lowest number in the respective
100 on the corner of the block nearest the baseline from which it is measured.
The first block from the baseline shall include all numbers less than 100 which
may be necessary to number the parcels in the block, and each succeeding block
shall begin its series of numbers by adding as many hundreds to 100 as it is
from the first block adjoining the baseline.
   (C)   Each building shall be assigned a number by the Code Enforcement
Officer. In assigning the number, the first 25-foot lot shall be assigned the
first number reserved for the respective block, and each succeeding lot which
is 25 feet wide and no wider shall receive the succeeding numbers in the
respective order. No fractional numbers shall be used, unless for pieces less
than or a part of a 25-foot lot.
   (D)   Nothing but even numbers shall be used on lots or buildings on the
south side of streets running east and west and on the east side of streets
running north and south. Nothing but odd numbers shall be used on lots or
buildings on the north side of streets running east and west and on the west
side of streets running north and south.
   (E)   A number assigned under this section shall be placed in a conspicuous
place on the building by the owner or occupant of same. Numbers shall be at
least two inches high and of metal or painted numerals, subject to the approval
of the Code Enforcement Officer. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant
of a building to fail or refuse to place thereon the number assigned to such
building, within ten days after notice from the Code Enforcement Officer so to
do. Each day after the expiration of the ten days’ notice in which such failure
or omission to perform continues shall be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-107) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.006 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
   The fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows: Beginning at
the point of intersection of the center line of the alley between Jefferson and
Monroe with the center line of Third Street; thence due south on the center
line of the alley in blocks 22 and 27 to its intersection with the north line
of the Rock Island right-of-way; thence in a southwesterly direction along and
on the north line of the Rock Island right-of-way to its intersection with the
center line of Broadway; thence due north on the center line of Broadway to the
intersection with the center line of Fourth Street; thence due west on the
center line of Fourth Street to its intersection with the center line of the
alley between Broadway and Hill Street; thence due north on the center line of
the alley between Broadway and Hill Street to the north line of lot 13 in block
15; thence east along the north line of lots 20 and 13 in block 18 and the
north line of lot 20 in block 17 to the center line of the alley between
Washington and Main Streets; thence due north to the center line of Second
Street; thence due east to the center line of the alley between Main and
Jefferson; thence due south along the center line of the alley to the south
line of lot 12 in block 16; thence along the south line of the lot 12 and
across Jefferson Street and further east along south line of lot 21 in block 15
to the center of the alley between Jefferson and Monroe; thence due south to
the point of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 5-105)
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.020 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   The International Plumbing Code, as adopted in §
150.001, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by reference.
(Prior Code, § 5-201) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 150.021 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PLUMBING INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to install any plumbing fixtures, lines,
or apparatus in, on, or under any building or structure in the corporate limits
of this city or make extensions to any existing plumbing installations without
first securing a permit from the city as may be required by the Plumbing Code.
   (B)   Applications for plumbing permits shall be made to the city; and the
applicant shall provide such plans, specifications, and other data as may be
reasonably required.
   (C)   The fee for a plumbing permit shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
(Prior Code, § 5-202) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.022 PLUMBER’S REGISTRATION REQUIRED; BOND.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade, or
vocation of plumbing contractor, without a certificate of registration as such
secured from the city. The initial fee for a registration certificate, and any
renewal, to be paid to the City Clerk, shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.” A registration certificate must be
renewed within 90 days following expiration of the certificate. After the
expiration, an application for a new certificate must be requested and the
initial fee paid again. No person may be registered with the city as
contractor, or apprentice unless he or she possesses a valid and current state
license issued by the state and is properly bonded and insured as required by
the state and pays the registration fee. This certificate is not transferable
to any other individual or company.
   (B)   After adequate opportunity for a hearing the City Council may revoke
the certificate of a plumbing contractor, an apprentice plumber, or a
journeyman plumber.
(Prior Code, § 5-203) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.023 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All plumbing construction and all materials and appliances, and
apparatus used in connection with plumbing work and the operation of all
plumbing apparatus within the city limits shall conform to the rules and
requirements of the code adopted by this chapter.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the responsibility and
authority for making interpretations of the provisions of such code, for
deciding upon the approval of equipment, materials, and construction and for
granting the special permission contemplated in a number of the provisions of
such code, and the Code Enforcement Officer, where necessary, shall follow the
code procedure for securing official interpretations of such code.
(Prior Code, § 5-204) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.024 INSPECTION OF WORK; REMOVAL OF DEFECTIVE INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the completion of any work for which a permit has been issued
under §
150.021 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to notify
the Code Enforcement Officer who shall, as early as possible, inspect the
plumbing, installation, appliances, and apparatus and execute a certificate of
satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and
the result of his or her examination. No such certificate shall be issued
unless such plumbing installations, appliances, and apparatus are in strict
accord with the rules, requirements, and spirit of this chapter.
   (B)   The amount of fee or charge to be made for such inspections and
certificates shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
   (C)   Whenever plumbing installations, appliances, or apparatus are found to
be defective or hazardous through improper manufacture or improper or
insufficient installation or for any other reason, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall at once cause the removal of such defect, at the expense of the owner of
such plumbing installation or apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 5-205) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.025 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce all provisions of
this chapter. The Inspector is hereby granted the authority to enter all
buildings in the city in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 5-206) (Ord. 11-05, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 150.026 EXEMPTIONS.
   For “minor” plumbing work, as defined by the Code Enforcement Officer as
exempt from this code, to be performed by the owner of property in which the
owner resides, no inspection, registration, or bond is required.
(Prior Code, § 5-207)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.040 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
150.001, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by reference.
(Prior Code, § 5-301) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 150.041 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring,
fixtures, or apparatus in or on any building or structure in the corporate
limits of this city or make extensions to any existing electrical installations
without first securing a permit from the city as may be required by the
Electrical Code.
   (B)   Applications for electrical permits shall be made to the city; and the
applicant shall provide such plans, specifications, and other data as may be
reasonably required.
   (C)   The fee for an electrical permit shall be as set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
(Prior Code, § 5-302) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.042 INSPECTION FEE.
   The City Council may prescribe an inspection fee set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges” of this code, to be paid to the city when
electrical installations are inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-303) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 150.043 ELECTRICIAN’S REGISTRATION REQUIRED; BOND.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade, or
vocation of electrical contractor, journeyman electrician, or apprentice
electrician without a certificate of registration as such secured from the
city. The initial fee for a registration certificate, and any renewal, to be
paid to the City Clerk, shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.” A registration certificate must be
renewed within 90 days following expiration of the certificate. After the
expiration, an application for a new certificate must be requested and the
initial fee paid again. No person may be registered with the city as
contractor, journeyman, or apprentice unless he or she possesses a valid and
current state license issued by the state and is properly bonded and insured as
required by the state and pays the registration fee. This certificate is not
transferable to any other individual or company.
   (B)   After adequate opportunity for a hearing, the City Council may revoke
the certificate of an electrical contractor, an apprentice electrician, or a
journeyman electrician.
(Prior Code, § 5-304) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.044 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   All electrical construction and all materials, appliances, motors, heating
devices, and apparatus used in connection with electrical work and the
operation of all electrical apparatus within the city limits shall conform to
the rules and requirements of the code adopted by this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the responsibility and authority for making
interpretations of the provisions of such code, for deciding upon the approval
of equipment, materials and construction and for granting the special
permission contemplated in a number of the provisions of such code, and the
Code Enforcement Officer, where necessary, shall follow the code procedure for
securing official interpretations of such code. In cases of necessity, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require larger size wire, more branch circuits and
better types of equipment than the minimum which is specified in the National
Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-305) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.045 INSPECTION OF WORK; REMOVAL OF DEFECTIVE INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the completion of any work for which a permit has been issued
under §
150.041, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to notify the Code
Enforcement Officer who shall, as early as possible, inspect the wiring,
installation, appliances, and apparatus and execute a certificate of
satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and
the result of his or her examination. No such certificate shall be issued
unless such wiring, motors, heating devices, appliances, and apparatus are in
strict accord with the rules, requirements, and spirit of this chapter. No
current shall be turned on until such certificate is issued.
   (B)   The amount of fee or charge to be made for such inspections and
certificates shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
   (C)   Whenever electric wiring, appliances, or apparatus are found to be
defective or hazardous through improper manufacture or improper or insufficient
installation or for any other reason, the Code Enforcement Officer shall at
once cause the removal of such defect, at the expense of the owner of such
wiring, appliance. or apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 5-306) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.046 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce all provisions of
this subchapter. The inspector is hereby granted the authority to enter all
buildings in the city in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 5-307) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 150.047 EXEMPTIONS.
   For “minor” electrical work, as defined by the Code Enforcement Officer as
exempt from this code, to be performed by the owner of property in which the
owner resides, no inspection, registration, or bond is required.
(Prior Code, § 5-308) (Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011)
GAS PIPING CODE
§ 150.060 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
   The International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted in §
150.001 of this chapter, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by
reference and shall be in full force and effect in the city and shall govern
the installation of gas piping and gas appliances in the city. Any violation of
the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall be deemed a violation
of the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-501) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.061 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No gas plumbing may be done until a permit is obtained from the city and the
fee is paid. All inspections under this chapter may be done by the City
Plumbing Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 5-502) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.062 NO CONNECTIONS UNTIL INSPECTED.
   No company shall make any connections with, or sell any gas to any owner or
consumer who has failed, neglected, or refused to put in the proper size pipe
or to comply with the rules and regulations herein, all of which shall first be
inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector and a clearance slip issued.
(Prior Code, § 5-503) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.063 METERS.
   Meters shall be set in such manner that they will be accessible for reading
and with due regard for their protection from injury or accident. The Plumbing
Inspector shall approve all locations and prescribe rules and regulations
relating to the location of meters.
(Prior Code, § 5-504) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.064 REQUIREMENTS.
   All utility lines being installed shall be inspected by the plumbing
inspector before the line is covered. Such lines shall be 24 inches below
surface level. Each separate violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-505) (Ord. 1084, passed 9-11-1984; Ord. 1097, passed 11-14-
1989) Penalty, see §
150.999
Cross-reference:
   Tunneling under streets for utility crossings, see §
96.32
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.075 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   The International Mechanical Code, as adopted in §
150.001 of this chapter, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code for the city.
The Mechanical Code shall be fully applicable and enforceable in governing
mechanical work in the city, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified, or amended, as fully as if set out at length herein. If any
provisions of the ordinances of the city are in conflict with the provisions of
the Mechanical Code, except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of the
Mechanical Code shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 5-601) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 150.076 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to install, alter, or repair any
mechanical device or equipment in, on, or under any building or structure in
the corporate limits of this city without first securing a permit from the city
as may be required by the Mechanical Code.
   (B)   Applications for mechanical permits shall be made to the city; and the
applicant shall provide such plans, specifications, and other data as may be
reasonably required.
   (C)   The fee for a mechanical permit shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
(Prior Code, § 5-602) (Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.077 MECHANICAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED; BOND.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade, or
vocation of mechanical contractor, without a certificate of registration as
such secured from the city. The initial fee for a registration certificate, and
any renewal, to be paid to the City Clerk, shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.” A registration certificate must be
renewed within 90 days following expiration of the certificate. After the
expiration, an application for a new certificate must be requested and the
initial fee paid again. No person may be registered with the city as a
contractor or apprentice unless he or she possesses a valid and current state
license issued by the state and is properly bonded and insured as required by
the state and pays the registration fee. This certificate is not transferable
to any other individual or company.
   (B)   After adequate opportunity for a hearing the City Council may revoke
the certificate of a mechanical contractor, an apprentice technician, or a
journeyman technician.
(Prior Code, § 5-603) (Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.078 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   All mechanical construction, and all materials, appliances, motors, and
apparatus used in connection with mechanical work, and the operation of all
mechanical apparatus within the city limits, shall conform to the rules and
requirements of the Code adopted by this subchapter. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the responsibility and authority for making interpretations
of the provisions of such Code, for deciding upon the approval of equipment,
materials, and construction, and for granting the special permission
contemplated in a number of the provisions of such Code, and the Code
Enforcement Officer, where necessary, shall follow the Code procedure for
securing official interpretations of such Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-604) (Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.079 INSPECTION OF WORK; REMOVAL OF DEFECTIVE INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the completion of any work for which a permit has been issued
under §
150.076, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to notify the Code
Enforcement Officer who shall, as early as possible, inspect the mechanical
installation, appliances and apparatus and execute a certificate of
satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and
the result of his or her examination. No such certificate shall be issued
unless such mechanical installations, appliances, and apparatus are in strict
accord with the rules, requirements, and spirit of this chapter.
   (B)   The amount of fee or charge to be made for such inspections and
certificates shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
   (C)   Whenever mechanical appliances or apparatus are found to be defective
or hazardous through improper manufacture or improper or insufficient
installation or for any other reason, the Code Enforcement Officer shall at
once cause the removal of such defect, at the expense of the owner of such
mechanical appliance or apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 5-605) (Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.080 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce all provisions of
this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby granted the authority to
enter all buildings in the city in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 5-606) (Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 150.081 EXEMPTIONS.
   For “minor” mechanical work, as defined by the Code Enforcement Officer as
exempt from this code, to be performed by the owner of property in which the
owner resides, no inspection, registration, or bond is required.
(Prior Code, § 5-607) (Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011)
OTHER BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 150.095 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Suitable effective barriers. Every person owning land on which there
is situated a family swimming pool, as defined in division (B) below, shall
erect and maintain thereon an adequate suitable effective barrier including,
but not limited to fences, enclosures, walls, or other approved barriers either
surrounding the property or pool area, sufficient to make the pool inaccessible
to small children. The barrier, including gates therein, shall be not less than
four feet above the outside ground at all points and, provided further, that
access steps or ladders are capable of being rendered inaccessible by being
removed or raised more than four feet above the outside grade.
(Prior Code, § 5-1001)
   (B)   Family swimming pool defined. FAMILY SWIMMING POOL shall mean any and
every pool of water any part of which is more than 24 inches in depth or having
a surface area of more than 150 square feet, on private property and shall
include below ground and above ground pools with the exception of streams,
lakes, and other natural bodies of water, municipally-owned lakes, and stock
watering or other agricultural purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-1002)
   (C)   Unlawful installations. No person shall construct, install, erect,
locate, or maintain any swimming pool within the city limits, whether on public
or private property, unless the swimming pool is within an area completely
enclosed or protected by a suitable effective barrier.
(Prior Code, § 5-1003)
   (D)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   No person shall erect, construct, or install a swimming pool within
the city limits, whether on public or private property without first obtaining
a permit therefor from the City Clerk or his or her designated representative.
      (2)   Before the City Clerk or his or her designated representative shall
issue a permit to erect, construct, or install a swimming pool, he or she shall
require that one of the following requirements be met:
         (a)   A suitable effective barrier is included as part of the
construction of the swimming pool project; or
         (b)   The owner of the swimming pool or his or her agent shall certify
that a suitable effective barrier will be provided before the swimming pool is
in operation.
(Prior Code, § 5-1004)
   (E)   Fees. A permit fee to erect, construct, or install swimming pools is
hereby levied. Amendment of the fee for the permit shall be determined by the
City Council by motion or resolution. The initial fee shall be the sum of $10.
(Prior Code, § 5-1005)
   (F)   Retroactivity. The lack of an enclosure or protective barrier is
hereby deemed to be a serious safety and health hazard. Therefore, the
provisions of this section shall be retroactive and shall apply to all swimming
pools from and after the effective date of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-1006)
(Ord. 14-01, passed 8-12-2013) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.096 REGISTRATION OF ROOFING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   No person or entity shall engage in the business nor act in the
capacity of a roofing contractor within the city limits, nor may such person or
entity bring or maintain any claim, action, suit, or proceeding in any court in
the city without a valid registration as provided in this section.
   (B)   Prior to any work, all roofing contracting persons or entities shall
register with the city by providing a copy of the Oklahoma registration
certificate and a copy of liability insurance and proof of compliance with
workers’ compensation.
   (C)   The fee for registration in the city shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges,” of this code.
   (D)   Any registration in force on or before June 30, 2012, may be renewed
in each fiscal year until June 30 of the following year. The fee for renewals
shall be set forth in § 35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.” Renewals shall
have a 30-day grace period after June 30 for renewal without a late fee.
Renewals after the 30-day grace period shall be set forth in §
35.01, “Schedule of Fees and Charges.”
(Prior Code, § 5-901) (Ord. 11-07, passed 3-14-2011) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.097 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   (A)   Definitions. The terms LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES, LPG, or LP GAS when
used in this section shall mean and include any material which is composed
predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of the same:
      (1)   Butanes (normal butane and iso butant);
      (2)   Butylenes;
      (3)   Propane; and
      (4)   Propylene.
(Prior Code, § 5-401)
   (B)   Unlawful to possess, use, store, transport in violation. It is
unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, or corporation to operate any
tank, tank truck, or tank trailer or any other container containing LPG on any
street or highway within the city, or to install, possess, and maintain any
system for the use of liquified petroleum gas or to store or to possess any LPG
or container thereof in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-402)
   (C)   Labeling required for transportation. No tank, truck, or trailer used
for or containing LPG shall be driven through the city, or make any delivery
within the city unless the same shall be properly labeled with the name of the
contents and inspected and approved by the Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 5-403)
   (D)   Rules adopted, inspection, orders.
      (1)   All tanks, trucks, and trailers containing or used for LPG and all
liquefied petroleum gas
systems used or operated within this city or passing through this city shall be
at all times subject to the laws of the state applicable thereto, and the rules
and regulations of the Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administrator now, or
hereafter in force and effect. A violation of any such laws, rules, or
regulations shall be deemed a violation of this section.
      (2)   All such tanks, trucks, trailers, and systems shall be subject to
inspection at all reasonable
times by the Fire Chief of this city. In the event of discovery of a violation
of any such laws, rules, regulations, or the provisions of this section which
the Fire Chief deems to constitute a hazard to life or property, the Fire Chief
shall have the power to immediately order the removal or abatement of such
hazard. Thereupon it is the duty of the person having control thereof to comply
with such order. Such person shall have the right to appeal the order of the
Fire Chief to the City Council, but this appeal right shall not excuse his or
her compliance with the order of the Fire Chief pending a hearing by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-404)
   (E)   Parking prohibited, exception. No such tank, truck, or trailer,
whether loaded or empty shall be at any time, parked within the city except on
making deliveries of LPG to any user thereof, in which event the same may be
stopped long enough to make such delivery.
(Prior Code, § 5-405)
   (F)   Notice to city of breakdowns. In the event of a breakdown or other
unavoidable stop of any tank, truck, or tank trailer used for transporting LPG
within the city, the driver of the tank, truck, or trailer shall give immediate
notice to the Fire Department of this city as to the location of the truck or
trailer and the same shall not remain parked longer than is necessary to make
the mechanical repairs necessary for its removal from the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-406)
   (G)   City approval of certain repairs, inspection, orders. In the event it
becomes necessary to make any mechanical repairs to any such truck, tank, or
trailer within the city, before such mechanical repairs shall be made, it shall
be the duty of the person having control thereof to notify the Fire Chief. The
Fire Chief shall inspect the same, and if he or she should find that the same
is in a safe condition for the contemplated repairs, shall issue a permit
therefor which shall expire five days after its issuance. If the Fire Chief
shall find upon such inspection that the same is not in a safe condition for
the contemplated repairs, no such repairs shall be made until the tank, truck,
or trailer shall be made safe as required by the Fire Chief. The Chief may
require that the same be removed from the city until his or her requirements
are complied with.
(Prior Code, § 5-407)
   (H)   Sale or storage prohibited in certain areas. No person shall hereafter
set up or establish within the city any tanks or receptacles of any nature,
temporary or permanent, for the storage, handling, transfer, or sale of any LP
gas within the Main Street business area nor within any residential area for
home use where natural gas is available.
(Prior Code, § 5-408)
   (I)   New installations, proof of state approval. Any person hereinafter
installing an LP gas system for domestic, commercial, or other use within this
city shall, prior to its use, furnish the City Clerk with a certificate of the
Oklahoma State Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administration showing that such
installation or system has been duly inspected and found satisfactory to the
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 5-409)
   (J)   Provisions cumulative. The provisions and requirements of this section
shall be in addition to the provisions and requirements of the Fire Prevention
Code enacted by this code which are applicable to the subject matter of this
section. The provisions of this section shall not be considered as repealing
any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code by implication or otherwise
except where absolutely necessary in order to give effect to the provisions of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-410)
(Ord. 1095, passed 12-22-1987) Penalty, see §
150.999
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Code, see §§
32.025 through
32.030
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall engage in any
business, trade, or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate, or
registration is required by this chapter, without having a valid license,
permit, certificate, or certificate of registration as required, or who shall
fail to do anything required by this chapter or by any code adopted by this
chapter, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of the subchapters in
this chapter or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall violate any
lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this
chapter, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-701)
      (2)   No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter shall interfere
with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for
a mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against such person,
firm, or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 5-702)
   (B)   A person who violates a provision of the Building Code or fails to
comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects,
constructs, alters, repairs or removes, or has erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, or removed a building or structure in violation of a detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or of a permit or
certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined any sum as provided in §
10.99, including costs. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
   (C)   Any violations of the provisions of §§
150.020 through
150.026, including violations of the International Plumbing Code shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-208)
   (D)   Any violations of the provisions of §§
150.040 through
150.047, including violations of the National Electrical Code shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-309)
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
150.060 through
150.064 and refuses, within three days after notice given by the Plumbing
Inspector, to comply with any of such provisions, shall be guilty of an offense
and punished accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 5-506)
   (F)   Any violations of the provisions of §§
150.075 through
150.081, including violations of the International Mechanical Code shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-608)
   (G)   Any person who violates any provision of §
150.095 or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof or
who erects, constructs, or installs a swimming pool in violation of a detail
statement or plans submitted and approved thereunder or a permit or certificate
issued thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in
Chapter 33, Appendix A of this code. Each day upon which a violation continues
shall be deemed as a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-1007)
   (H)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall engage in any business,
trade, or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate, or registration is
required by §
150.096, without having a valid license, permit, certificate, or registration
as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by §
150.096 or by any code adopted by this city code, or who shall violate any
lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in §
150.096, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-902)
   (I)   The doing of any act prohibited by §
150.097, or the failure to do any act required therein, shall be an offense and
upon conviction thereof, the offender shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-411)
(Ord. 1095, passed 12-22-1987; Ord. 11-04, passed 3-14-2011; Ord. 11-05, passed
3-14-2011; Ord. 11-06, passed 3-14-2011; Ord. 11-07, passed 3-14-2011; Ord. 14-
01, passed 8-12-2013)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Findings of fact
   
151.02   Statement of purpose
   
151.03   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
151.04   Definitions
   
151.05   Application
   
151.06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
151.07   Establishment of development permit
   
151.08   Compliance
   
151.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.10   Interpretation
   
151.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.27   Permit procedures
   
151.28   Variances
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Standards for subdivisions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 12-501) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Prior Code, § 12-502) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.03 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; or
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 12-503) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Fire Chief’s interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone
A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
   ELEVATED BUILDING.  
      (1)   A nonbasement building:
         (a)   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and pliers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water; and
         (b)   Adequately anchored so at not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
      (2)   In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO AH, B, C, X, D, ELEVATED
BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of ELEVATED BUILDING, even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway
walls meet the standards of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). The official map of a community on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related to erosion areas having special hazards
which have been designated as Zone A, M, or E.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. The physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain
management purposes the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term MANUFACTURED HOME does
not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which the
base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501
et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or
walkways; nor does it include excavation of basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or shed
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purpose of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. For full requirements, see 44 C.F.R. § 60.6 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure of other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, here specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Prior Code, § 12-504) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.05 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-505) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.06 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency on its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) and any revisions
thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-506) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.07 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required in order to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-507) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.08 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 12-508) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 12-509) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor appeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 12-510) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 12-511) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.25 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed the Floodplain
Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(Prior Code, § 12-512) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site
will be reasonably safe from flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344) from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the Oklahoma Water Resources Board prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any water course is maintained; and
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
151.06, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
151.40,
151.41, and
151.42 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-513) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.27 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
151.41(B);
      (4)   Description of the extent of which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
151.26(A).
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Prior Code, § 12-514) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
§ 151.28 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board of the community shall hear and render judgment on
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. This Board shall
consist of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
151.27(B) of this code have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter as set out in §
151.02.
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Pre-requisites for granting variances:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief;
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the costs of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (J)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (I) above are met;
and
      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Prior Code, § 12-515) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or
modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood water.
   (G)   On-site waste water disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 12-516) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in §§
151.06,
151.26(H), or
151.42(D), the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and a substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A), as
proposed in §
151.27(A), is satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes are required to be placed
within Zone A, and shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Such methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 12-517) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
151.01 through
151.03 of this chapter.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit
requirements of §§
151.07,
151.27 and the provisions of §§
151.40 and
151.41.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser,
if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
151.06 or §
151.26(H) of this chapter.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 12-518) (Ord. 1089, passed 5-12-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 152: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
   
152.01   Short title
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Zones established
   
152.04   Height limitations
   
152.05   Use restrictions
   
152.06   Nonconforming uses
   
152.07   Permits and variances
   
152.08   Administration and enforcement
   
152.09   Board of Adjustment
   
152.10   Appeals
   
152.11   Judicial review
   
152.12   Conflicting regulations
   
152.13   Acquisition of air rights
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Hobart Municipal Airport
Zoning Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 12-601) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Hobart Municipal Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. Feet above mean sea level at the highest point on the
runway surface.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented as provided in this chapter.
   AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION. A commission consisting of five members appointed
by the Joint Airport Zoning Board (Zoning Board) to make recommendations to the
Zoning Board regarding the boundaries of the various zones to be established
and the regulations to be adopted by the zoning ordinance.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
152.04. In plan, the perimeter of the APPROACH SURFACE coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL ZONES. These zones are set
forth in §
152.03.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A Board consisting of five members appointed by the
Municipal Joint Airport Zoning Board as provided in 3 O.S. § 110, as amended.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a significant
adverse impact on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT.  For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless
otherwise specified.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD. A board consisting of four members appointed by
each political subdivision: two from the City of Hobart and two from Kiowa
County, of which a chairperson is elected. The JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD
appoints an Airport Zoning Commission to recommend the boundaries of the
various zones to be established and the regulations to be adopted. After
receiving recommendations from the Airport Zoning Commission the JOINT AIRPORT
ZONING BOARD adopts the zoning ordinance.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or
the use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment thereto.
   NONPRECISION RUNWAY. A runway intended for the operations of aircraft using
nonprecision approach procedures.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth, or any other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
152.04.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or governmental entity and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or any other similar representative thereof.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any municipality, city, town, village, or county.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the
runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
200 feet beyond each end of that runway; when the runway has no specifically
prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the PRIMARY SURFACE ends at each
end of that runway. The width of the PRIMARY SURFACE is set forth in §
152.03. The elevation of any point on the PRIMARY SURFACE is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. Any object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed
by humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to
the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven
feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. Any runway that is constructed for and intended to be used
by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operations of aircraft using
visual approach procedures.
(Prior Code, § 12-602) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.03 ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and
conical surfaces as they apply to the Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown
on the Municipal Airport airspace drawing consisting of one sheet, prepared by
Barnard Dunkelberg & Company and dated August 2001, which is attached to
Ordinance 02-01 and made a part hereof.
   (B)   An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered
to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation.
   (C)   The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
      (1)   Utility Runway Nonprecision Approach Zone (Runway 17/35). The inner
edge of this approach zone is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000
feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway;
      (2)   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone (Runways 03/21 And 12/30). The
inner edge of this approach zone is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000
feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway;
      (3)   Transitional Zones. The areas beneath the transitional surfaces;
      (4)   Horizontal Zone. The Horizontal Zone is established by swinging
arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
Runway 17/35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those
arcs. The Horizontal Zone does not include the Approach and Transitional Zones;
and
      (5)   Conical Zone. The Conical Zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and extends outward therefrom
a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(Prior Code, § 12-603) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.04 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any
zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone.
   (B)   Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones in question as follows:
      (1)   Utility Runway Nonprecision Approach Zone (Runway 17/35). Slopes 34
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline;
      (2)   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone (Runways 03/21 And 12/30).
Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline;
      (3)   Transitional Zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation which is 1,564 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the
foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for
each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
approach surface, and extending to where they intersect at the conical surface;
      (4)   Horizontal Zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport
elevation; and
      (5)   Conical Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
(Prior Code, § 12-604) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.05 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of
land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as
to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with
the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Prior Code, § 12-605) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.06 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of
a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and is
diligently prosecuted. Existing structures fall under the existing ordinance.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Joint Airport Zoning
Board, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport
the presence of such airport obstructions. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the Municipal Airport and
the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-606) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.07 PERMITS AND VARIANCES.
   (A)   Future uses.
      (1)   Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b),
and (A)(1)(c) below, no material change shall be made in the use of the land,
no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, no pond, lake, or
lagoon shall be constructed, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby
created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each
application for permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether
the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be
granted. No permit for use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with
division (D) below.
         (a)   In the area lying within the limits of the Horizontal Zone and
Conical Zone and outside the Approach Zone and Transition Zone, no permit shall
be required for any structure or tree less than 75 feet of the vertical height
above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographical features, such structure or tree would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
         (b)   In areas lying within the limits of the Approach Zones and
Transition Zones, but at a horizontal distance of no less than 4,200 feet from
each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any structure or tree
less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground except when such
structure or tree, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features,
would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
         (c)   In the areas lying within the limits of the Transition Zones, no
permit shall be required for any structure or tree less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such structure or tree, because
of terrain, land contour, or topographical features, would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such Transition Zones.
      (2)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration
of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this chapter except as set forth in §
152.04(B)(5) of this chapter.
   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date hereof or any amendments thereto or than it is when the
application for permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such
permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Joint Airport
Zoning Board determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or allow the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a variance from such regulations. The application for a variance
shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace.
Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary
hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will
not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be
in accordance with the spirit of this chapter. Additionally, no application for
variance to the requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Airport
Zoning Commission for advice as to the aeronautical effect of the variance. If
the Airport Zoning Commission does not respond to the application within 15
days after receipt, the Board of Adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny
said application.
   (E)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter
and be reasonable in its circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain,
at the owner’s expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the Board of Adjustment, this condition may be modified to require
the owner to permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain the necessary markings and lights.
(Prior Code, § 12-607) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Joint Airport Zoning Board, to administer and
enforce the regulations prescribed herein. An application for permits or
variances shall be made to the Airport Zoning Commission on a form published
for that purpose. Applications required by this chapter shall be submitted to
the Chairperson, Airport Zoning Commission, promptly considered and, along with
a recommendation to grant or deny said application, promptly forward to the
Joint Airport Zoning Board for approval or denial thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12-608) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.09 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   As required by 3 O.S. § 110, there is hereby created a Board of
Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any other requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Joint Airport Zoning Board, in the enforcement of
this chapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter
upon which such Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be required to
pass; and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the
Joint Airport Zoning Board and each shall serve for a term of three years until
a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed,
one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one
for a term of three years, one for a term of four years, and one for a term of
five years. Members shall be removable by the appointed authority for cause,
upon written charges, after a public hearing.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in
harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board of
Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times
as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in the absence of
the Chairperson, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
public and comply with the open meetings act. The Board of Adjustment shall
keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board and
shall be a public record.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions on law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Joint Airport Zoning Board, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter,
or to effect variation to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-609) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Joint Airport Zoning Board, made in the administration of this chapter, may
appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the
Chairperson, Airport Zoning Commission, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Chairperson, Airport Zoning Commission, shall forthwith,
transmit to the Board of Adjustment and the Joint Airport Zoning Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Chairperson, Airport Zoning Commission, certifies to
the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it,
that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the
opinion of the Chairperson, Airport Zoning Commission, cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order
of the Board of Adjustment or notice to the Chairperson, Airport Zoning
Commission, and on due cause shown.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest,
including the Oklahoma Aeronautics Commission and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent
or by attorney.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 12-610) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   As provided in 3 O.S. § 111, any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected
by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, and who is of the opinion that the
decision is illegal, may appeal to the district court.
(Prior Code, § 12-611) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.12 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   In any case where a conflict in regulations established by this chapter
arises, the provisions of 3 O.S., the Airport Zoning Act, shall take
precedence.
(Prior Code, § 12-613) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.13 ACQUISITION OF AIR RIGHTS.
   In any case in which the following situations exist, the political
subdivision within which the property or nonconforming use is located, or by
the city of Hobart, as owner of the airport may acquire, by purchase, grant, or
condemnation in the manner provided under the law for such public purposes,
such air rights, aviation easements, or other estate or interest in the
property of nonconforming structure or use in question may be necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter:
   (A)   It is desired to remove, lower, or otherwise terminate a nonconforming
structure or use;
   (B)   The approach protection necessary cannot, because of constitutional
limitations, be provided under this chapter; or
   (C)   It appears advisable that the necessary approach protection be
provided by acquisition of the property rights rather than airport zoning
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 12-614) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of this chapter, or of any regulation, orders, or rulings
promulgated by the political subdivision, Joint Airport Zoning Board, Board of
Adjustment or the Oklahoma Aeronautics Commission pursuant to this chapter,
shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than one year in the county jail, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate violation. In addition, the Joint Airport Zoning Board
may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this chapter, or of any airport
zoning regulations adopted under this chapter, or of any order or ruling made
in connection with their administration or enforcement, and the court shall
adjudge to the plaintiff such relief, by way of injunction or otherwise, as may
be proper under all the facts and circumstances of the case, in order to fully
effectuate the purpose of this chapter and of the regulations adopted and
orders and rulings made pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 12-612) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-4-2002)
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING AND ZONING
Section
Planning Commission
   
153.01   Planning Commission created
   
153.02   Term of office; provision for vacancies
   
153.03   Ex officio members
   
153.04   Quorum
   
153.05   Appointment and confirmation
   
153.06   Meetings, organization, and rules
   
153.07   Members to serve without pay; power to employ staff
   
153.08   Powers and duties
   
153.09   Uniformity of regulations
   
153.10   Purpose of regulations; comprehensive plan
   
153.11   Additional authority
   
153.12   Planning Commission to act as Zoning Commission
Board of Adjustment
   
153.25   Creation; procedures established
   
153.26   Meetings and rules
   
153.27   Appeals to Board of Adjustment
   
153.28   Powers
   
153.29   Notice and hearings
   
153.30   Review by certiorari, petition for judicial review
   
153.31   Writ of certiorari and restraining order
   
153.32   Testimony and adjudication
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 153.01 PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED.
   There is hereby created within and for the city a Planning Commission, which
shall consist of five citizens of the city, nominated by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council. The members of the Commission shall be nominated and
appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party
affiliation, and shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 12-101)
Statutory reference:
   Planning commissions may be established, duties and powers, see 11 O.S. §§
45-101 et seq.
§ 153.02 TERM OF OFFICE; PROVISION FOR VACANCIES.
   Members of the Planning Commission shall hold office for a term of three
years with the exception that in the first instance two shall be appointed to
serve a term of one year, two for a term of two years and one appointed for a
term of three years. Appointments thereafter shall be made for a term of three
years, except when a vacancy occurs when the appointment shall be made to fill
the unexpired term.
(Prior Code, § 12-102)
§ 153.03 EX OFFICIO MEMBERS.
   The Mayor and the City Engineer shall be ex officio members of the Planning
Commission, but shall receive no compensation other than their affixed salary
as such officials.
(Prior Code, § 12-103)
§ 153.04 QUORUM.
   Three members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. However, no action shall be taken and be binding upon
the planning commission unless concurred in by not less than a majority of all
members comprising the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 12-104)
§ 153.05 APPOINTMENT AND CONFIRMATION.
   The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Planning Commission subject to
approval and confirmation by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-105)
§ 153.06 MEETINGS, ORGANIZATION, AND RULES.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall meet within two weeks after
their appointment and confirmation and organize by electing from their members
a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary, and shall adopt from time to
time such bylaws, rules, and regulations and amendments thereto as may be
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-106)
§ 153.07 MEMBERS TO SERVE WITHOUT PAY; POWER TO EMPLOY STAFF.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without pay. It is the
duty of such Commission to prepare from time to time plans for the systematic
development and betterment of the municipality as a place of residence or for
business. It shall have the power and authority to employ engineers, attorneys,
clerks, and a secretary, or other help deemed necessary, subject to the
approval of the Mayor. The salary and compensation of such employees shall be
fixed by the city and shall be paid out of the city treasury as other officers
and employees, and the necessary expenses incurred by the Commission shall be
paid out of the city treasury as other legal expenses of the city government.
(Prior Code, § 12-107)
§ 153.08 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may consider and investigate any subject
matter tending to the development and betterment of the city, and make
recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof to any
department of the municipal government, and for any purpose make, or cause to
be made, surveys, maps, or plans. Before final action shall be taken by the
City Council, or any department of the city government, on the location and
designs of any public building, statue, memorial, park, parkway, boulevard,
street and alley, playgrounds, public grounds, bridge, or the change in
location of any street or alley, or the grade thereof, such question shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for investigation and report.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may prepare and recommend to the City Council
the adoption of rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within
the corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats, or other portions of the
same intended to be dedicated to public or private use within the corporate
limits of the city shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for its
recommendation, approval, or rejection.
   (C)   The disapproval of any such plan, plat, or replat by the City Council
shall be deemed a refusal of the purported dedication shown thereon.
(Prior Code, § 12-108)
§ 153.09 UNIFORMITY OF REGULATIONS.
   The Planning Commission may recommend the division of the city into
districts of such number, size, and area as may be deemed best suited to carry
out the zoning purpose. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or
kind of buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district
may differ from those in other districts.
(Prior Code, § 12-109)
§ 153.10 PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS; COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and
designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire,
panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other
things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-110)
§ 153.11 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   The Planning Commission shall have additional authority and responsibility
as the City Council shall from time to time prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 12-111)
§ 153.12 PLANNING COMMISSION TO ACT AS ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission also shall act as the Zoning Commission and shall
have the power to prepare and recommend to the City Council zoning district
boundaries and appropriate regulations relating to the height, number of
stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that
may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density
of population, the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for
trade, industry, residences, and other purposes.
(Prior Code, § 12-112)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 153.25 CREATION; PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment consisting of five members,
appointed by the Mayor with confirmation of the Council, and removable for
cause by the City Council upon written charges and after public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any members whose term
becomes vacant. The Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council. It is the declared policy of the Council that it
will consider and appoint only those persons who have demonstrated their civic
interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, and
availability to prepare for and attend meetings.
(Prior Code, § 12-120)
§ 153.26 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   The Board of Adjustment shall elect one of its members as Chairperson. The
Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such
other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or, in his or her
absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses by subpoena. The Board of Adjustment shall be subject to the open
meeting laws of the state, and all meetings, deliberations, and voting of the
Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep the minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such facts, and shall keep records of all
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be a public record.
(Prior Code, § 12-121) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
§ 153.27 APPEALS TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected
by any decision of the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of the
decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the
City Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and by paying a
filing fee established by the Board of Adjustment which shall be sufficient to
defray the cost of publishing the notice of public-hearing and any other costs
associated with the hearing. The appellant shall pay such fee upon filing the
appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Board of Adjustment the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay, in his or her
opinion, would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application
and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on the cause shown.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal or other matters referred to it, given ten days public notice
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, as well as due
notice to the parties in interest, in conformance with the requirements
concerning “Notice and Hearings,” and decide the same within a reasonable time.
Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(Prior Code, § 12-122) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
§ 153.28 POWERS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
   (A)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. In reaching its
decision, the Board shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative
actions on like matters;
   (B)   Special exception.
      (1)   To decide upon those applications for a special exception to use or
develop property when the same is authorized under these regulations subject to
Board approval. In reaching its decision, the Board shall not grant the
application if it finds:
         (a)   That the use is not specifically permitted under the regulation;
         (b)   That the location of proposed activities and improvements are
not clearly defined on the site plan filed by the applicant; or
         (c)   That the exception will not be wholly compatible with the use
and permitted development of adjacent properties.
      (2)   An application for a special exception to use or develop property
as specifically authorized in district use regulations or in this section, may
be filed by any person owning the affected property or by any tenant upon
written authorization of the owner. Such application shall be filed with the
Board, and a copy thereof with the enforcing officer. Such application shall
show the location and intended use of the site, the names of all the property
owners and existing land uses within 300 feet, and any other material pertinent
to the request which the Board of Adjustment may require.
      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall hold one or more public hearings
thereon in accordance with the requirements for notice and hearings. Any appeal
or application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the enforcing officer
but no appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of hearing notice and prior to
Board action thereon without formal consent of the Board.
   (C)   Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances
from the terms of this chapter, other than as to use, as will not be contrary
to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in any individual case,
result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such
individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of
Adjustment that:
      (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to
the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or
topography;
      (2)   The application of this chapter to this particular piece of
property would create an unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed by the owner or
developer;
      (3)   Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of
property involved; or
      (4)   Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the
public good or impair the purposes and intent of this zoning ordinance or the
comprehensive plan; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a
use of land, or buildings or structure that is prohibited by this chapter.
   (D)   Extent of relief.
      (1)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment,
in conformity with the provisions of 11 O.S. § 44-105, and the provisions of
this chapter, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly; or modify the order;
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
      (2)   Every decision of the Board shall be based upon findings of fact
and every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of proceedings. The
enumerated conditions required to exist on any matter upon which the Board is
authorized to pass under these regulations shall be construed as limitations on
the power of the Board to act. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
empower the Board to change the terms of these regulations, or to effect
changes in the zoning districts. The powers of the Board shall be so applied
that the terms of these regulations will be strictly enforced.
         (a)   Three votes required. The concurring vote of at least three
members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, and decision or determination of any such administrative officer,
or to decide in favor of the applicant, or to decide any matter upon which it
is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in this
chapter.
            1.   A member shall disqualify himself or herself from voting
whenever he or she has a personal or monetary interest in the property under
appeal, or will be directly affected by the decision of the Board; and
            2.   A member may disqualify himself or herself from voting
whenever any applicant, or his or her agent, has sought to influence the
member’s vote on the appeal, other than in the public hearing.
         (b)   Approval of request.
            1.   In approving any request, the Board may designate such
conditions in connection therewith in order to secure substantially the
objectives of the regulation or provision to which such variance is granted to
provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character of the
zone in which such permit is granted.
            2.   When necessary, the Board may require guarantees, in such form
as it deems proper, to insure that conditions designated in connection
therewith are being or will be complied with. Where any condition under which a
request has been granted appears to have been violated, the Board may hold a
public hearing thereon to determine whether or not the permit theretofore
granted shall be terminated.
            3.   Upon approval of an application for special exception or of a
variance appeal, the applicant shall apply for occupancy or construction
permits within 30 days after the Board’s decision unless a greater time is
requested in the application and is authorized by the Board. Any approval may
be granted one emergency extension of 60 days on written request filed with the
Board before expiration of the original approval. Failure of the applicant to
apply for occupancy or construction permits within the authorized time period
shall void the right to secure such permits except upon the filing of a new
application or appeal.
         (c)   Denial of request. No appeal or application that has been denied
shall be further considered by the board under a subsequent request obtained by
filing new plans and obtaining of a new decision from the enforcing officer
unless:
            1.   The new plans materially change the nature of the request; or
            2.   The permitted development of other nearby property in the same
zone has been substantially altered or changed by a ruling of the Board so as
to support an allegation of changed conditions.
(Prior Code, § 12-123) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
§ 153.29 NOTICE AND HEARINGS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an
appeal or other matters referred to it.
   (A)   Notice of public hearing before the Board of Adjustment shall be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city where the
property is located and by mailing written notice by the Clerk of the Board of
Adjustment to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior
boundary of the subject property. A copy of the published notice may be mailed
in lieu of written notice; however, the notice by publication and written
notice shall be published and mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing.
   (B)   The notice, whether by publication or mail, of a public hearing before
the Board of Adjustment shall contain:
      (1)   A legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
      (2)   Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
appeal, variance, or exception requested; and
      (3)   Date, time, and place of the hearing.
   (C)   On hearings involving minor variances or exceptions, notice shall be
given by the Clerk of the Board of Adjustment by mailing written notice to all
owners of property adjacent to the subject property. The notice shall be mailed
at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall contain the facts listed in
divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) above. The Board of Adjustment shall set forth
in a statement of policy what constitutes minor variances or exceptions,
subject to approval or amendment by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-124) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
§ 153.30 REVIEW BY CERTIORARI, PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or
bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record in the district a
duly verified petition, setting forth grounds of the alleged illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of
the decision in the office of the Board of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 12-125) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
§ 153.31 WRIT OF CERTIORARI AND RESTRAINING ORDER.
   Upon the presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of
certiorari directed to the Board of Adjustment to review such decision of the
Board of Adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return
thereto must be made and served upon the realtor’s attorney, which shall not be
less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ
shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may,
on application, on notice to the Board and on due cause shown, grant a
restraining order.
(Prior Code, § 12-126) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
§ 153.32 TESTIMONY AND ADJUDICATION.
   If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or
appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to
the court with his or her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall
constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court
shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision brought up for review.
(Prior Code, § 12-127) (Ord. passed 12-1-1971)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Purpose
   
154.002   Authority
   
154.003   Application to types of subdividing
   
154.004   Definitions
   
154.005   Subdivision names
Design Standards
   
154.020   Streets
   
154.021   Alleys
   
154.022   Easements
   
154.023   Blocks
   
154.024   Lots
   
154.025   Marginal land
Improvements
   
154.040   Monuments
   
154.041   Improvements
   
154.042   Public sites and open spaces
Plat Preparation and Approval Procedure
   
154.055   Preliminary plats
   
154.056   Preliminary plat data
   
154.057   Other data
   
154.058   Final plat
   
154.059   Fees
   
154.060   Planning Commission action
Administration and Amendment
   
154.075   Variations and exceptions
   
154.076   Administration and amendment
   
154.077   Violation
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Suggested Forms of Certificates
Cross-reference:
   Zoning district regulations, see
Ch. 155
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban
development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential,
commercial, and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks, and
other public purposes, will determine to a large degree the conditions of
health, safety, economy, and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The
quality of these conditions is of public interest. These regulations and
standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make
provision for adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation,
public utilities, and other needs, to insure the development and maintenance of
a healthy, attractive, and efficient community that provides for the
conservation and protection of its human and natural resources.
   (B)   These regulations are designed, intended, and should be administered
in a manner to:
      (1)   Implement the general plan;
      (2)   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight;
      (3)   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land
to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
      (4)   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community to be borne by the community;
      (5)   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
      (6)   Reconcile any differences of interest; and
      (7)   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 12-401)
Statutory reference:
   Powers to adopt subdivision regulations, 11 O.S. § 45-104
§ 154.002 AUTHORITY.
   These subdivision regulations and minimum standards for land development are
adopted by ordinance passed by the City Council under the authority granted by
11 O.S. §§ 45-101 to 45-106.
(Prior Code, § 12-402)
§ 154.003 APPLICATION TO TYPES OF SUBDIVIDING.
   These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following
forms of land subdivision:
   (A)   The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites, or parcels,
any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than ten acres in area;
   (B)   The division of land, previously subdivided or platted into tracts,
lots, sites, or parcels, of less than ten acres in area;
   (C)   The dedication, vacation, or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
   (D)   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of
land regardless of the area involved.
(Prior Code, § 12-403)
§ 154.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street and which may be used for public utility purposes.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public
walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination
thereof.
   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. A line or lines designating the area outside
of which buildings may not be erected.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or
persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
   GENERAL PLAN or COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The comprehensive development plan for
the city which has been officially adopted to provide long-range development
policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and
which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision,
circulation, and community facilities.
   LOT. A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or
more streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two non-intersecting sides abutting on two or more streets.
   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE. A double-frontage lot which is to be developed with
the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and
egress provided on a minor street.
   LOT, SPLIT. Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two or
more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, and which does not constitute a subdivision as herein defined.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets and alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the
character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
   ROADWAY.  The portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic.
Where curbs are in place, it means that portion of the street between curbs.
   STREET. The entire width of whatever nature between the property lines when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the
purpose of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic, and wherever designated as
a STREET, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, land,
place, cul-de-sac, or however otherwise designated.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A major street which is designated on the thoroughfare
plan, or official city plan and designed to carry inter-city traffic and to
relate the various neighborhoods within the city.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. The streets designed to carry intra-city traffic
connecting neighborhood areas to a major street whose purpose is to collect
traffic from other minor streets and to serve as the most direct route to a
major street or to a community facility.
   STREET, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL. A street which abuts a commercial or
industrial-zoned property and is designed to provide access to those parcels so
designated.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic
and having one closed end terminated by a turnaround.
   STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the
side of an  arterial street for service to abutting properties and adjacent
areas and for control of access.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A service road or other roadway normally running
parallel to or with an arterial street for the purpose of intercepting traffic
from abutting property or intersecting streets for the purpose of limiting
access to the arterial street main roadway.
   STREET, MINOR. Any street not specifically classified on the thoroughfare
plan whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent properties.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity, acting as
a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or re-division of land into two or more lots,
tracts, sites, or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way or
easement.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of an official city plan referring to
transportation development goals, principles, and standards.
(Prior Code, § 12-404)
§ 154.005 SUBDIVISION NAMES.
   Subdivision names shall not duplicate existing subdivisions of record.
(Prior Code, § 12-405)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.020 STREETS.
   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall conform to all of the elements of the general plan and shall be
designed in accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   All such streets shall be related to existing and proposed streets in
the area, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and existing
and proposed land uses along such streets;
   (B)   All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting lots
shall conform to the applicable zoning regulations;
   (C)   Where such streets are not shown in the official city plan, the
arrangements of these streets in the subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
streets in the surrounding areas; or
      (2)   Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic;
   (E)   Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, the Planning Commission shall require:
      (1)   Marginal access streets;
      (2)   Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line;
      (3)   Deep lots with rear service streets; or
      (4)   Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate
protection and stabilization of residential properties and to afford separation
of through and local traffic.
   (F)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited access highway, the Planning Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way;
   (G)   Reserve strips designed and used for the primary purpose of
controlling access to minor streets by parties or persons other than a public
agency shall be prohibited;
   (H)   Street alignment requirements are as follows:
      (1)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided;
      (2)   A tangent of not less than 100 feet in length shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets;
      (3)   Sight distance: Minimum clear sight distance, measured along the
chord of the center line, shall be provided on all streets as follows:
         (a)   Arterial streets: 400 feet;
         (b)   Collector streets: 350 feet; or
         (c)   Minor streets: 250 feet.
   (I)   Street rights-of-way and roadway widths are as follows:
      (1)   Street rights-of-way and roadway width shall conform to the
official city plan;
      (2)   All streets shall be paved according to the established standards
adopted by the City Council; or
      (3)   The following minimum standards shall apply:
 
Street Type           Width Roadway
Convenience collector 70    44
Industrial collector  70    44
Local street          50    30
Primary arterial      120   44
Residential collector 60    32
Secondary arterial    100   44
 
      (4)   Half streets are prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations;
      (5)   In no event shall lots facing a one-half minor residential street
be permitted; or
      (6)   Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street is platted within such tract.
   (J)   Arterial street frontage access control requirements are as follows:
      (1)   No access on an arterial street shall occur within minimum
intervals of 600 feet, measured from the nearest intersecting rights-of-way
lines (except as modified by division (J)(2) below. The distance may be
extended or increased if traffic conditions as determined by the Planning
Commission warrant such extension;
      (2)   In commercial and industrial subdivisions, specifically designated
“one-way turn only” access may be provided in the direction of the adjacent
traffic lane at a minimum distance of 300 feet between major street
intersections or a minimum of 300 feet between each access point;
      (3)   Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to an
arterial or commercial street, and may have access to a collector street, if
traffic conditions as determined by the Planning Commission warrant such
extension, but shall not have access to a residential street;
      (4)   To assure traffic safety, appropriate nonaccess provisions shall be
designated and dimensioned along all abutting streets in commercial and
industrial subdivisions, and along major streets in residential subdivisions. A
description of such nonaccess provisions shall appear upon the plat;
      (5)   Access to property occurring within the minimum distance prescribed
for major street access, 600 feet, shall only be by the closest service or
frontage road entrance onto the major street; or
      (6)   Individual driveways will be so located on each lot to avoid direct
vehicular access to or from any expressway, thoroughfare, or arterial street.
Driveways should be located to enable direct access primarily to or from a
minor street or, if necessary, to the collector streets which serve as feeders
to or distributors from the major streets.
   (K)   No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be referred to the post
office for recommendation and subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission and the City Council;
   (L)   Street grade requirements are as follows:
      (1)   The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.4%;
      (2)   Except where unusual topographic conditions justify an exception,
the maximum grade of all streets shall not be greater than the following:
 
Street Type     Grade
Arterial        3%
Collector       5%
Service streets 7%
 
   (M)   Street intersection requirements are as follows:
      (1)   Streets are laid out to intersect at right angles and may be
curved, if necessary, in order to make this possible. In no event shall a
street intersect any other street at any angle of less than 75 degrees;
      (2)   Street corners on local residential streets shall have a minimum
radius of 20 feet at curbline or its equivalent;
      (3)   Street corners on commercial and industrial streets shall have a
minimum radius of 25 feet at the curbline or its equivalent;
      (4)   Street intersections involving major thoroughfares shall have a
minimum street corner radius of 30 feet at the curbline or its equivalent;
      (5)   All street corner radii shall be shown on the preliminary and final
plats; and
      (6)   A 25-foot area of clear vision at street intersections in
subdivisions shall be provided. This area shall be kept clear of all structures
and vegetation exceeding a height of three feet above the established city
street elevation.
   (N)   Cul-de-sac and dead-end street requirements are as follows:
      (1)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet except where
topography would render impracticable the standard distance as set forth in §
154.023 of these regulations;
      (2)   Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a
minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet;
      (3)   The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall have a
minimum width of 30 feet;
      (4)   In the case of temporarily dead-ended streets which are stub
streets designed to provide further connection with adjoining unsubdivided
areas, the Planning Commission may require:
         (a)   Temporary easement for a turnaround having a radius of 50 feet;
or
         (b)   An appropriate area for a backaround.
      (5)   In all instances, proper provisions shall be made for adequate
storm drainage so that storm water does not collect at the ends of these
streets.
(Prior Code, § 12-410) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.021 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
   (B)   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall be not less than
30 feet in width.
   (C)   Alleys in residential areas shall be not less than 20 feet in width
when provided.
   (D)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   (E)   Dead-end alleys are prohibited except where natural or other features
make it impossible to continue them. Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable,
they shall be provided with adequate turn around areas with a minimum radius of
40 feet at the dead-end. Backaround areas may be allowed in residential
subdivisions.
(Prior Code, § 12-411) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.022 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for utility purposes,
easements shall be provided as may be advisable for poles, wires, conduits,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines, and other
similar purposes.
   (B)   Rear-yard easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. In the event one-
half of an easement is platted, it shall be not less than ten feet in width.
   (C)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and
such further width of construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
   (D)   Twenty-foot utility easements shall be provided at the end of cul-de-
sacs along major thoroughfares.
(Prior Code, § 12-412) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.023 BLOCKS.
   (A)   In general, blocks should have the following dimensions:
 
       Minimum  Maximum
Length 600 feet 1,200 feet
Width  240 feet 400 feet
 
   (B)   The foregoing dimensions are subject to adjustment upon recommendation
by the Planning Commission where topography, the character of the proposed
development, or other similar conditions justify blocks of greater or lesser
length or width.
   (C)   Block lengths and widths are measured from the street right-of-way
line.
   (D)   Wherever blocks are longer than 1,000 feet, crosswalks may be required
at the approximate center of the block.
(Prior Code, § 12-413) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.024 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the
type of development and use contemplated.
   (B)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the existing zoning regulations, but
in no case shall the width of a lot designed for residential use be less than
50 feet.
   (C)   Each lot shall have access and front upon a public street.
   (D)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where their use will produce definite advantages in meeting special situations
in relation to topography and proper land use.
   (E)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
(Prior Code, § 12-414) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.025 MARGINAL LAND.
   When a plat is filed on land that is subject to flooding or has been flooded
within the last 20 years and corrective measures have not been taken to prevent
flooding, or when the land has soil conditions unsuitable for building
purposes, the plat shall not be acceptable except where the property is
dedicated to the city or other appropriate municipality subject to its
acceptance for a watercourse, water drainage basin, a park, or a conservancy
district or for any other purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 12-415) Penalty, see §
154.999
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.040 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Each block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less
than three-quarters inch in diameter and 24 inches long and placed at least one
inch below finished grade.
   (B)   Monuments marking property lines and corners shall not be disturbed;
or if such disturbance is necessary, the monuments are to be replaced at the
exact spot from which they were removed.
(Prior Code, § 12-420) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.041 IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Any final plat or subdivision located within the corporate limits are
not approved unless the subdivider or developer shall provide the facilities
listed below or file a surety bond with the City Clerk to ensure the actual
construction of such improvements according to the plans and specifications
approved by the City Council or City Engineer within a period of time not to
exceed one year from date of final plat approval. Such bond shall equal 100% of
the cost of improvements as estimated by the City Council or City Engineer.
Conditions stipulated by the bond shall be acceptable to the City Attorney and
City Council. No building shall take place until such facilities have been
constructed:
      (1)   Water mains properly connected with public water supply system
provided to ensure adequate water flow for fire protection;
      (2)   A sanitary sewer system properly connected with the existing
system, in accordance with standard specifications governing sanitary sewer
construction and in accord with requirements of State and County Health
Departments;
      (3)   Streets graded to the full roadway width and to the, established
grade, such streets will be paved with a stable base material such as concrete
or asphalt; and
      (4)   Storm drainage facilities, curbs, and gutters to provide adequate
surface water drainage for the area being drained.
   (B)   All such facilities are installed according to plans and
specifications of this city, and the city will extend any existing water or
sewer line 100 feet in any direction to assist any property owner to connect to
our services. Any cost past the 100 feet will be at the property owner’s
expense.
   (C)   All lots in residential subdivisions where septic tanks or individual
sewer disposal devices are to be installed shall not contain less than 15,000
square feet, and the width of the lot at the building line shall be a minimum
of 100 feet. All such lots to be serviced by private sewerage facilities shall
comply with the regulations of the County and State Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 12-421) (Ord. 00-23, passed 7-10-2000) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.042 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   Where a site for a proposed park, playground, playfield, school,
library, fire station, or other public use is proposed by the official city
plan, or is deemed by the Planning Commission to be necessary, and is located
in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Planning Commission may require the
reservation of such area within the subdivision.
   (B)   The developer shall give the public agency involved 60 days’ written
notice of the proposed subdivision, with a copy of such notice to be mailed to
the Planning Commission. During the 60-day period, the agency may or may not
express its interest in the proposed subdivision in connection with the
provision of appropriate public site. Should such interest be expressed, that
agency shall have a period of an additional 30 days within which to arrange for
the acquisition of the public site under consideration.
   (C)   Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of
suitable size for the public site intended, the site provided may be combined
with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas; thus, in the
aggregate, there will be provided a site of suitable size for the purpose
intended.
(Prior Code, § 12-422) Penalty, see §
154.999
PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
§ 154.055 PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall submit at least ten copies of the preliminary
plat to the City Clerk who shall distribute them as follows: one copy each to
the school board, the local gas company, the local electric company, the local
telephone company, Oklahoma State Transportation Commission, Board of County
Commissioners, and four copies to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall return one to the subdivider and forward one to the City
Council, together with its report and recommendation, and retain the other
copies for its use and official record.
   (B)   After receipt of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission shall,
within 30 days of its submission, approve, conditionally approve, or reject the
plat. The subdivider is notified in writing of this action, together with any
conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
   (C)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not in all cases entitle the
subdivider to approval of the final plat. After preliminary approval, if any
conditions arise which would cause the preliminary plat to become
unsatisfactory due to health, safety, or welfare of the community, the Planning
Commission shall recommend that the final plat be rejected.
(Prior Code, § 12-430)
§ 154.056 PRELIMINARY PLAT DATA.
   (A)   The preliminary plat is drawn on suitable tracing paper or cloth with
black waterproof ink or pencil; however, legible reproduction of the drawings
may be submitted.
   (B)   The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Date, scale, and north point;
      (2)   The proposed subdivision name and all intended street names;
      (3)   The name of the subdivider or the engineer or surveyor preparing
the plat;
      (4)   Legal description showing location of plat;
      (5)   Topographic survey map of the area being subdivided, showing
contours at two-foot intervals;
      (6)   A key map showing the location of the plat in the section,
township, and range in which the plat is located;
      (7)   Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;
      (8)   Location, widths, and names of all existing platted or dedicated
streets, alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings,
bridges, and other pertinent data as required by the Planning Commission;
      (9)   The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or
streams. All elevations shall refer to the established U.S. Coast and Geodetic
Survey datum;
      (10)   When a subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distance and
bearings of a meander line is established not less than 20 feet back from the
ordinary high water mark of the lake or from the bank of the stream;
      (11)   Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way, including
alleys, highways, and easements, whether private or public, and for public and
private utilities;
      (12)   The exact length of the exterior boundaries of the land to be
subdivided;
      (13)   Approximate dimensions of all lots;
      (14)   Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of all tangents; and
      (15)   Approximate location and area of property to be dedicated for
public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in
the subdivision, with any conditions of such dedication or reservation.
(Prior Code, § 12-431)
§ 154.057 OTHER DATA.
   (A)   Where deed restrictions are to be recorded on the plat, a brief
description of the proposed restrictions should accompany the preliminary plat.
   (B)   A description of the improvements such as grading, paving, tree
planting, walks, and installation of utilities which the subdivider proposes to
make, and the time when they are proposed to be made, shall also accompany the
preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 12-432)
§ 154.058 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat is a print or series of prints 24 x 36 inches in size
on a stable base tracing medium of mylar, cronar, or other suitable durable
material or linen tracing cloth. When more than one sheet is used in connection
with the plat, each additional sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall
contain a notation indicating the total number of sheets.
   (B)   The developer shall submit sufficient copies for examination, but in
no case shall it be less than the following:
      (1)   Five paper copies and one copy on stable base tracing medium of
mylar or comparable cronaflex of the proposed subdivision, drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet; such final plat is prepared by a registered civil
engineer or surveyor; and
      (2)   Five copies of any restrictive covenants.
   (C)   The final plat of the proposed subdivision is submitted to the
Planning Commission and City Council for final approval within one year of the
date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final
approval within such time, the preliminary plat approval is considered as null
and void unless the Planning Commission agrees to an extension of time. The
final plat is filed in the office of the County Clerk within six months after
approval of the City Council and if not filed within such time, the approval is
considered null and void.
   (D)   The final plat shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of subdivision and the name of the owner, the subdivider, and
the engineer or land surveyor;
      (2)   Date, north point, scale (written and graphic);
      (3)   Boundaries of the subdivided area with accurate distances and
bearings noted thereon;
      (4)   Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all
monuments found or placed in making the survey;
      (5)   The lines, names, and width or dimensions of all proposed street
rights-of-way;
      (6)   The lines, widths, and purposes of all easements;
      (7)   Numbered designation of all lots in the subdivision with their
lines and dimensions accurately shown;
      (8)   The names of all adjacent subdivisions;
      (9)   Certification by the registered professional engineer or land
surveyor who designed the plat as to the accuracy of the survey and plat;
      (10)   Dedication by the owner of lands for public use, including streets
and walkways;
      (11)   Exact dimensions of all lots;
      (12)   Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents; and
      (13)   Any additional data as may be required by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 12-433) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.059 FEES.
   (A)   The subdivider shall pay to the city a preliminary plat and
application fee as set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
   (B)   The subdivider shall pay to the city a final plat filing fee per
residential lot. When acreage is involved, such as sites for industrial,
housing projects, and commercial purposes, the fee is figured per acre.
(Prior Code, § 12-434) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.060 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall review the final plat for conformance
with the preliminary plat and shall prepare a set of written recommendations to
be submitted to the City Council at the time the final plat is considered.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall examine the final plat and shall approve
or disapprove the plat within 30 days of the date of its submittal. If the
final plat is approved with the modification or waiver of certain requirements,
the Planning Commission shall specify the reasons therefor. If the final plat
is disapproved, the grounds for refusal, including citation of the applicable
regulations or general plan, shall be stated on the records of the Planning
Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to act, a certificate by the City
Clerk as to date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of the
Planning Commission to act thereon within such specified time is sufficient in
lieu of written endorsement of approval.
   (C)   The action of the Planning Commission is shown on the final plat, with
the date of action, over the signature of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, or
Secretary.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council the tracing
and two paper copies of the final plat, together with four copies of the
restrictive covenants, and a listing of all required improvements indicating
that they have been installed, or that a contract and bond ensuring their
installation, satisfactory to the City Council, has been executed and received
by the City Clerk.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the final plat as approved by
the Planning Commission to the school board affected, the public utility
companies, and utility departments.
   (F)   After the Planning Commission and City Council have approved the final
plat, no change is made therein unless the plat is resubmitted for approval of
the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (G)   Before recording the final plat, it is submitted to the City Council
for approval and for acceptance of public ways, service and utility easements,
and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat is shown over the
signature of the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk or his or her Deputy.
The disapproval of any plat by the City Council is deemed a refusal of the
proposed dedication shown thereon.
   (H)   After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required
signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the Planning
Commission with two dark line prints thereof and one contact reproducible cloth
tracing, the tracing to be filed with the City Clerk. One dark line print is
retained in the permanent file of the Planning Commission and one is sent to
the office of the City Clerk. The applicant shall file, within six months after
the date of approval by the City Council, the original tracing, one dark line
copy on lineback, and one contact reproducible cloth tracing or film with the
City Clerk.
   (I)   Council approval of any final plat is conditioned upon the completion
of the subdivision in conformance with the standards and requirements in the
final plat. If the completed subdivision does not meet the plat requirements,
the Council may withdraw its approval and direct the Clerk to file appropriate
notice of the withdrawal with the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 12-435)
ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
§ 154.075 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Whenever it would be inadvisable to apply a provision of this chapter
because a tract is of such unusual size, shape, or character as would render an
extraordinary hardship not created or imposed by the owner or developer, the
Planning Commission may modify such provisions only to provide that substantial
justice may be done, the public interest secured, and the intent and spirit of
these regulations fulfilled; provided that in no event shall the requirements
of procedure or improvements be waived. Such modification thus granted is made
at the written request of the developer stating the reasons for such
modification and is waived only by three-fourths vote of the regular membership
of the Planning Commission. Any such modifications thus granted is duly entered
and recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission, with the reasons
justifying the modifications set forth therein.
(Prior Code, § 12-440)
§ 154.076 ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT.
   The City Council may, from time to time, adopt, amend, and make public rules
and regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end that the
public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. These regulations
may be enlarged or amended by the City Council after public hearing, due notice
of which shall be given as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 12-441)
§ 154.077 VIOLATION.
   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement, or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land in a
subdivision filed of record after the initial effective date of this chapter
(1-15-1970) which does not comply with all of the provisions of these
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 12-442) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided
in §
10.99 of this code. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition to other remedies provided herein, the city may
institute any proper action or proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-442)
APPENDIX A: SUGGESTED FORMS OF CERTIFICATES
Section
1.   Subdivision bond
2.   Owner’s certificate and dedication
3.   Surveyor’s certificate
4.   Certificate of Clerk
5.   Planning Commission certification
6.   City Council approval
7.   Septic tank certification
8.   Mortgage release
9.   County Treasurer’s certificate
10.   Application for preliminary approval of subdivision
§ 1. SUBDIVISION BOND.
   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
   That we,                                                                   ,
as PRINCIPAL, and the undersigned Surety, are held and firmly bound unto the
City of                                                , Oklahoma, hereafter
called CITY, in the full sum of
                                                      Dollars
($               ), for the payment of which, well and truly to be made, we,
and each of us, bind ourselves jointly and severally, by these presents.
      Dated this                      day
                                       , 20                .
   The conditions of this obligation are such that:
   WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has submitted to the CITY a preliminary plat for
subdivision of a tract of land described as follows:
   AND, WHEREAS, PRINCIPAL has, pursuant to the ordinances of the City of
                        
elected to file this bond in lieu of actual completion of improvements and
utilities in the above subdivision.
   NOW THEREFORE, if the PRINCIPAL shall, within two (2) years from date of
approval of the final plat of the subdivision faithfully install and complete
improvements and utilities in the subdivision according to the requirements or
ordinances, approved plans, specifications, and subdivision rules and
regulations of the CITY, and pay all bills for contractors, subcontractors,
labor and materials incurred in completion thereof; and shall hold harmless and
indemnify the CITY and all interested property owners against liability, loss
or damage by reason of failure of PRINCIPAL to faithfully perform the
conditions hereof, then this obligation shall be null and void, otherwise to
remain in full force and effect; PROVIDED, however, that actions upon this bond
by contractors, subcontractors, laborers, or materialmen shall be limited to
six (6) months from and after completion of the improvements and utilities
above referred to.
   Signed, sealed and delivered the day and year first herein above written.
                                                                                   
                     Principal
ATTEST:
                                                                 BY                                                               
                                                                     
ATTEST:
                                                                  BY                                                               
Secretary
Approved as to form and legality this                     day of
                                A.D., 20              .
                                                                                         
                     Attorney
Approved by the City Council of the City of
                                          this                     day of
                                A.D., 20              .
ATTEST:
                                                                  BY                                                               
Clerk                           Mayor
§ 2. OWNER’S CERTIFICATE AND DEDICATION.
   We,
                                                                                        the
undersigned, do hereby certify that we are the owners of and the only person
having any right, title or interest in the land shown on the annexed plat of
                                                           , and that the plat
represents a correct survey of the above described property made with our
consent, and that we hereby dedicate to the public use all the streets as shown
on the annexed plat; that the easements as shown on the annexed plat are
created for the installation and maintenance of public utilities; that we
hereby guarantee a clear title to all lands so dedicated from ourselves, our
heirs or assigns forever and have caused the same to be released from all
encumbrances so that the title is clear, except as shown in the abstractor’s
certificate.
   RESTRICTIONS: (if any, follow here)
   Witness                                                                   
hand                                                    this
                              day of                                       , 20
             .
   (ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
§ 3. SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.
   I,                                                 , the undersigned, do
hereby certify that I am by profession a land surveyor or civil engineer and
that the annexed map of consisting of                                       
sheets, correctly represents a survey made under my supervision on the
                                day of
                                                , 20         , and that all of
the monuments shown hereon actually exist and their positions are correctly
shown.
                                                                                         
                     Signature
   (ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
§ 4. CERTIFICATE OF CLERK.
   I,                                                             , Clerk of
the City of                                 State of Oklahoma, hereby certify
that I have examined the records of the city and find that all deferred
payments or unmatured installments upon special assessments have been paid in
full and that there is no special assessment procedure now pending against the
land as shown on the annexed plat of
                                                               except
                                                       on this
                        day of
                                                   , 20        .
                                                                                         
                     Clerk
§ 5. PLANNING COMMISSION CERTIFICATION.
   I,                                                           , Chairperson/
Secretary of the Planning Commission for the City of
                                                     , State of Oklahoma,
hereby certify that the Commission duly approved the annexed map of
                                              , on the
                            day of                                            ,
20           .
                                                                                          
                     Chairperson/Secretary
§ 6 CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of
                                       that the dedications shown on the
attached plat of                                                         are
hereby accepted.
   Adopted by the City Council of the City of
                                                this                       day
of                                          , 20           .
   Approved by the Mayor of the City of
                                                  this
                           day of                                           ,
20           .
                                                                                          
                     Mayor
   ATTEST:
                                                                   
   Clerk
§ 7. SEPTIC TANK CERTIFICATION.
   (Applicable where septic tanks are to be used.)
   I,                                                       registered engineer
in the State of Oklahoma, certify that a soil survey has been completed by
                                                                 (name of
testing laboratory) and that this test shows that soil to be sufficiently
porous to permit septic tanks for each lot shown on the plat.
                                                                                     
                        Signature
§ 8. MORTGAGE RELEASE.
   In consideration of the platting of the property shown on the annexed map of
                   Addition, and other good and valuable considerations,
receipt of which is hereby acknowledged
                                            and
                                                     dated the day of
                         , 20             , to
                                                                                which
was recorded in Book                    , of Mortgages on Page
                  of the records of                                        
County, State of Oklahoma, insofar as the same covers all property dedicated
for streets, alleys, parks, boulevards, easements, or other public use, as
shown on the map.
   Witness                                                      hand
                                this                  day of
                                 , 20  .
   (ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
§ 9. COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATE.
   I,                                               , do hereby certify that I
am the duly elected, qualified and acting County Treasurer of
                                                  County, State of Oklahoma.
That the tax records of the County show all taxes are paid for the year
                    and                      prior years on the land shown on
the annexed plat of                                Addition in
                            County, Oklahoma; that the required statutory
security has been deposited in the office of the County Treasurer, guaranteeing
payment of the current year’s taxes.
   In witness whereof, the County Treasurer has caused the instrument to be
executed at              , Oklahoma on this                                    
day of                           , 20           .
                                                                                          
                     County Treasurer
§ 10. APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION.
   To: The City Planning Commission
   Application is hereby made for preliminary approval of the subdivision of
land described below:
      Proposed name of subdivision:
                                                                        
      Legal description of land:
                                                                               
      Area:                                                           acres.
      Name of owner(s):
                                                                                      
   Accompanying this application are ten (10) prints of a preliminary plat of
the proposed subdivision; also five (5) copies of any restrictive covenants.
   I have examined and am familiar with the regulations covering the
subdivision of land, as adopted by the Planning Commission.
   Respectfully submitted this                            day of
                                , 20           .
                  (Signed)
                                                                    
                  (Print or type:
)                                                            
                  Name:
                                                                       
                  Address:
                                                                   
                  Telephone:
                                                                
                                                                                                   
                  (For use of Planning Commission)
      This will acknowledge receipt of
                                        dollars ($
                             ) in payment of the fee required for the above
requested preliminary approval of applicant’s subdivision.
Date:                                              
               Title:
                                                                        
 
CHAPTER 155: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Interpretation and application
   
155.004   Jurisdiction
   
155.005   Definitions
Establishment of Districts
   
155.020   Zoning districts established
   
155.021   Zoning map incorporated
   
155.022   District boundaries established
   
155.023   Maintenance of official zoning map
Provisions Applying to All or to Several Districts
   
155.035   Limitation on use
   
155.036   Division of lots
   
155.037   Yards
   
155.038   Street access
   
155.039   Trailers and commercial vehicles
   
155.040   Off-street parking requirements
   
155.041   Required open space for parking
   
155.042   Location of parking
   
155.043   Joint parking and off-site parking facilities
   
155.044   Size of off-street parking space
   
155.045   Amount of off-street parking and loading required
   
155.046   Paved surface required
   
155.047   Off-street parking lots located with or adjacent to a residential
district
   
155.048   Fences, walls, and hedges
   
155.049   Sewer service
Nonconformities
   
155.060   Intent
   
155.061   Nonconforming lots of record
   
155.062   Nonconforming structures
   
155.063   Nonconforming uses of structures
   
155.064   Nonconforming uses of land
   
155.065   Changes in nonconformity
Specific District Regulations
   
155.080   A-G General Agricultural District
   
155.081   R-S Single-Family Residential District
   
155.082   R-G General Residential District
   
155.083   R-GM General Residential District Allowing Manufactured and Mobile
Homes
   
155.084   C-C Convenience Commercial District
   
155.085   C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District
   
155.086   C-G General Commercial District
   
155.087   I-L Light Industrial District
   
155.088   I-H Heavy Industrial District
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.100   Responsibility for enforcement
   
155.101   Zoning clearance permit required
   
155.102   Change in use of land or building
   
155.103   Application
   
155.104   Accompanying material
   
155.105   Fees
Amendments
   
155.120   Planning Commission recommendation required
   
155.121   Application for amendment
   
155.122   Notice and public hearing
   
155.123   Planning Commission action
   
155.124   City action
   
155.125   Protest to amendment
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the
Zoning Regulations of the City of Hobart, Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 12-201) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of the community; lessening congestion in the
streets, securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing
adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue
concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the community; and promoting the development of the community
in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code, § 12-202) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.003 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   As concerns interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction than are imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other
rules or regulations or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. Terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in §
155.005. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular.
(Prior Code, § 12-203) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.004 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits of
the city. Territory annexed to the corporate limits of the city subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter shall immediately be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and shall be deemed to be designated as R-S Single-
Family Residence.
(Prior Code, § 12-204) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. Use or structure customarily incidental,
appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the
principal use of land and which is located upon the same lot therewith.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes including farming,
dairying, pasturage, horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce;
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be
secondary to that of normal agricultural activities and provided further that
these above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of swine or other
animals; stockyards or commercial feedlots for cattle.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use not more than 30 feet
wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used
for the display, sales, or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in
operable condition and where no repair work is done.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles, or trailers; collision services including body, frame,
or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle
steam cleaning.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental replacement of parts and motor service
to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half ton capacity.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or FILLING STATION. Any area used for retail sale
of gasoline or oil fuels or automobile accessories, and incidental services
including facilities for lubricating, and washing and cleaning, but not
including painting, major repair or the sale of butane or propane fuels.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH or AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A building or structure or chain
conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners, and other mechanical devices used primarily
for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
   BLOCK. In describing the boundaries of a district, the word BLOCK refers to
the legal description. In all other cases, the word BLOCK refers to the
property abutting one side of the street between two intersecting streets or
between an intersecting street and a railroad right-of-way or between an
intersecting street and a watercourse.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT of the City of Hobart,
Oklahoma; also referred to as the BOARD.
   BOARDING HOUSE and ROOMING HOUSE. Where meals or lodging are provided for
persons other than the family or their relatives and excluding facilities for
transient persons such as hotels, motels, inns, and other such facilities.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
or property. Includes the word STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See definition of ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average line of the highest
and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the
highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of a mansard roof or
the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   BUILDING LINE. A line established beyond which no part of a building shall
project, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building or buildings in which the principal use of
the building site is conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling shall
be deemed to be the PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the building site.
   BULLETIN BOARD. Any sign announcing the activities of an educational,
religious, institutional, or similar use.
   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead
and dedicated for cemetery purposes.
   CHILDCARE CENTER. Any place, home, or institution which receives three or
more children under the age of 16 years for care apart from their natural
parents, legal guardians, or custodians, and received for regular periods of
time for compensation; provided, however, this definition shall not include
public and private schools organized, operated, or approved under the laws of
this state, custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or
marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or
other religious or public institutions caring for children within their
institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending
services or meetings or classes and other church activities.
   CITY COUNCIL. The official governing body of the City of Hobart.
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission, as established by
the statutes hereinbefore cited, also referred to as PLANNING COMMISSION. The
PLANNING COMMISSION may also be the ZONING COMMISSION for the city.
   CLINIC. A place used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm, and injured persons and those in need of surgical or medical attention
but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept overnight on
the premises.
   CLUB. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying
regular dues, and organized for some common purpose, but not including a group
organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a
commercial enterprise.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The official city plan of the City of Hobart, Oklahoma;
also refers to the specific document, “Comprehensive General Plan - A Program
For The Next 20 Years.”
   CONVALESCENT HOME. A nursing home, a rest home; a home for the aged,
recuperating, chronically ill, or incurable persons, in which two or more
persons not of the immediate family are received, kept; or provided with food
and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or
similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of
disease or injury.
   COVERAGE. The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including
the area covered by all overhanging roofs.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence of
one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer coach, mobile
home, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units and designed for or used by three or more families; also
includes the word “apartments.”
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing one dwelling unit and
designed for or used exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling units and designed
for or used exclusively by two families; also includes the word “duplex.”
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms arranged, intended, or designed as a
habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath, and sleeping facilities for not more
than one family living independently of any other family.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
services by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.
   FAMILY. A person living alone or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit, using a single
facility in a dwelling unit, for culinary purposes, as distinguished from a
group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, motel, fraternity
house, or sorority house.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerlines of walls separating two buildings.
   FRONTAGE. The linear measurement of a lot boundary which is abutting a
street.
   GARAGE APARTMENT. A dwelling for one family erected as a part of a private
garage.
   GARAGE, PARKING. Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of
four or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is
incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities
are not provided.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or a portion of the principal
building used or intended for use by the occupants of the premises for storage
of passenger vehicles or trailers.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. The structure or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repairing or refinishing of any
vehicles.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
   HEIGHT. The vertical measurement of any structure on any parcel of land
measured from the average elevation of the lot or parcel to the uppermost point
of the structure.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a
dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which
is conducted entirely within the main or accessory building; provided that no
trading and merchandising is carried on and in connection with which there is
no display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one nonilluminated
nameplate, not more than two square feet in area, attached to the main or
accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is
customarily used in purely domestic or household purposes. A tea room,
restaurant, rest home, clinic, barbershop, beauty parlor, doctor’s or dentist’s
office, childcare center, tourist home or cabinet shop, metal shop,
refrigerator and electric motors, heating, ventilator and plumbing, lawn mower
repair, or auto repair garage shall not be deemed a HOME OCCUPATION.
   HOSPITAL. See definition of MEDICAL FACILITIES.
   HOTEL. A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six
or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without
meals for compensation, but not including trailer parks, or camp, hospital,
asylum, orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint.
   INDUSTRY. Storage, repair, manufacture, preparation, or treatment of any
article, substance, or any commodity for commercial use.
   INSTITUTIONAL USES. Those uses organized, established, used, or intended to
be used for the promotion of a public, religious, educational, charitable,
cultural, social, or philanthropic activity and normally operated on a
nonprofit basis.
   JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvage materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including
all wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards
for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and
equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawnshops and
establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and
household equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvage material
incidental to manufacturing operations.
   KENNEL. Any structure or premises on which four or more dogs over four
months of age are kept.
   LOADING SPACE. A space on the same lot as the principal use of at least ten
feet in width and 30 feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least
14 feet, designated for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOT. A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open spaces as required by this chapter, and having access on a public street.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting on a
street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides
is less than 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. Any boundary of a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where
the lot abuts more than one street, the owner may select the FRONT LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most
nearly parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT, WEDGE SHAPED. A lot situated so that the front is either wider or
narrower than the rear of the lot.
   LOTS OF RECORD. A separate and distinct parcel designated on a legally
recorded subdivision plat or a legally recorded deed filed in the records of
Kiowa County, State of Oklahoma.
   MEAN LOT ELEVATION. The average elevation of a lot.
   MEDICAL FACILITIES.
      (1)   DENTAL OR DOCTOR’S OFFICE. The same as dental or medical clinic,
including the various dental and medical specialties.
      (2)   DENTAL OR MEDICAL CLINIC. A building used for the examination and
treatment of the physically ill, provided that no facilities are provided for
patients remaining overnight except under emergency conditions except as
provided for herein.
      (3)   HOSPITAL. An institution providing physical and mental health
services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or
injured, and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices
which are an integral part of the facilities.
      (4)   NURSING HOME, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOMES. See definition of
CONVALESCENT HOME.
      (5)   PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER. A facility primarily utilized by a health
unit for providing PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES, including related facilities.
   MOBILE HOME. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for
transportation, after fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or
on flatbeds or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be
occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary or permanent foundations, and connection to utilities.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A portion of a mobile home park allocated to the exclusive
use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for placement of mobile homes to be occupied as
residences.
   MOTEL. An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be
used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient persons.
   OPEN SPACE. An area included in any side, rear, or front yard, or any other
unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for
the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches.
   PARCEL. A LOT as defined herein.
   PARKING SPACE. A permanently surfaced area of not less than 200 square feet,
either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access
drives, for the parking of motor vehicles.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. See definition of CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   ROOMING HOUSE. See definition of BOARDING HOUSE AND ROOMING HOUSE.
   SHALL. Is mandatory and not directory, except where the natural construction
of the writing indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 12-203)
   SIGN. Any word, lettering, part of letters, figures, numerals, phrases,
sentences, emblems, devices, designs, pictures, trade names, or trademarks by
which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a
firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a service, a
commodity or product, which are visible from any public street or right-of-way
and designed to attract attention. “For Sale” and “For Rent” shall be deemed
SIGNS within the meaning of this definition, but the term SIGN shall not
include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other
political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious, or like campaign, drive, movement, or event used for a public
purpose in the public interest.
   SIGN, DISPLAY SURFACE AREA. The net geometric area of the surface of the
sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated,
including the outward extremities of all letters, figures, characters and
delineations, provided that only one face of a double faced sign shall be
included in the computation of display surface area.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or
designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign erected on the face or outside wall of a building
which projects out at any angle therefrom.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Signs of temporary nature used to advertise the premises
for sale, rent, or lease.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it; or, if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREET. A public right-of-way more than 30 feet in width which provides the
primary public means of access to abutting property and used primarily for
vehicular circulation.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. Any street designated on the thoroughfare plan as an
arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, major street, and the like.
   STREET, MINOR. Any street not designated on the thoroughfare plan as an
arterial.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the structural members of a building,
such as walls, columns, beams, or girders.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location
on the ground (not including sidewalks, driveways, and similar improvement
areas).
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of the comprehensive plan referring to
transportation development goals, principles, and standards; also includes use
of the words “major street plan” and “trafficways plan.”
   TRAILER. A portable or mobile unit, other than a mobile home, used or
designed to carry or transport material or animals.
   USED. Includes “arranged,” “designed,” “constructed,” “altered,”
“converted,” “rented,” “leased,” or “intended to be used.”
(Prior Code, § 12-203)
   UTILITIES. Public or private facilities for distribution of water, gas,
electricity, telephone service, or the collection of sewerage.
   YARD. A required space on a lot unobstructed except as expressly permitted.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of a lot from side lot
line to side lot line abutting on a street, into which a building may not
protrude.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured from side lot
line to side lot line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from front yard to the rear yard abutting the
side lot line, into which no building may protrude.
(Prior Code, § 12-205)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 05-06, passed 2-14-2005)
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
§ 155.020 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   For the purpose of this chapter and the promotion of public health, safety,
and general welfare of the community, the following districts are hereby
established for the city:
   (A)   A-G General Agricultural District;
   (B)   R-S Single-Family District;
   (C)   R-G General Residential District;
   (D)   R-GM General Residential District Allowing Manufactured and Mobile
Homes;
   (E)   C-C Convenience Commercial District;
   (F)   C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District;
   (G)   C-G General Commercial District;
   (H)   I-L Light Industrial District; and
   (I)   I-H Heavy Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 12-210) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-9-
2021)
§ 155.021 ZONING MAP INCORPORATED.
   The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be established by
ordinance and shall be delineated and shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of
the city of Hobart, Oklahoma,” and the zoning map is hereby incorporated as a
part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-211) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-9-
2021)
§ 155.022 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ESTABLISHED.
   The boundaries of a zoning district shall extend to a centerline of abutting
streets, regardless of the legal description used in establishing such
districts. In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the “Zoning Map of the City of Hobart,” the Planning
Commission, upon written application or upon its own motion, shall recommend
the location of such boundaries to the Board of Adjustment, and the Board of
Adjustment shall make the final determination.
(Prior Code, § 12-212) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.023 MAINTENANCE OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to maintain an up to date
official “Zoning Map of the City of Hobart, Oklahoma,” including all amendments
directly adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-213) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR TO SEVERAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.035 LIMITATION ON USE.
   (A)   No land, building, structure, or improvement shall be used and no
building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved,
altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be
used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with
the use, height, area, coverage, yard, space, and other requirements
established in the district in which such land, building, structure, or
improvement is located, and such use is authorized, except as provided by §§
155.060 through
155.065, “Nonconformities,” of this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district
permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to
the conditions set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district,
unless otherwise specified.
   (C)   It is intended that this chapter be interpreted as not permitting a
dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or
intended to be used primarily for nonresidential purposes except that one
accessory residential unit may be provided for a night watchperson, motel
manager, or similar purpose where essential to the main use of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 12-215) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.036 DIVISION OF LOTS.
   An improved lot shall not hereafter be divided into two or more lots unless
all lots resulting from such division comply with all the applicable yard,
space, area, parking, and loading regulations of the zoning district in which
located.
(Prior Code, § 12-216) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.037 YARDS.
   (A)   No building, structure, or improvement shall be permitted to encroach
upon required yard spaces set forth in the provisions of this chapter;
provided, however, that surfaced parking facilities, signs, fences, and
gasoline pumping service units may be permitted to occupy required yard space
unless otherwise prohibited in those districts permitting such improvements and
provided that no inoperative vehicle may be stored in the front yard of a lot
in a residential district.
   (B)   Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project into
any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. Open uncovered porches or
open fire escapes may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to
exceed five feet.
(Prior Code, § 12-217) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 09-07, passed 2-9-
2009) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.038 STREET ACCESS.
   No principal building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not
abut a public dedicated street.
(Prior Code, § 12-218) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.039 TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel,
camping, and hauling, and mobile homes shall not be parked or stored on any lot
occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in
accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   No more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and
one-half tons’ rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall be
permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling
explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be permitted;
      (2)   No more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer per
family living on the premises shall be permitted, and the trailer shall not
exceed 30 feet in length or eight feet in width; and further provided that the
trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is
located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall
not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored
in any area within the incorporated limits except in a mobile home park
authorized under the ordinances of the city except as provided for in division
(B) below; and
      (3)   A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a mobile home park
which is in conformity with ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types may be displayed in such
commercial districts allowing sales of the vehicles or in such industrial
districts allowing their manufacture; provided, however, the vehicles may not
be used for dwelling purposes either temporarily or permanently except in a
mobile home park authorized under the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-219) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.040 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading
facilities be provided on off-the-street areas for each use of land within the
city. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use.
These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts.
(Prior Code, § 12-220) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.041 REQUIRED OPEN SPACE FOR PARKING.
   Off-street parking space may be a part of the required open space associated
with the permitted use, unless otherwise prohibited; provided, however, the
off-street parking requirements shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any
manner.
(Prior Code, § 12-221) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.042 LOCATION OF PARKING.
   The off-street parking lot shall be located within 200 feet, exclusive of
street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have direct access to a
street or alley.
(Prior Code, § 12-222) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.043 JOINT PARKING AND OFF-SITE PARKING FACILITIES.
   Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building,
shopping center, or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements
may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility,
cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of
spaces, for each use. Owners jointly provide for their individual parking needs
through a joint facility or facilities, provided that the total number of
spaces so provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual
requirements and that each business or other use is within 200 feet of the
parking facility.
(Prior Code, § 12-223) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.044 SIZE OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE.
   The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular
area having dimensions of not less than ten feet by 20 feet plus adequate area
for ingress and egress.
(Prior Code, § 12-224) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.045 AMOUNT OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIRED.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts
in accordance with the following schedule:
   (A)   Dwelling, single-family or duplex: One parking space for each separate
dwelling unit within the structure;
   (B)   Dwelling, multi-family: The number of spaces provided shall not be
less than one and one-half times the number of units in the dwelling;
   (C)   Boarding or rooming house or hotel: One parking space for each
sleeping room;
   (D)   Hospitals: One space for each four patient beds, exclusive of
bassinets, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for
each three employees including nurses, plus adequate area for the parking of
emergency vehicles;
   (E)   Medical or dental clinics or offices: Six spaces per doctor plus one
space for each two employees;
   (F)   Convalescent or nursing homes: One space for each six patient beds
plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one space for each two
employees including nurses;
   (G)   Community center, theater, auditorium, church sanctuary: One parking
space for each four permanent seats, based on maximum seating capacity, or each
50 square feet of floor area in rooms without permanent seating but intended to
be used for assembly purposes;
   (H)   Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement or
recreation: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for
assembly or recreation in the building;
   (I)   Office building: One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area in the building, exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities,
and building service;
   (J)   Commercial establishments not otherwise classified: One parking space
for each 150 square feet of floor space used for retail trade in the building
and including all areas used by the public; and
   (K)   Industrial establishments: One off-street parking space for each 500
square feet of gross floor area or one off-street parking space for each two
employees, whichever is greater, and one loading or unloading berth for each
25,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area.
(Prior Code, § 12-225) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.046 PAVED SURFACE REQUIRED.
   All parking spaces shall be paved with a sealed surface permanent pavement
and maintained in a manner that no dust will result from continued use.
(Prior Code, § 12-226) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.047 OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS LOCATED WITH OR ADJACENT TO A RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT.
   Whenever off-street parking lots for more than six vehicles are to be
located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions
shall apply:
   (A)   All sides of the lot within or abutting the residential district shall
be enclosed with a fence, wall, or hedge as specified under § 155.048 of this
subchapter;
   (B)   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard when the parking lot
is located in a residential district;
   (C)   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall
not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns;
   (D)   All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved
with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust
will be produced by continued use;
   (E)   Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that all light
is deflected from adjoining residential uses; and
   (F)   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to
guide traffic and to state the condition and terms of the use of the lots. Only
non-intermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 12-227) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 09-07, passed 2-9-
2009) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.048 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   The following requirements are intended to provide for the regulating of
fences, walls, and hedges in all districts:
   (A)   Fences, walls, and hedges in any district may be erected in a required
yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that:
      (1)   No fence, wall, or hedge in residential districts located in front
of the front building line shall exceed four feet in height, and no other fence
or wall shall exceed seven feet in height;
      (2)   Fences, walls, and hedges in residential districts enclosing
property of five acres or more and/or subdivision of ten acres or more shall
not exceed eight feet in height;
      (3)   Fences, walls, and hedges in commercial and industrial districts
shall not exceed ten feet in height; and
      (4)   Barbed wire may be permitted at the top of fences for security
reasons provided that the bottom strand of barbed wire shall not be less than
six feet above grade.
   (B)   No fence, wall, or hedge more than two feet in height above the curb
or sidewalk level shall be located within a triangular area measuring 25 feet
in two directions along the right-of-way lines from the point of street right-
of-way intersection;
   (C)   Fences and walls in residential districts located in front of the
front building line shall not be constructed of solid non see-through material.
Fences shall not have opacity of more than 30%;
   (D)   Fence types permitted:
      (1)   Masonry walls;
      (2)   Ornamental iron;
      (3)   Woven wire;
      (4)   Wood or other similar material; and
      (5)   Hedges.
   (E)   Fence types prohibited:
      (1)   Barbed wire in all districts except agricultural districts
including where abutting other districts.
      (2)   Any fence, in the opinion of the Chief Building Inspector, that
would constitute a hazard to the health of any person.
(Prior Code, § 12-228) (Ord. 09-07, passed 2-9-2009) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.049 SEWER SERVICE.
   No structure or use in any district shall be erected or commenced which does
not have a connection to the public sewer system, unless and until the County
Public Health Officer certifies that a septic tank or any substitute disposal
system can be installed and operated effectively. As a basis for making his or
her decision, the Public Health Officer may require such percolation tests as
he or she deems to be necessary. Such tests are to be made at the expense of
the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 12-229) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
Cross-reference:
   Toilet facilities required; nuisance, see §
93.012
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 155.060 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended but which would be
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this chapter.   
(Prior Code, § 12-230) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.061 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any district in which a lot exists of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter which does not conform in size or area to
the provisions of this chapter, buildings for the uses permitted in such
district may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this chapter, provided that such lot is in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
(Prior Code, § 12-231) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.062 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or
other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity;
   (B)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; and
   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Prior Code, § 12-232) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.063 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.
   If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the
lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in charging
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building;
   (C)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
   (D)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months, the
structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located; and
   (E)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
(Prior Code, § 12-233) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.064 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
lawful uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of
this chapter as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as they
remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter; and
   (C)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.
(Prior Code, § 12-234) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.065 CHANGES IN NONCONFORMITY.
   A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in
combination, shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the
district in which located; except that the board of adjustment may permit a
change to a more restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be
construed as an abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use.
(Prior Code, § 12-235) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.080 A-G GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. The A-G, General Agricultural District, is
established for several purposes:
      (1)   To provide for the continued use of land for predominantly
agricultural purposes;
      (2)   To preserve undeveloped areas until they can feasibly be developed
to urban standards and with adequate public safeguards of health, safety, and
the like; and
      (3)   To restrict development in areas subject to severe inundation until
such time as it can be shown that these areas are no longer subject to
flooding.
(Prior Code, § 12-240)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the A-G, General Agricultural District, the
following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Agriculture, as defined in this chapter;
      (2)   Single-family dwellings;
      (3)   Churches and temples;
      (4)   Elementary schools and high schools;
      (5)   Golf courses, but not including golf driving ranges, pitch and putt
courses, or miniature golf courses;
      (6)   Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit;
      (7)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes only and not
for dwelling purposes, nor for a period that exceeds the completion of
construction;
      (8)   Accessory buildings or uses incidental to the foregoing principal
uses;
      (9)   Municipal or community recreation centers;
      (10)   Police or fire stations;
      (11)   Public buildings or buildings operated in the public interest by a
not-for-profit corporation, including art galleries, post offices, libraries,
or museums;
      (12)   Public or not-for-profit auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, armories,
or sanitariums;
      (13)   Public or private hospitals or sanitariums;
      (14)   Public or private schools or colleges; and
      (15)   Public utility and service uses including electric substations,
gas regulator stations, electric, gas, telegraph, telephone, and water
transmission metering and distribution equipment and structure, micro-wave
relay towers, water reservoirs or pumping stations, and other similar
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 12-241)
   (C)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   The regulations are as follows:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: five acres;
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 330 feet;
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage: 10%;
         (d)   Maximum height: 35 feet;
         (e)   Maximum front yard setback: 50 feet;
         (f)   Minimum side yard setback: 30 feet; and
         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.
      (2)   All lots and improvements within the A-G District shall meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   All lots shall have not less than five acres of land, and not
more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot;
         (b)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 330 feet;
         (c)   Not more than 2% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of
this provision;
         (d)   No improvement of structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot;
         (e)   All structures shall have not less than a 50-foot front yard
setback;
         (f)   All principal structures shall have not less than a 30-foot side
yard setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not less than ten
feet; and
         (g)   All principal structures shall have not less than a 50-foot rear
yard setback. Accessory buildings may have a rear yard of not less than ten
feet.
(Prior Code, § 12-242)
   (D)   Signs and billboards. No signs, posters, bulletin boards, or other
similar displays shall be permitted in the A-G District except as follows:
      (1)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an
educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring an announcement
of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in
surface area nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by
constant light;
      (2)   One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a
single-family subdivision or permitted nonresidential use. The sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and illumination,
if any, shall be by constant light; and
      (3)   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. The sign shall
not exceed 80 square feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(Prior Code, § 243)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.081 R-S SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)    General description. The R-S, Single-Family Residential District, is
established as a district in which the use of land is for single-family
dwellings except as noted. It is the purpose and intent of this district to
promote the development of and the continued use of the land for single-family
dwellings and to prohibit commercial and industrial use or any other use which
would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of single
family dwellings in this district. The intent is to further discourage any use
in this district which would generate traffic or create congestion on
neighborhood streets other than the normal traffic which serves the residents
in the area. This district further encourages only those uses which, because of
character or size, would not create additional requirements and costs for
public services in excess of requirements and costs for single-family
dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 12-245)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the R-S, Single-Family Residential District,
the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings and duplexes, subject to the
requirements of division (D)(2)(a) below;
      (2)   Public schools and private schools where the curriculum is similar
in nature and preparation of course work to the public schools;
      (3)   Public park or playground; and
      (4)   Agricultural uses of the garden type that are not intended for
commercial purposes.
(Prior Code, § 12-246)
   (C)   Uses permitted subject to additional requirements. The following uses
may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing provided
they meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to applicable area
regulations:
      (1)   Churches. A minimum lot size of one acre and arterial street
frontage as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
      (2)   Library. Provided it has arterial street frontage as shown on the
thoroughfare plan;
      (3)   Home occupation. Provided that it is in keeping with the meaning of
HOME OCCUPATION as defined in § 155.005;
      (4)   Plant nursery. Provided that no building or structure is maintained
in connection therewith and no retailing of any material is carried on upon the
premises;
      (5)   Golf course, private or public, or country club. Provided that the
chief activity is for recreational purposes, and any commercial activity is
accessory or incidental thereto;
      (6)   Junior high or senior high schools. Provided that they have
arterial street frontage as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
      (7)   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings which are not a part of a
main building may include one private garage;
      (8)   Temporary structures. Temporary structures which are incidental to
the construction of the main building and will be removed when the main
structure is completed; and
      (9)   Parking lots. Provided they are within 200 feet of a commercial or
industrial district.
(Prior Code, § 12-247)
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   The regulations are as follows:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: 7,200 square feet;
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 60 feet;
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage: 30%;
         (d)   Maximum height: 35 feet;
         (e)   Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet;
         (f)   Minimum side yard setback: five feet interior lots; ten feet
street side of corner lots; and
         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback: 20% depth of lot.
      (2)   All lots and improvements within the R-S District shall meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   All lots shall have not less than 7,200 square feet of lot area,
and not more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot, except
that not less than 12,000 square feet shall be required for uses other than
single-family residences;
         (b)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 60 feet. The
frontage of any wedge-shaped lot which meets the requirements of minimum lot
size may be a minimum of 40 feet; however, the front building line on the lot
shall be a minimum of 60 linear feet measured at an equal distance parallel to
and from the front lot line;
         (c)   Not more than 30% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of
this provision;
         (d)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot;
         (e)   All structures shall have not less than 25-foot front yard
setback;
         (f)   For a single-family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of
the side yard shall be five feet for interior lot lines and ten feet for the
side yard abutting the side street on a comer lot. For buildings of more than
one story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be
not less than ten feet. For a principal building other than a single-family
dwelling, the minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height
of the building, but in no case less than 15 feet; and
         (g)   A rear yard of 20% of the depth of the lot shall be provided for
the principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in
the rear yard of a main building provided, however, that no accessory building
shall be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line.
(Prior Code, § 12-248)
   (E)   Signs and billboards. No signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards,
or other similar display shall be permitted in the R-S District except as
follows:
      (1)   A temporary bulletin board or sign not exceeding 12 square feet in
area, pertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which
board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or
sold;
      (2)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an
educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of
its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface
area nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light;
      (3)   Official public notices may be erected on affected property; and
      (4)   One nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area
and not containing lettering other than the name of the owner or occupants or
name or address of the premises.
(Prior Code, §12-249)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.082 R-G GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. This residential district is intended to provide
for both low and high population density. It is established as a district in
which the principal uses of the land are for multi-family dwellings and similar
high-density residential development. The intent is to encourage the
development and continued use of land for multi-family dwellings and to
prohibit commercial and industrial uses or any other use which would
substantially interfere with the development or continuation of multi-family
dwellings in this district. It is further intended to discourage any use which
would generate traffic or create congestion on the neighborhood streets other
than the normal traffic which serves the multi-family dwellings or similar
residential uses in this district and discourage any use which, because of its
character or size, would create additional requirements and costs for public
services which would be in excess of such requirements and costs if the
district were developed solely for multi-family or other similar residential
uses.
(Prior Code, § 12-250)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the R-G, General Residential District, the
following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted in §
155.081(B) for the R-S, Single-Family Residential District;
      (2)   Duplex;
      (3)   Multi-family dwelling; and
      (4)   Rooming or boarding house.
(Prior Code, § 12-251)
   (C)   Uses permitted subject to additional requirements.  The following uses
may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment after public hearing provided they
meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to applicable area
regulations:
      (1)   Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home, and hospitals, public
or private, provided they have frontage on an arterial street as shown on the
thoroughfare plan;
      (2)   Mobile home parks in compliance with §
155.083(F) of this chapter;
      (3)   Community services, cultural, and utility facilities, provided they
are located on a lot of not less than one acre and have frontage of an arterial
street as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
      (4)   Child care centers or day nurseries, provided they are located on a
lot not less than 10,000 square feet in area and have principal access on an
arterial street as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
      (5)   Any uses permitted subject to additional requirements in §
155.081(C) for the R-S, Single-Family Residential District; and
      (6)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses when located on the same lot.
(Prior Code, § 12-252)
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   The regulations are as follows:
         (a)   Minimum lot area.
            1.   Single-family: 6,000 square feet;
            2.   Duplex: 10,000 square feet; and
            3.   Multi-family: 10,000 square feet plus 2,000 each unit over
two.
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage.
            1.   Single-family: 50 feet;
            2.   Duplex: 60 feet; and
            3.   Multi-family: 100 feet.
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage.
            1.   Single-family: 30%;
            2.   Duplex: 35%; and
            3.   Multi-family: 50%.
         (d)   Maximum height.
            1.   Single-family: 35 feet;
            2.   Duplex: 35 feet; and
            3.   Multi-family: 35 feet.
         (e)   Minimum front yard setback.
            1.   Single-family: 25 feet;
            2.   Duplex: 25 feet; and
            3.   Multi-family: one foot per one foot of height; 15 feet
minimum.
         (f)   Minimum side yard setback.
            1.   Single-family: Five feet;
            2.   Duplex: Five feet; and
            3.   Multi-family: one foot per one foot of height; 15 feet
minimum.
         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback.
            1.   Single-family: 20%;
            2.   Duplex: 20%; and
            3.   Multi-family: 20%.
      (2)   All lots and improvements within the R-G District shall meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   All lots shall have an area of not less than 6,000 square feet
for a single-family dwelling, 10,000 square feet for a two-family dwelling, or
10,000 square feet plus 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over two for
multi-family dwellings. For uses other than dwelling purposes, the lot area
shall not be less than 10,000 square feet except as otherwise specified;
         (b)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 50 feet for
single-family dwelling, 60 feet for two-family dwelling, and 100 feet for
multi-family dwelling and all other uses;
         (c)   Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements, except that duplex shall not exceed 35% coverage and single-
family improvement 30%. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the
meaning of this provision;
         (d)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot;
         (e)   A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be provided on all
single-family and duplex dwellings. One foot of setback for each one foot of
height shall be provided for all uses other than single-family and duplex, but
not less than a 15-foot front yard shall be provided;
         (f)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than 15 feet. One foot of setback for each one foot of height for all uses
other than single-family and duplex shall be provided; and
         (g)   A rear yard of 20% of the depth of the lot shall be provided for
the principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory use shall be located
in the rear or side yard of a main building only; provided, however, that no
accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line.
(Prior Code, § 12-253)
   (E)   Signs and billboards. The control of signs and billboards in the R-
G District is the same as that set forth in §
155.081(D) of this chapter for the R-S District except that such uses as may be
permitted, subject to additional requirements may erect one non-illuminated
nameplate not exceeding 24 square feet in area, identifying the name and use of
the premises.
(Prior Code, § 12-254)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 05-04, passed 11-8-2004) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.083 R-GM GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ALLOWING MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE
HOMES.
   (A)   Intent. This residential district is intended to provide for both low
and high population density. It is established as a district in which the
principal uses of the land are for manufactured homes, mobile homes, multi-
family dwellings, and similar high density residential developments. The intent
is to encourage the development and continue use of land for manufactured
homes, mobile homes, multi-family dwellings, and to prohibit commercial and
industrial uses or any other use which would substantially interfere with the
development or continuation of manufactured homes, mobile homes, and multi-
family dwellings in this district. It is further intended to discourage any use
which would generate traffic or create congestion on the neighborhood streets
other than the normal traffic which serves the manufactured homes, mobile
homes, or similar residential uses in this district and discourage any use
which because of its character or size would create additional requirements and
costs for public services which would be in excess of the such requirements and
costs of the district were developed solely for manufactured home, mobile home,
and multi-family or other similar residential uses.
(Prior Code, § 12-255)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the R-GM General Residential District Allowing
Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted in §
155.081(B) for R-S, Single-Family Residential District and the uses permitted
in R-G, General Residential District (§
155.082); and
      (2)   Manufactured homes, and mobile homes.
(Prior Code, § 12-256)
   (C)   Uses permitted subject to additional requirements. The following uses
may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment after public hearing provided they
meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to applicable area
regulations:
      (1)   Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home, and hospitals, public
or private, provided they have frontage on an arterial street as shown on the
thoroughfare plan;
      (2)   Mobile home parks in compliance with division (F) below;
      (3)   Community services, cultural and utility facilities, provided they
are located on a lot not less than 10,000 square feet in area and have
principal access on an arterial street as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
      (4)   Child care centers or day nurseries provided they are located on a
lot not less than 10,000 square feet and have principal access on an arterial
street as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
      (5)   Any uses permitted subject to additional requirements in §
155.081(C) for the R-S, Single-Family Residential District; and
      (6)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses when located on the same lot.
(Prior Code, § 12-257)
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   Minimum lot area.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: 5,625 square feet;
         (b)   Single-family: 6,000 square feet;
         (c)   Duplex: 10,000 square feet; and
         (d)   Multi-family: 10,000 square feet plus 2,000 each unit over two.
      (2)   Minimum lot frontage.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: 37.5 feet;
         (b)   Single-family: 50 feet;
         (c)   Duplex: 60 feet; and
         (d)   Multi-family: 100 feet.
      (3)   Maximum percent coverage.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: 30%;
         (b)   Single-family: 30%;
         (c)   Duplex: 35%; and
         (d)   Multi-family: 50%.
      (4)   Maximum height.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: 35 feet;
         (b)   Single-family: 30 feet;
         (c)   Duplex: 35 feet; and
         (d)   Multi-family: 35 feet.
      (5)   Minimum front yard setback.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: 25 feet;
         (b)   Single-family: 25 feet;
         (c)   Duplex: 25 feet; and
         (d)   Multi-family: one foot per one foot of height; 15 feet minimum.
      (6)   Minimum side yard setback.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: five feet;
         (b)   Single-family: five feet;
         (c)   Duplex: five feet; and
         (d)   Multi-family: one foot per one foot of height; 15 feet minimum.
      (7)   Minimum rear yard setback.
         (a)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes: 20%;
         (b)   Single-family: 20%;
         (c)   Duplex: 20%; and
         (d)   Multi-family: 20%.
(Prior Code, § 12-258)
   (E)   Installation requirements. The installation of manufactured homes and
mobile homes shall be governed by the requirements of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development. (Prior Code, § 12-259)
   (F)   Mobile home park. Upon compliance with the provisions as set forth
herein, a mobile home park will be allowed within the R-G District and the R-GM
District.
      (1)   The applicant, upon making application for a zoning clearance
permit, must submit a detailed site plan locating all mobile home stands,
screening or fencing, and plans and specifications for the proposed park in a
form suitable for making the determinations required herein;
      (2)   The proposed site shall be a minimum of two and one-half acres in
size and shall contain no more than 15 mobile home stands per acre. The
proposed site shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a street designated
as an arterial on the thoroughfare plan. All ingress or egress by automobile
shall be on such streets. The proposed site shall be a minimum of 200 feet in
depth;
      (3)   The mobile home shall accommodate primarily permanent occupants,
with no more than 40% of the mobile home stands devoted to solely transient
purposes. These solely transient stands are to be located in one area of the
park so they will in no way interfere with the permanent residents;
      (4)   Front yards of not less than 20 feet and side and rear yards of not
less than ten feet shall be provided on mobile home park sites.
(Prior Code, § 12-259(A))
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-9-2021) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.084 C-C CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. This commercial district is intended for a
unified grouping on one or more buildings of retail shops and stores and
personal services that provide for the regular needs and are for the
convenience of the people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods.
It is intended that the suburban convenience center be developed as a unit with
adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with
appropriate landscaping and screening.
(Prior Code, § 12-260)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the C-C District the following uses are
permitted:
      (1)   Any of the following uses:
         (a)   Artists’ supplies and hobby shop;
         (b)   Bakery shop;
         (c)   Barber and beauty shops;
         (d)   Book store;
         (e)   Clothing or wearing apparel shops;
         (f)   Drugstore;
         (g)   Dairy products store;
         (h)   Delicatessen;
         (i)   Financial institutions;
         (j)   Florist shop;
         (k)   Gift shop;
         (l)   Grocery shop;
         (m)   Hardware store;
         (n)   Jewelry shop;
         (o)   Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations;
         (p)   Liquor store;
         (q)   Medical facility;
         (r)   Office, professional and general;
         (s)   Pharmacy;
         (t)   Restaurants (not drive-in);
         (u)   Self -service laundries;
         (v)   Shoe repair shop;
         (w)   Sporting goods store;
         (x)   Tailor shop;
         (y)   Theater;
         (z)   Toy store; and
         (aa)   Variety store.
      (2)   Any of the uses permitted in §
155.082(C), subject to additional requirements as provided;
      (3)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses, provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products other than such
as are customarily incidental to retail establishments; and
      (4)   Any other commercial use deemed by the Board of Adjustment to be of
a similar nature to those listed above.
(Prior Code, § 12-261)
   (C)   Area regulations.
      (1)   The following regulations apply:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet;
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet;
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage: 40%;
         (c)   Maximum height: 35 feet;
         (d)   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet;
         (e)   Minimum side yard setback: two feet per one foot of height
adjacent to residential district; and
         (f)   Minimum rear yard setback: ten feet.
      (2)   More specifically, these regulations are described as follows:
         (a)   The parcel of land on which a convenience commercial center is
located shall not be less than 12,000 square feet;
         (b)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 100 feet;
         (c)   Not more than 40% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of
this provision;
         (d)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot; and
         (e)   It is intended that the grouping of buildings and parking areas
be designed to protect, insofar as possible, adjacent residential areas. In no
case shall the design of the shopping center provide less than the following
standards:
            1.   All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way
lines not less than 50 feet;
            2.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard setback of two feet for each one foot of height; and
            3.   All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not
less than ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 12-262)
   (D)   Business signs. Business signs, poster boards, bulletin boards, or
other similar displays in the C-C District shall conform to the following
requirements:
      (1)   In the C-C District, one business sign not exceeding 32 square feet
in surface area and identifying the business or activity conducted on the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. In the case of a
shopping center containing a group of businesses and activities on one lot, one
accessory building sign may be erected and (on) the lot identifying the
shopping center. Such accessory sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in the
area. Ground signs shall not exceed the height of the building in which the
principal use is located or 20 feet, whichever is lower. No business sign shall
be located within 50 feet of a residential district if visible from such
district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light;
      (2)   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 16 feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light; and
      (3)   All signs in C-C District shall be erected upon private property
and shall not encroach upon any public street or walk except as provided by the
applicable codes of the city and they shall not overhang at a height of less
than nine feet and shall not have a maximum projection greater than 72 inches.
(Prior Code, § 12-263)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.085 C-A/R AUTOMOTIVE COMMERCIAL AND COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. This commercial district is established as a
district in which the principal use of land is for establishments offering
accommodations, supplies of services to motorists, and for certain specialized
uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusement, and service
establishments which serve the entire community but do not and should not
necessarily locate in the Central Business District or the Convenience
Commercial District.
(Prior Code, § 12-265)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the C-A/R, Automotive Commercial and Commercial
Recreation District, the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the C-C, Convenience Commercial District;
      (2)   Other uses, including:
         (a)   Amusement enterprises;
         (b)   New and used automobile sales and services, new and used
machinery sales and services and public garages;
         (c)   Ambulance service office or garage;
         (d)   Automobile service station;
         (e)   Billboards as permitted in division (D) below;
         (f)   Boat sales;
         (g)   Bowling alleys;
         (h)   Bus terminal;
         (i)   Dance hall;
         (j)   Drive-in theater or restaurant;
         (k)   Electric transmission station;
         (l)   Feed and fuel store;
         (m)   Funeral parlor;
         (n)   Garden stores;
         (o)   Golf course, miniature or practice range;
         (p)   Heating and plumbing sales and service;
         (q)   Hospital for small animals;
         (r)   Ice plant;
         (s)   Key shop;
         (t)   Kennel;
         (u)   Laundry;
         (v)   Motels;
         (w)   Music, radio and television shop and repair;
         (x)   Nightclub;
         (y)   Novelty;
         (z)   Pawnshop;
         (aa)   Pet shop;
         (bb)   Printing plant;
         (cc)   Public uses;
         (dd)   Recreation center, private;
         (ee)   Roller skating rink;
         (ff)   Sign painting shop;
         (gg)   Tavern;
         (hh)   Travel trailer park and sales; and
         (ii)   Wholesale distribution center.
      (3)   Any other store or shop for retail trade or for providing personal,
professional, or business service other than those provided for in §
155.086(B); and
      (4)   Buildings, structures, and accessory uses customarily incidental to
any of the above uses, provided that there shall be no manufacturing of
products other than such as are customarily incidental to retail
establishments.
(Prior Code, § 12-266)
   (C)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   The regulations are as follows:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet;
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet;
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage: 30%;
         (d)   Maximum height: 35 feet;
         (e)   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet;
         (f)   Minimum side yard setback: two feet per one foot of height
adjacent to residential district; and
         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
      (2)   More specifically, these regulations are described below:
         (a)   The parcel of land on which any commercial use is located shall
not be less than 12,000 square feet;
         (b)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 100 feet;
         (c)   Not more than 30% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of
this provision;
         (d)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above
the mean elevation of the lot;
         (e)   It is intended that the commercial uses and parking areas within
a C-A/R District be designed to protect, insofar as possible, adjacent
residential areas. In no case shall the development have less than the
following standards:
            1.   All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way
lines not less than 50 feet;
            2.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district there
shall be a side yard setback of two feet for each one foot of height; and
            3.   All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not
less than 20 feet.
(Prior Code, § 12-267)
   (D)   Business signs. Business signs, poster boards, bulletin boards, or
other similar display in the C-A/R District shall conform to the following
requirements:
      (1)   In the C-A/R District, business signs not exceeding in the
aggregate one square foot of display surface area per one lineal foot of street
frontage may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. Ground signs and
billboards shall not exceed 30 feet in height. No sign or billboard shall be
located within 50 feet of a residential district if visible from such district.
Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light;
      (2)   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 50 square feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light; and
      (3)   All signs in the C-A/R District shall be erected upon private
property and shall not encroach upon any public street or walk except as
provided by the applicable codes of the city and they shall not overhang at a
height of less than nine feet and shall not have a maximum projection greater
than 72 inches.
(Prior Code, § 12-268)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.086 C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. This commercial district is designed for the
conduct of personal and business services and the general retail trade of the
community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in
the Central Business District or areas of mixed business enterprises. It will
not normally be applied in the case of new commercial areas.
(Prior Code, § 12-270)
   (B)   Uses permitted. Within the C-G, General Commercial District, the
following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted in a C-C or C-A/R District;
      (2)   Any other retail, personal service, business service, or
professional use not already mentioned, including:
         (a)   Bakery;
         (b)   Department store;
         (c)   Frozen food locker;
         (d)   Furniture repair and upholstery;
         (e)   Research laboratories; and
         (f)   Wholesale, except for outdoor storage.
      (3)   Any public buildings or uses; and
      (4)   Buildings, structures, and accessory uses customarily incidental to
any of the above uses, provided that there shall be no manufacturing of
products other than such as are customarily incidental to retail
establishments.
(Prior Code, § 12-271)
   (C)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   The following regulations apply:
 
         (a)   Minimum lot area: None;
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: None;
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage: None;
         (d)   Maximum height: None;
         (e)   Minimum front yard setback: None;
         (f)   Minimum side yard setback: None;
         (g)   Minimum rear yard setback: None.
      (2)   There are no area or height regulations in the C-G District.
(Prior Code, § 12-272)
   (D)   Signs and billboards. All signs and billboards in the C-G District
shall conform to the requirements in §
155.085(D).
(Prior Code, § 12-273)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.087 I-L LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. The purpose of the I-L, Light Industrial
District, is to provide a location for industries which do not by their nature
create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a
location beneficial to industries and to prohibit nonindustrial uses. Because
of the traffic generated and other potentially objectionable influences created
in this district, a buffer or setback area between this district and any other
zoning district except I-H is required.
(Prior Code, § 12-275)
   (B)   Standards. Any use constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in
the I-L, Light Industrial District, after the effective date of this chapter
shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards:
      (1)   No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a
watchperson may reside on the premises;
      (2)   No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental
to or accessory to a permitted use;
      (3)   No noise, either continuous or intermittent, from any operation
conducted on the premises, other than that emanating from vehicular traffic,
shall be detectable at any boundary line of the I-L District;
      (4)   No toxic matter; noxious matter, smoke, gas, or odorous or
particulate matter shall be emitted that is detectable beyond the lot lines of
the lot on which the use is located;
      (5)   No vibrations shall be detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot
on which the use is located;
      (6)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to
avoid casting direct light upon property located in any residential district;
      (7)   The manufacture of flammable materials which produce explosive
vapors or gases is prohibited;
      (8)   No outside storage of equipment and material, except equipment in
daily use, shall be permitted in such a location where it can be viewed from
any public street; and
      (9)   Any operation that produces intense glare or heat shall be
performed within a completely enclosed building, and exposed sources of light
shall be screened so as not to be detectable beyond the lot lines.
(Prior Code, § 12-276)
   (C)   Uses permitted. Within the I-L Light Industrial District, the
following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Building materials sales;
      (2)   Commercial radio and television transmitting antenna towers and
other electronic equipment requiring outdoor towers, including antenna towers
for the dispatching of private messages;
      (3)   Compounding, processing, and blending of chemical products, but not
including any materials which decompose by detonation;
      (4)   General and administrative offices;
      (5)   Machine shops and metal products manufacture and tool and die
shops, provided they do not include any of the following equipment:
         (a)   Automatic screw machines;
         (b)   Drop forges; or
         (c)   Riveting machines.
      (6)   Mail-order houses;
      (7)   Manufacturing and assembling (or any combination of such processes)
of products from wood, cork, glass, leather, fur, plastic, felt, and other
textiles, but not including as a principal operation the processing of any raw
materials;
      (8)   Manufacturing and assembling of electrical and electronic products
and equipments;
      (9)   Printing and binding plants;
      (10)   Research laboratories;
      (11)   Warehouse and storage facilities;
      (12)   Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and lift
stations;
      (13)   Any other manufacturing process or establishment except those
permitted in §
155.088(C); and
      (14)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a
principal use.
(Prior Code, § 12-277)
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
      (1)   The following regulations apply:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: None;
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: None;
         (c)   Maximum percent coverage: 40%;
         (d)   Maximum height: None;
         (e)   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet; and
         (f)   Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet (minimum of two feet of
setback for each one foot of height when adjacent to residential district).
      (2)   More specifically, these regulations as described below:
         (a)   There are no area requirements in an I-L District;
         (b)   There are no lot frontage requirements in an I-L District;
         (c)   Not more than 40% of the lot area shall be covered with
improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of
this provision;
         (d)   There are no height requirements in an I-L District;
         (e)   No structure shall be erected, commenced, or maintained which
has a front yard of less than 50 feet;
         (f)   When adjacent to a residential district, a side yard of 50 feet
or two feet for each one foot of height, whichever is greater, shall be
provided; and
         (g)   When adjacent to a residential district, a rear yard of 50 feet
or two feet for each one foot of height, whichever is greater, shall be
provided.
(Prior Code, § 12-278)
   (E)   Signs and billboards. All signs and billboards in the I-L District
shall conform to the requirements in §
155.085(D) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-279)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.088 I-H HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General description. The purpose of the I-H Heavy Industrial District,
is to provide a location for industries which may by their nature create
nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land especially for such industry in
locations with access to arterial streets as designated on the thoroughfare
plan, as well as locations generally accessible to railroad transportation.
Because of the nuisances or other objectionable influences that may be created
in this district, a buffer or setback strip between this district and other
zoning districts except I-L is required.
(Prior Code, § 12-280)
   (B)   Standards. Any use constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in
the I-H Heavy Industrial District, after the effective date hereof shall be so
operated as to comply with the following standards. No use already established
on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict
with, or further conflict with, the applicable standards hereinafter for the I-
H District:
      (1)   No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a
watchperson may reside on the premises;
      (2)   No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental
to or accessory to a permitted use;
      (3)   No storage, manufacture, or assembly of goods shall be conducted
out of a building unless the nearest point of the activity is more than 100
feet from the boundary of any zoning district;
      (4)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to
avoid casting direct light upon property located in any residential district;
      (5)   All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing,
storing, cleaning, servicing, and testing of goods, water (wares), and
merchandise shall be carried on in such a manner as not to be injurious or
offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare, heat,
fire or explosive hazards; and
      (6)   No activities involving storage, utilization, or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 12-281)
   (C)   Uses permitted. Within the I-H Heavy Industrial District, the
following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the C-C Convenience Commercial District; C-A/
R Automotive Commercial District; C-G General Commercial District; and I-
l Light Industrial District;
      (2)   Blacksmiths, tinsmiths, and sheet metal shops;
      (3)   Bottling works;
      (4)   Canning or preserving factories;
      (5)   Cold storage plants;
      (6)   Ice cream production and distribution;
      (7)   Laundry and dry cleaning plants;
      (8)   Machine shops;
      (9)   Machinery rental, sales, and service; and
      (10)   Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, repairing, storing and
cleaning, servicing, or testing of any of the following materials, goods, or
merchandise:
         (a)   Apparel;
         (b)   Automobile wrecking and junk yards, provided they are enclosed
throughout the entire perimeter by a solid fence not less than eight feet in
height;
         (c)   Beverages (nonalcoholic), processing and bottling;
         (d)   Building materials specialties;
         (e)   Bulk fuel sales and storage;
         (f)   Clothing;
         (g)   Compounding and packaging of chemicals;
         (h)   Cosmetics and toiletries;
         (i)   Dairy products;
         (j)   Drugs and pharmaceutical products;
         (k)   Electrical and acoustical products and components;
         (l)   Food products (except fish, sauerkraut, vinegar and yeast);
         (m)   Furniture;
         (n)   Glass products;
         (o)   Ice, dry and natural;
         (p)   Jewelry;
         (q)   Medical laboratory supplies, equipment, and specialties;
         (r)   Metal products and utensils;
         (s)   Milk, bottling and distribution;
         (t)   Monumental stone cutting;
         (u)   Motor freight terminals;
         (v)   Musical instruments;
         (w)   Optical goods;
         (x)   Paper products, including boxes and containers;
         (y)   Pattern shops;
         (z)   Printing plants;
         (aa)   Processing of meat and vegetable products, including the
slaughter of animals;
         (bb)   Radios, phonographs, recorders, and television sets and parts;
         (cc)   Railroad yards and switching areas, including lodging and
sleeping facilities for transient railroad labor;
         (dd)   Sign painting;
         (ee)   Soldering and welding shops;
         (ff)   Spray painting and mixing;
         (gg)   Textiles;
         (hh)   Toys and children’s vehicles;
         (ii)   Trailers and carts; and
         (jj)   Wood products, including wooden boxes and containers.
(Prior Code, § 12-282)
   (D)   Area regulations.
      (1)   There are no requirements for minimum lot area or frontage in the
I-H District.
      (2)   Front, rear, and side yard requirements in the I-H District are the
same as those set forth in §
155.087(D) for the I-L District.
      (3)   Buildings shall not cover more than 50% of the site on which the
use is located.
(Prior Code, § 12-283)
   (E)   Signs and billboards. All signs and billboards in the I-H District
shall conform to the requirements in §
155.085(D).
(Prior Code, § 12-284)
(Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970; Ord. 06-02, passed 11-14-2005) Penalty, see §
155.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.100 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this chapter. If
the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter
are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the persons responsible
for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other action as is
authorized by law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 12-290) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
Cross-reference:
   Code Enforcement Officer to serve as Zoning Administrator, see §
150.003
§ 155.101 ZONING CLEARANCE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The zoning clearance permit is a permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator which states that a particular development meets all of the
requirements of the zoning ordinance. It is not a building permit and does not
authorize construction. It certifies that the land or structure is in
conformance with the terms of this zoning ordinance.
   (B)   No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed,
enlarged, altered, or repaired in such a manner as to prolong the life of the
building, nor shall the use of any land or building or other structure be
changed without a zoning clearance permit being issued authorizing such
construction, alteration, repair, or use changes as being in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. No building permit shall be issued for any
construction not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit.
(Prior Code, § 12-291) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.102 CHANGE IN USE OF LAND OR BUILDING.
   No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure
after the passage of this chapter until a zoning clearance permit has been
obtained, certifying that all the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with.
(Prior Code, § 12-292) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.103 APPLICATION.
   An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator by the owner or proposed occupant of the building or land to be
occupied or used, and the application shall state the location and legal
description of the property and set out in detail the character and nature of
the use to be conducted thereon. Within three days, the Zoning Administrator
shall grant or deny the zoning clearance permit in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-293) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.104 ACCOMPANYING MATERIAL.
   All applications for zoning clearance permits shall be accompanied by a plat
plan, drawn to scale on suitable paper, showing the actual dimensions of the
lot to be built upon, the size and location of the building to be erected, and
such other information as may be necessary to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-294) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.105 FEES.
   Zoning clearance permits shall not be issued until a fee shall have been
paid as set by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-295) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
AMENDMENTS
§ 155.120 PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED.
   The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations imposed and the
districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified, or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the
Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the City
Council a report and recommendation on the proposed change.
(Prior Code, § 12-300) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.121 APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT.
   An owner or his or her duly authorized agent or representative may make
application for the amendment of the zoning restrictions applicable to his or
her property by filing with the Planning Commission a written application in
such form and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish.
An application for amendment shall be accompanied by the payment of a $50 fee.
Costs of notice and posting shall be billed to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 12-301) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.122 NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING.
   Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Commission shall set a date for
public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the Planning
Commission by publication in a newspaper. Additional notice shall be given by
the posting of a sign or signs on the property.
(Prior Code, § 12-302) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.123 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote
to:
      (1)   Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as
submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or
      (2)   Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied.
   (B)   An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to
modification, shall be transmitted to the city with the report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission within 15 days from the date of
Planning Commission action.
   (C)   An application recommended for denial shall not be considered further
and the application fee required in this subchapter for application for
amendment shall be refunded to the applicant unless the applicant, within 15
days from the date of the Planning Commission action, files a written request
with the City Council for a hearing. A fee shall accompany the request for a
hearing before the city if the refund herein above has been granted to the
applicant in appeal. Upon notice of such request, and receipt of fee, the
Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and
recommendation to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-303) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.124 CITY ACTION.
   The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application regularly
transmitted, or which has been transmitted pursuant to an appeal as provided
for in this subchapter. The City Council shall approve the application as
submitted and recommended by the Planning Commission, or approve the
application subject to modification, or deny the application, or return the
application to the Planning Commission for further study.
(Prior Code, § 12-304) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.125 PROTEST TO AMENDMENT.
   If a written protest against an amendment, change, or repeal of this chapter
or any part thereof is presented, duly signed, and acknowledged by the owners
of 20% or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting the territory
included in such proposed change or separated therefrom only by an alley or
street, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of
three-fourths of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 12-305) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 12-296) (Ord. 1020, passed 1-15-1970)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting to Capital Cities Cable, Inc., a nonexclusive
1085     1-22-1985   franchise, for a period of 15 years from the effective
                     date hereof, to construct, operate, and maintain a cable
                     system throughout the city.
                     Granting to Cable One, Inc., for a period of 15 years from
                     and after the passage, acceptance, and effective date of
99-16    12-13-1999  this ordinance, the nonexclusive right, privilege and
                     permit to construct, operate and maintain a cable
                     television system in the city.
19-02    3-12-2019   Granting Public Service Company of Oklahoma (PSO) a 25-
                     year franchise within the city.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
O.S. Cite Code Section
O.S. Cite                     Code Section
2 O.S. 11-90 et seq.          116.01
3 O.S.                        152.12
3 O.S. 110                    152.02,
                              152.09
3 O.S. 111                    152.11
4 O.S. 499 et seq.            90.053
4 O.S. 501 through 508        90.046,
                              90.051
10 O.S. 401 et seq.           135.06
11 O.S. 1-402                 10.19
11 O.S. 8-105                 31.05
11 O.S. 10-101 et seq.        30.01
11 O.S. 10-104                31.20
11 O.S. 10-105                31.20
11 O.S. 10-111                31.01
11 O.S. 10-117                31.22
11 O.S. 10-120                31.03
11 O.S. 10-121                31.04
11 O.S. 11-113                31.22
11 O.S. 12-110                34.001
11 O.S. 14-101 et seq.        Ch. 10
11 O.S. 14-101                135.01,
                              135.25
11 O.S. 14-108                10.01
11 O.S. 14-109                10.01
11 O.S. 14-111                10.99
11 O.S. 10-102                30.15
11 O.S. 10-103                30.02,
                              30.16
11 O.S. 10-106                30.17
11 O.S. 10-107                30.18
11 O.S. 10-108                30.19
11 O.S. 10-109                30.20
11 O.S. 10-119                30.03
11 O.S. 16-104                30.02
11 O.S. 16-105.1              30.02
11 O.S. 16-110                30.02
11 O.S. 16-112                34.024
11 O.S. 16-208                30.02
11 O.S. 20-101 through 20-106 11.02
11 O.S. 22-101 et seq.        Ch. 10
11 O.S. 22-106                110.01
11 O.S. 22-107                110.01,
                              110.05
11 O.S. 22-108                133.15
11 O.S. 22-110                113.01
11 O.S. 22-111                93.052
11 O.S. 22-115                90.002
11 O.S. 27-101 through 27-131 33.001
11 O.S. 27-101                33.001
11 O.S. 27-102                33.001
11 O.S. 27-104                33.015,
                              33.021
11 O.S. 27-111                33.036
11 O.S. 27-113                33.067
11 O.S. 27-119                10.99
11 O.S. 27-123                33.071
11 O.S. 27-124                33.071
11 O.S. 27-129                33.076
11 O.S. 29-101 et seq.        32.001
11 O.S. 29-102                32.002
11 O.S. 29-201 et seq.        32.001
11 O.S. 31-101 et seq.        95.01
11 O.S. 34-101 et seq.        32.045
11 O.S. 34-104                32.075
11 O.S. 44-105                153.28
11 O.S. 45-101 et seq.        153.01
11 O.S. 45-101 through 45-106 154.002
11 O.S. 45-104                154.001
11 O.S. 49-101 et seq.        31.60
11 O.S. 49-103 et seq.        31.60
11 O.S. 49-122                31.60
11 O.S. 50-101 et seq.        31.61
15 O.S. 511 et seq.           32.075
21 O.S.                       130.11,
                              133.11
21 O.S. 1289.1 et seq.        132.04
21 O.S. 1321.1                32.105
21 O.S. 1321.9                32.105
21 O.S. 1685                  90.065
21 O.S. 1704                  131.01
21 O.S. 1706                  131.01
21 O.S. 1767.1                113.01
22 O.S. 303                   33.065
22 O.S. 1115.1 through 1115.5 33.051
22 O.S. 1261 et seq.          32.075
22 O.S. 1321 et seq.          32.075
27A O.S. 2-7-101 et seq.      34.031
36 O.S.                       90.030
37 O.S.                       130.11
37 O.S. 163.1 et seq.         111.45
37A O.S.                      111.05
37A O.S. 1-101 et seq.        111.01
37A O.S. 3-125                111.55
37A O.S. 4-103                111.07
37A O.S. 4-104                111.46
37A O.S. 6-102A2              111.51
37A O.S. 6-114(A)(1)          135.03
37A O.S. 6-127                32.075
47 O.S. 1 et seq.             70.004
47 O.S. 1-101 et seq.         70.003,
                              70.004
47 O.S. 4-107(d)              Ch. 33, App. A
47 O.S. 6-101                 70.055
47 O.S. 6-210                 Ch. 33, App. A
47 O.S. 6-303                 70.040
47 O.S. 7-204                 70.059
47 O.S. 7-503                 70.059
47 O.S. 7-600 et seq.         70.059
47 O.S. 7-601 et seq.         70.059
47 O.S. 10-101 et seq.        70.004
47 O.S. 10-108                70.042
47 O.S. 11-104                70.009
47 O.S. 11-106                70.025,
                              70.026
47 O.S. 11-201 et seq.        72.01
47 O.S. 11-201                72.03
47 O.S. 11-202                72.05
47 O.S. 11-203                72.08
47 O.S. 11-204                72.07
47 O.S. 11-206                72.09
47 O.S. 11-207                72.10
47 O.S. 11-301                71.046
47 O.S. 11-308                71.001
47 O.S. 11-309                72.13
47 O.S. 11-310                71.002
47 O.S. 11-401                71.080
47 O.S. 11-402                71.081
47 O.S. 11-405                70.026
47 O.S. 11-501 through 11-507 74.01
47 O.S. 11-601                71.124
47 O.S. 11-604                71.125
47 O.S. 11-704                71.092
47 O.S. 11-705                71.052,
                              71.053
47 O.S. 11-801                71.105
47 O.S. 11-803                71.106
47 O.S. 11-804                71.105
47 O.S. 11-901                71.010
47 O.S. 11-902                71.014
47 O.S. 11-1003               73.10
47 O.S. 11-1004               73.22
47 O.S. 11-1105               71.019
47 O.S. 11-1108(a)            70.027
47 O.S. 11-1109               70.028
47 O.S. 11-1201 et seq.       75.01
47 O.S. 12-101 et seq.        70.070
47 O.S. 12-101                71.028
47 O.S. 12-201 et seq.        70.072
47 O.S. 12-218                70.026
47 O.S. 12-609                71.007
47 O.S. 14-101 et seq.        70.074
                              71.065,
47 O.S. 15-102                71.105,
                              71.106
47 O.S. 15-112                73.25
47 O.S. 16-103                70.006
47 O.S. 790                   33.051
47 O.S. 954A                  70.090
47 O.S. 955                   70.090
47 O.S. 401066                71.007
50 O.S. 1 et seq.             93.001
50 O.S. 12                    93.004
50 O.S. 14                    93.005
50 O.S. 15                    93.005
50 O.S. 16                    93.006,
                              93.008
50 O.S. 17                    93.009
51 O.S. 121 et seq.           31.40
51 O.S. 125                   31.40
51 O.S. 151 et seq.           111.32
59 O.S. 353.1                 34.029
59 O.S. 1501 et seq.          117.01
60 O.S. 655                   32.075
62 O.S. 517.1 et seq.         34.002
63 O.S.                       130.11
63 O.S. 1-1011                93.011
63 O.S. 1-1521 et seq.        135.06
63 O.S. 1-1901 et seq.        135.06
63 O.S. 2-101 et seq.         71.014
63 O.S. 2-101                 133.06
63 O.S. 2-101.1               133.06
63 O.S. 420 through 430       92.01
63 O.S. 683.11                32.090
63 O.S. 4200 et seq.          94.19
68 O.S. 205                   34.102,
                              34.120
68 O.S. 217                   34.038,
                              34.098
68 O.S. 220                   34.039,
                              34.099
                              34.040,
68 O.S. 227                   34.099,
                              34.100
68 O.S. 301                   135.60
68 O.S. 1350 et seq.          34.020,
                              34.042
68 O.S. 1352                  34.021
68 O.S. 1354.15               34.021
68 O.S. 1401                  34.087
68 O.S. 1408                  34.094
68 O.S. 1501 et seq.          112.02
                              113.01,
68 O.S. 1621 et seq.          113.17,
                              132.02
68 O.S. 1622                  113.02,
                              132.02
68 O.S. 1624                  132.02
68 O.S. 1625                  113.01
68 O.S. 2601 et seq.          34.055
68 O.S. 2601                  34.070
68 O.S. 2602                  34.070
68 O.S. 2701                  34.020
68 O.S. 6001 through 6004     34.027
74 O.S. 314                   32.002
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2022 Code
Prior Code 2022 Code
1-108      10.99
1-109      10.20
1-110      10.21
1-201      11.01
1-202      11.02
2-101      30.01
2-102      30.02
2-201      30.03
2-202      30.15
2-203      30.16
2-204      30.17
2-205      30.18
2-206      30.19
2-207      30.20
2-208      31.01
2-209      31.20
2-210      31.20
2-211      31.20
2-212      31.21
2-213      31.21
2-214      31.21
2-215      31.21
2-216      31.21
2-217      31.22
2-218      31.23
2-219      31.03
2-220      31.04
2-221      31.24
2-222      31.25
2-222.1    31.26
2-223      31.02
2-224      31.05
2-225      31.06
2-501      31.40
2-502      31.41
2-503      31.42
2-504      31.43
2-505      31.44
2-506      31.45
2-601      31.60
2-602      31.60
2-603      31.60
2-610      31.61
2-611      31.61
2-612      31.61
2-620      31.62
2-621      31.62
2-622      31.62
2-623      31.62
2-624      31.62
2-625      31.62
3-101      111.01
3-102      111.02
3-103      111.03,
           111.99
3-104      111.04
3-105      111.05
3-106      111.06
3-107      111.07
3-108      111.08
3-109      111.09
3-110      111.10
3-111      111.11
3-112      111.12
3-113      111.13
3-114      111.14
3-115      111.15
3-116      111.16
3-117      111.17
3-118      111.56,
           111.99
3-201      111.45
3-202      111.46
3-203      111.46
3-204      111.47
3-205      111.48
3-206      111.49
3-207      111.50
3-208      111.51
3-209      111.52
3-210      111.52
3-211      111.53
3-212      111.54
3-213      111.55
3-214      111.56
3-215      111.56,
           111.99
3-301      133.05,
           133.99
3-401      111.31
3-402      111.30
3-403      111.32
3-404      111.33
3-405      111.56,
           111.99
4-101      90.001
4-102      90.002
4-103      90.003
4-104      90.004
4-105      90.005
4-106      90.006
4-107      90.007
4-108      90.008
4-109      90.009
4-110      90.010
4-120      90.025
4-121      90.026
4-122      90.027
4-123      90.028
4-124      90.029
4-125      90.030,
           90.999
4-130      90.045
4-131      90.046
4-132      90.047
4-133      90.048
4-134      90.049
4-135      90.050
4-136      90.051
4-137      90.052
4-138      90.053
4-140      90.065
4-141      90.066
4-142      90.067
4-150      90.011
4-160      90.012
4-170      90.080
4-171      90.081
4-172      90.082
4-173      90.083
4-174      90.084
4-175      90.085
4-180      90.100
4-181      90.101
4-182      90.102,
           90.999
4-185      90.999
5-101      150.001
5-102      150.002
5-103      150.999
5-104      150.003
5-105      150.006
5-106      150.004
5-107      150.005
5-201      150.020
5-202      150.021
5-203      150.022
5-204      150.023
5-205      150.024
5-206      150.025
5-207      150.026
5-208      150.999
5-301      150.040
5-302      150.041
5-303      150.042
5-304      150.043
5-305      150.044
5-306      150.045
5-307      150.046
5-308      150.047
5-309      150.999
5-401      150.097
5-402      150.097
5-403      150.097
5-404      150.097
5-405      150.097
5-406      150.097
5-407      150.097
5-408      150.097
5-409      150.097
5-410      150.097
5-411      150.999
5-501      150.060
5-502      150.061
5-503      150.062
5-504      150.063
5-505      150.064
5-506      150.999
5-601      150.075
5-602      150.076
5-603      150.077
5-604      150.078
5-605      150.079
5-606      150.080
5-607      150.081
5-608      150.999
5-701      150.999
5-702      150.999
5-801      91.01
5-802      91.02
5-803      91.03
5-804      91.04
5-805      91.05
5-806      91.06
5-807      91.07
5-808      91.08
5-809      91.09
5-810      91.10
5-811      91.11
5-812      91.12
5-813      91.13
5-814      91.14,
           91.99
5-901      150.096
5-902      150.999
5-1001     150.095
5-1002     150.095
5-1003     150.095
5-1004     150.095
5-1005     150.095
5-1006     150.095
5-1007     150.999
6-101      33.001
6-102      33.002
6-103      33.003
6-104      33.015
6-105      33.016
6-106      33.017
6-107      33.018
6-108      33.019
6-109      33.020
6-110      33.021
6-111      33.022
6-112      33.023
6-113      33.035
6-114      33.036
6-115      33.037
6-116      33.036
6-117      33.038
6-118      33.038
6-119      33.065
6-120      33.050
6-121      33.051
6-122      33.052
6-123      33.066
6-124      33.067
6-125      33.068
6-126      33.069
6-127      33.070
6-128      33.071
6-129      33.072
6-130      33.073
6-131      33.074
6-132      Ch. 33, App. A
6-133      33.075
6-134      33.076
7-101      34.001
7-102      34.002
7-103      34.003
7-104      34.004
7-105      34.005
7-106      34.006
7-201      34.020
7-202      34.021
7-203      34.021
7-204      34.022
7-205      34.023
7-206      34.024
7-207      34.025
7-208      34.026
7-209      34.027
7-210      34.028
7-211      34.029
7-212      34.030
7-213      34.031
7-214      34.032
7-215      34.033
7-216      34.034
7-217      34.035
7-218      34.036,
           34.999
7-219      34.037
7-220      34.038
7-221      34.039
7-222      34.040
7-223      34.041,
           34.999
7-224      34.042
7-225      34.043
7-226      34.044
7-301      34.055
7-302      34.056
7-401      34.070
7-402      34.071
7-403      34.072
7-404      34.073
7-405      34.074
7-501      34.085
7-502      34.086
7-503      34.087
7-504      34.088
7-505      34.089
7-506      34.090
7-507      34.091
7-508      34.092
7-509      34.093
7-510      34.094
7-511      34.095
7-512      34.087
7-513      34.096
7-514      34.097
7-515      34.098
7-516      34.099
7-517      34.100
7-518      34.101,
           34.999
7-519      34.102
7-520      34.103
7-601      34.115
7-602      34.116
7-603      34.117
7-604      34.118
7-605      34.119
7-606      34.120
7-607      34.121,
           34.999
7-608      34.122
7-609      34.123
8-101      93.050
8-102      93.051
8-103      93.052
8-104      93.053
8-105      93.054
8-106      93.055
8-107      93.056
8-108      93.057
8-109      93.058
8-110      93.059
8-111      93.060
8-112      93.061
8-113      93.062,
           93.999
8-114      93.063
8-115      93.999
8-301      93.001
8-302      93.002
8-303      93.003
8-304      93.004
8-305      93.005
8-306      93.006
8-307      93.007
8-308      93.008
8-309      93.009
8-310      93.010
8-311      93.011
8-312      93.012
8-313      93.013
8-314      93.014
8-401      93.025
8-402      93.026
8-403      93.027
8-404      93.028
8-405      93.029
8-406      93.030
8-407      93.031
8-408      93.032
8-409      93.033
8-410      93.034
8-411      93.035
8-412      93.999
8-501      93.075
8-502      93.076
8-503      93.077
8-504      93.999
8-601      51.01
8-602      51.02
8-603      51.99,
           93.999
8-701      52.01
8-702      52.03
8-703      52.04
8-704      52.05
8-705      52.06
8-706      52.02
8-707      52.07
8-708      52.99
9-101      110.01
9-103      110.02
9-104      110.03
9-105      110.04
9-106      110.05
9-107      110.06
9-108      110.07
9-109      110.08
9-110      110.09
9-301      112.01
9-302      112.02
9-303      112.03
9-304      112.04
9-305      112.05
9-306      112.06
9-307      112.07
9-308      112.08
9-309      112.09
9-310      112.10
9-311      112.11
9-312      112.12
9-401      116.01
9-402      116.02
9-403      116.03
9-404      116.04
9-405      116.05
9-501      117.01
9-502      117.02
9-503      117.03
9-504      117.04
9-505      117.05
9-506      117.06
9-507      117.06
9-508      117.07
9-509      117.08
9-510      117.08
9-511      117.09
9-512      117.10
9-513      117.11
9-514      117.12
9-515      117.13
9-516      117.14
9-517      117.15
9-601      114.01
9-602      114.02
9-603      114.03
9-604      114.04
9-605      114.05
9-606      114.06
9-607      114.99
9-701      118.01
9-702      118.02
9-703      118.03
9-801      113.01
9-802      113.02
9-803      113.03
9-804      113.04
9-805      113.05
9-806      113.06
9-807      113.07
9-808      113.08
9-809      113.09
9-810      113.10
9-811      113.10
9-812      113.11
9-813      113.12
9-814      113.13
9-815      113.14
9-816      113.15
9-817      113.16
9-818      113.18
9-819      113.18
9-820      113.17
9-901      110.99
10-101     130.02
10-102     130.03
10-103     130.01
10-104     130.01
10-105     130.04
10-106     130.05
10-107     130.06
10-108     130.07
10-109     130.08
10-110     130.09
10-111     130.10
10-112     130.11
10-201     131.01
10-202     131.02
10-203     131.03
10-204     131.04
10-205     131.05
10-206     131.06
10-207     131.07
10-208     131.08
10-209     131.09
10-210     131.10
10-211     131.11
10-212     131.12
10-213     131.13
10-214     131.14
10-215     131.15
10-216     131.16
10-301     132.01
10-303     132.02
10-304     132.03
10-305     132.04
10-306     132.05
10-307     132.06
10-308     132.07
10-401     133.02
10-402     133.03
10-403     133.04
10-404     133.06
10-405     133.07
10-406     133.08
10-407     133.08
10-408     133.09
10-409     133.10
10-410     133.11
10-411     133.11
10-412     133.12
10-413     133.13,
           133.99
10-414     133.14
10-416     133.15
10-417     133.15
10-418     133.16
10-419     133.17
10-420     133.18
           135.01 -
10-421     135.10,
           135.99
10-430     135.25
10-431     135.26
10-432     135.27
10-433     135.28,
           135.99
10-434     135.29,
           135.99
10-435     135.30,
           135.99
10-436     135.31
10-437     135.32
10-438     135.33,
           135.99
10-439     135.45,
           135.99
10-440     135.46,
           135.99
10-441     135.60
10-442     135.34,
           135.99
10-443     135.61
10-501     133.01
10-601     134.01
10-602     134.02
10-603     134.04
10-604     134.06
10-605     134.07
10-606     134.08
10-607     134.09
10-608     134.10
10-609     134.11
10-610     134.05
10-611     134.03
10-701     130.99
11-101     94.15
11-102     94.16
11-103     94.17
11-104     94.18
11-105-1   94.19
11-105-2   94.19
11-105-3   94.19
11-105-5   94.19
11-105-6   94.19
11-105-7   94.19
11-105-8   94.19
11-105-9   94.19
11-106-1   94.20
11-106-2   94.20
11-106-3   94.20
11-106-4   94.20
11-106-5   94.20
11-106-6   94.20
11-106-7   94.20
11-201     95.01
11-202     95.02
11-203     95.20
11-204     95.21
11-205     95.22
11-206     95.23
11-207     95.24
11-208     95.25
11-209     95.26
11-210     95.27
11-211     95.03
11-212     95.04
11-213     95.05
11-214     95.28
11-301     94.01
11-302     94.01
11-401     94.02
12-101     153.01
12-102     153.02
12-103     153.03
12-104     153.04
12-105     153.05
12-106     153.06
12-107     153.07
12-108     153.08
12-109     153.09
12-110     153.10
12-111     153.11
12-112     153.12
12-120     153.25
12-121     153.26
12-122     153.27
12-123     153.28
12-124     153.29
12-125     153.30
12-126     153.31
12-127     153.32
12-201     155.001
12-202     155.002
12-203     155.003,
           155.005
12-204     155.004
12-205     155.005
12-210     155.020
12-211     155.021
12-212     155.022
12-213     155.023
12-215     155.035
12-216     155.036
12-217     155.037
12-218     155.038
12-219     155.039
12-220     155.040
12-221     155.041
12-222     155.042
12-223     155.043
12-224     155.044
12-225     155.045
12-226     155.046
12-227     155.047
12-228     155.048
12-229     155.049
12-230     155.060
12-231     155.061
12-232     155.062
12-233     155.063
12-234     155.064
12-235     155.065
12-240     155.080
12-241     155.080
12-242     155.080
12-243     155.080
12-245     155.081
12-246     155.081
12-247     155.081
12-248     155.081
12-249     155.081
12-250     155.082
12-251     155.082
12-252     155.082
12-253     155.082
12-254     155.082
12-255     155.083
12-256     155.083
12-257     155.083
12-258     155.083
12-259     155.083
12-259(A)  155.083
12-260     155.084
12-261     155.084
12-262     155.084
12-263     155.084
12-265     155.085
12-266     155.085
12-267     155.085
12-268     155.085
12-270     155.086
12-271     155.086
12-272     155.086
12-273     155.086
12-275     155.087
12-276     155.087
12-277     155.087
12-278     155.087
12-279     155.087
12-280     155.088
12-281     155.088
12-282     155.088
12-283     155.088
12-284     155.088
12-290     155.100
12-291     155.101
12-292     155.102
12-293     155.103
12-294     155.104
12-295     155.105
12-296     155.999
12-300     155.120
12-301     155.121
12-302     155.122
12-303     155.123
12-304     155.124
12-305     155.125
12-401     154.001
12-402     154.002
12-403     154.003
12-404     154.004
12-405     154.005
12-410     154.020
12-411     154.021
12-412     154.022
12-413     154.023
12-414     154.024
12-415     154.025
12-420     154.040
12-421     154.041
12-422     154.042
12-430     154.055
12-431     154.056
12-432     154.057
12-433     154.058
12-434     154.059
12-435     154.060
12-440     154.075
12-441     154.076
12-442     154.077,
           154.999
12-501     151.01
12-502     151.02
12-503     151.03
12-504     151.04
12-505     151.05
12-506     151.06
12-507     151.07
12-508     151.08
12-509     151.09
12-510     151.10
12-511     151.11
12-512     151.25
12-513     151.26
12-514     151.27
12-515     151.28
12-516     151.40
12-517     151.41
12-518     151.42
12-601     152.01
12-602     152.02
12-603     152.03
12-604     152.04
12-605     152.05
12-606     152.06
12-607     152.07
12-608     152.08
12-609     152.09
12-610     152.10
12-611     152.11
12-612     152.99
12-613     152.12
12-614     152.13
13-101     32.025
13-102     32.026
13-103     32.027
13-104     32.028
13-105     32.029
13-106     32.030
13-107     32.999
13-201     32.001
13-202     32.002
13-203     32.002
13-204     32.003
13-205     32.003
13-206     32.004
13-207     32.005
13-208     32.006
13-209     32.007
13-210     32.008
13-211     32.008
13-212     32.009
13-213     32.010
13-214     32.011
13-301     32.045
13-302     32.046
13-303     32.047
13-304     32.048
13-320     32.060
13-321     32.061
13-322     32.062
13-401     32.090
13-402     32.091
13-403     32.092
13-404     32.093
13-405     32.094
13-420     32.105
13-421     32.106
13-422     32.107
13-423     32.108
13-424     32.109
13-425     32.110
13-426     32.111
13-427     32.112
13-428     32.113
13-429     32.114
13-501     32.075
13-502     32.076
13-503     32.077
13-504     32.078
14-101     96.01
14-102     96.02
14-103     96.03
14-104     96.04
14-105     96.05
14-106     96.06
14-107     96.07
14-108     96.08
14-109     96.09
14-110     96.10
14-111     96.11
14-112     96.12
14-113     96.13
14-114     96.14
14-115     96.15
14-116     96.16
14-117     96.17
14-118     96.18
14-119     96.19
14-120     96.99
14-201     96.30
14-202     96.31
14-203     96.32
14-204     96.33
14-205     96.34
14-206     96.35
14-207     96.99
15-101     70.001
15-102     70.002
15-103     70.003
15-104     70.004
15-201     70.110
15-202     70.111
15-203     70.112
15-204     70.113
15-205     70.114
15-206     70.009
15-207     70.010
15-208     70.006
15-209     70.007
15-210     70.008
15-211     70.025
15-212     70.026
15-213     70.027
15-214     70.028
15-215     70.055
15-216     70.056
15-217     70.057
15-218     70.058
15-219     70.040
15-220     70.041
15-221     70.042
15-222     70.115
15-223     70.116
15-224     70.116
15-225     70.117
15-226     70.118
15-227     70.119
15-228     70.120
15-229     70.059
15-301     70.070
15-302     70.071
15-303     70.072
15-304     70.073
15-305     70.074
15-306     70.075
15-401     71.105
15-402     71.106
15-403     71.107
15-404     71.108
15-405     71.109
15-501     71.045
15-502     71.046
15-503     71.047
15-504     71.048
15-505     71.049
15-506     71.050
15-507     71.001
15-508     71.002
15-509     71.003
15-510     71.065
15-511     71.066
15-512     71.067
15-513     71.051
15-514     71.052
15-515     71.053
15-516     71.004
15-517     71.005
15-518     71.006
15-519     71.007
15-520     71.008
15-521     71.009
15-522     71.010
15-523     71.011
15-524     71.012
15-525     71.013
15-526     71.014
15-527     71.015
15-528     71.016
15-529     71.017
15-530     71.018
15-531     71.019
15-532     71.020
15-533     71.021
15-534     71.022
15-535     71.023
15-536     71.024,
           71.999
15-537     71.025
15-538     71.080
15-539     71.081
15-540     71.082
15-541     71.083
15-542     71.084
15-543     71.085
15-544     71.086
15-545     71.087
15-546     71.088
15-547     71.089
15-548     71.090
15-549     71.091
15-550     71.092
15-551     71.093
15-552     71.026
15-553     71.027
15-554     71.028
15-555     71.029,
           71.999
15-556     71.030,
           71.999
15-601     72.01
15-602     72.02
15-603     72.03
15-604     72.04
15-605     72.05
15-606     72.06
15-607     72.07
15-608     72.08
15-609     72.09
15-610     72.10
15-611     72.11
15-612     72.11
15-613     72.12
15-614     72.13
15-701     73.01
15-702     73.02
15-703     73.03
15-704     73.04
15-705     73.05
15-706     73.06
15-707     73.06
15-708     73.07
15-709     73.08
15-710     73.09
15-711     73.10
15-712     73.11
15-713     73.12
15-714     73.13
15-715     73.14
15-716     73.15
15-717     73.16
15-718     73.17
15-719     73.18
15-720     73.19
15-721     73.20
15-722     73.21
15-723     73.22
15-724     73.23
15-725     73.24
15-726     73.25
15-801     73.40
15-802     73.41
15-803     73.42
15-804     73.43
15-805     73.44
15-806     73.45
15-807     73.46
15-808     73.47
15-901     71.120
15-902     71.121
15-903     71.122
15-904     71.123
15-905     71.124
15-906     71.125
15-907     71.126
15-908     71.127
15-1001    74.01
15-1002    74.02
15-1003    74.03
15-1004    74.04
15-1005    74.05
15-1006    74.06
15-1007    74.07
15-1008    74.08
15-1009    74.09
15-1010    74.10
15-1101    75.01
15-1102    75.02
15-1103    75.03
15-1104    75.04
15-1105    75.05
15-1106    75.06
15-1107    75.07
15-1108    75.08
15-1109    75.09
15-1110    75.10
15-1111    75.11
15-1201    75.25
15-1202    75.26
15-1203    75.27
15-1204    75.28
15-1205    75.29
15-1206    75.30
15-1207    75.99
15-1301    70.090
15-1302    70.091
15-1303    70.091
15-1304    70.092
15-1305    70.093
15-1306    70.093
15-1307    70.093
15-1308    70.093
15-1309    70.094
15-1310    70.093
15-1311    70.093
15-1312    70.093
15-1313    70.095
15-1314    70.093
15-1401    70.005
15-1402    70.999
17-101     50.01
17-102     50.02
17-103     50.03
18-101     92.01
18-102     92.02
18-103     92.03
18-104     92.04
18-110     92.99
App. 1     35.01
App. 2     TSO I
App. 4     TSO I
           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     155.001 -
                     155.005,
                     155.020 -
                     155.023,
                     155.035 -
                     155.047,
                     155.049,
1020     1-15-1970   155.060 -
                     155.065,
                     155.080 -
                     155.088,
                     155.100 -
                     155.105,
                     155.120 -
                     155.125,
                     155.999
-        12-1-1971   153.26 -
                     153.32
564-A    2-5-1980    33.050
1069     4-28-1981   96.19
1071     1-12-1982   90.011
1072     1-12-1982   132.06
1073     3-9-1982    71.024,
                     71.999
1076     7-26-1983   34.025
1078     7-26-1983   90.002,
                     90.051
1087     7-26-1983   90.010
1079     11-8-1983   10.99,
                     33.073
1080     4-10-1984   32.060 -
                     32.062
1084     9-11-1984   150.064
1986-2   6-17-1986   34.100
                     34.085 -
                     34.099,
1086     8-26-1986   34.101 -
                     34.103,
                     34.999
                     151.01 -
                     151.11,
1089     5-12-1987   151.25 -
                     151.28,
                     151.40 -
                     151.42
                     10.99,
1090     6-9-1987    33.070,
                     33.072,
                     33.073
1092     8-25-1987   94.01
1095     12-22-1987  150.097,
                     150.999
1096     5-23-1989   31.06
1097     11-14-1989  150.064
1098     3-27-1990   90.004
1100     5-14-1991   72.02
1101     7-9-1991    32.045
91-1102  8-27-1991   133.13,
                     133.99
1103     9-24-1991   90.030,
                     90.999
91-1104  10-8-1991   133.13,
                     133.99
92-1105  1-14-1992   32.045
92-1107  12-22-1992  33.076
95-1114  - -1995     10.99
97-1119  2-11-1997   150.004
97-1122  9-9-1997    93.053
98-05    11-10-1998  33.051
                     30.03,
                     30.15 -
                     30.18,
                     30.20,
99-07    4-5-1999    31.01 -
                     31.05,
                     31.20 -
                     31.25,
                     90.010
99-09    4-5-1999    113.02
99-10    5-3-1999    93.014,
                     93.057
99-12    5-25-1999   30.19
99-13    9-13-1999   31.26
00-17    3-13-2000   93.062,
                     93.999
00-23    7-10-2000   154.041
00-24    9-11-2000   33.075
01-27    11-13-2001  90.030,
                     90.999
01-26    11-29-2001  34.005,
                     34.006
-        12-10-2001  11.02
01-29    12-10-2001  71.015
01-30    12-10-2001  33.036
                     152.01 -
02-01    2-4-2002    152.13,
                     152.99
02-04    12-9-2002   94.02
05-01    7-26-2004   31.06
05-03    8-9-2004    33.065
05-05    10-29-2004  11.01
05-04    11-8-2004   155.082
05-06    2-14-2005   155.005
                     94.15,
05-07    4-11-2005   94.17 -
                     94.20
                     91.01 -
05-08    4-11-2005   91.14,
                     91.99
                     114.01 -
06-01    7-11-2005   114.06,
                     114.99
06-02    11-14-2005  155.088
                     34.115 -
06-03    12-12-2005  34.123,
                     34.999
06-04    12-12-2005  71.029,
                     71.999
06-04-02 2-13-2006   93.058
06-05    5-8-2006    93.029
08-01    10-9-2007   31.62
                     51.01,
08-03    4-14-2008   51.02,
                     51.99,
                     93.999
                     150.001 -
                     150.005,
08-04    5-12-2008   150.020,
                     150.040,
                     150.060,
                     150.075
08-05    6-9-2008    93.050
09-01    7-14-2008   71.024,
                     71.999
09-03    7-28-2008   133.05,
                     133.99
09-05    9-8-2008    10.99
09-06    10-14-2008  93.059
                     155.037,
09-07    2-9-2009    155.047,
                     155.048
                     135.25 -
                     135.34,
                     135.45,
10-08    1-11-2010   135.46,
                     135.60,
                     135.61,
                     135.99
10-09    2-8-2010    90.030,
                     90.999
                     111.30 -
10-10    5-10-2010   111.33,
                     111.99
11-01    9-13-2010   135.01 -
                     135.10
                     150.041 -
11-04    3-14-2011   150.047,
                     150.999
                     150.021 -
11-05    3-14-2011   150.025,
                     150.999
                     150.076 -
11-06    3-14-2011   150.081,
                     150.999
11-07    3-14-2011   150.096,
                     150.999
                     75.25 -
13-01    8-13-2012   75.30,
                     75.99
14-01    8-12-2013   150.095,
                     150.999
                     52.01 -
14-03    6-24-2014   52.07,
                     52.99
15-02    1-12-2015   70.003
15-05    4-13-2015   33.070
16-02    11-9-2015   71.030,
                     71.999
18-01    10-25-2017  Ch. 33, App. A
2020-01  6-12-2020   90.053
                     92.01 -
2020-02  6-16-2020   92.04,
                     92.99
2020-03  6-16-2020   90.102,
                     90.999
2020-04  7-14-2020   90.026
                     92.01 -
2020-02  8-11-2020   92.04,
                     92.99
                     155.020,
2021-01  3-9-2021    155.021,
                     155.083
                    
 
