CITY OF LEXINGTON, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through Ordinance 24-011 published 7-2-2024
 
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310, Cincinnati, Ohio 45202 (800) 445-5588
CHAPTER 1: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
Article 1. Incorporation, Form of Government, Powers, General Elections
1-101 Incorporation
1-102 Form of government
1-103 General powers of city
1-104 General election
Article 2. City Council
1-201 Council members; number, election, officers, terms, compensation
1-202 City Council powers
1-203 City Council; other powers
1-204 City Council; appropriation of monies
1-205 City Council; induction into office, meetings
1-206 City Council; removal of members
1-207 City Council; vacancies
1-208 City Council; quorum, rules, yeas, nays
1-209 Ordinances; enacting clause
1-210 Ordinances; passage, when in effect
1-211 Ordinances; emergency
1-212 Ordinances; adoption by reference
1-213 Ordinances; codification of municipal ordinances and penal ordinances,
publication, filing
Article 3. Officers and Employees
1-301 Mayor
1-302 City Clerk
1-303 City Treasurer
1-304 City Attorney
1-305 Chief of Police
1-306 Municipal Judge and alternate and acting judges
1-307 City Board of Health
1-308 Fire Department composition
1-309 Fire Chief
1-310 Assistant Fire Chief
1-311 Fire Marshal
1-312 Fire Department; company officers
1-313 Fire Department; Secretary-Treasurer
1-314 Fire Department; new members
1-315 Fire Department; bylaws
1-316 City Planning Commission; creation, membership
1-317 Office of Street Superintendent created
1-318 City Manager
Article 4. Nominations and Elections
1-401 Notice of municipal elections
1-402 General municipal elections, when held
1-403 Conduct of general municipal elections
1-404 What candidate’s name may be placed on general election ballot
1-405 Unopposed candidates in general elections
1-406 Primary elections, when held
1-407 Conduct of primary elections
1-408 Manner of becoming party candidate, declaration of candidacy
1-409 Independent candidates
1-410 Unopposed candidates in primary election
1-411 Special elections, questions which may be submitted
1-412 Special election ballot preparation and arrangement
1-413 Conduct of special elections held for electing officers
1-414 Political activity of officers and employees
Article 5. Miscellaneous Provisions
1-501 Initiative and referendum
1-502 Qualifications of officers and employees
1-503 Nepotism; compatibility of offices
1-504 Officers to give bonds
1-505 Compensation
1-506 Change of salaries
1-507 Oath of office
1-508 Who may administer oaths
1-509 City Manager may lay off, suspend, demote and remove
1-510 Acting officers and employees
1-511 Publicity of records
1-512 Filing of minutes
1-513 Location of records
1-514 Starting salary for police officers
1-515 Holding of dual offices
Article 6. Succession in Government
1-601 New code to go into effect when approved by Council
1-602 Ordinances continued
1-603 Officers and employees continued
1-604 Books and property to be delivered to successor
ARTICLE 1. INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS, GENERAL ELECTIONS
§ 1-101 INCORPORATION.
   The City of Lexington, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now
established or as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a
municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the “City
of Lexington, Oklahoma.” It shall succeed to and possess all the property,
rights, privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to the
corporation known as the City of Lexington, Oklahoma, and shall be liable for
all debts and other obligations for which the corporation is now legally bound.
§ 1-102 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The municipal government provided by this code shall be known as the “City
Council form of government.” All powers of the city shall be exercised in the
manner as the Council may prescribe by ordinance; provided, that this code and
other ordinances which may be enacted are not repugnant to the Constitution and
laws of the state.
§ 1-103 GENERAL POWERS OF CITY.
   (A)   The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises and immunities granted to cities by the State Constitution and state
law and all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers
granted. Except as prohibited by the State Constitution and state law, the city
shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and
immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
   (B)   The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at
pleasure, to sue and to be sued and to make contracts. It shall have power to
acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose
(including public utilities, works and ways) in fee simple; or any lesser
interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation or other
legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate,
lease, sell, convey or otherwise dispose of such property as its interest may
require (including public utilities, works and ways). It shall have power to
issue bonds in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by the State
Constitution and state law. It shall have power, within the limits prescribed
by the State Constitution and state law, to accept and administer federal and
state grants in aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or
purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and
to enforce local legislation, consistent with the State Constitution and state
law, for the proper organization and functioning of the city government, for
the preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the
protection of health, life, morals and property, for the promotion of the
common welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend and renew franchises in
accordance with the State Constitution and state law. It shall have the power
to make all contracts and do all other acts in relation to the property and
affairs of the city necessary to the good government of the city.
   (C)   The enumeration of particular powers by this code shall not be deemed
to be exclusive or limiting; in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under the State
Constitution and state law, it would be competent for this code specifically to
enumerate.
§ 1-104 GENERAL ELECTION.
   General elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in April 1995, and each
two years thereafter.
ARTICLE 2. CITY COUNCIL
§ 1-201 COUNCIL MEMBERS; NUMBER, ELECTION, OFFICERS, TERMS, COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The City Council shall be composed of five members. The Council
members shall be residents and registered voters of the city. The Council
members from wards shall be actual residents of their respective wards at the
time of their candidacy and election; but removal of a Council member from one
ward to another within the city after his or her election, or a change in ward
boundaries, shall not disqualify him or her from completing the term for which
he or she was elected.
   (B)   Commencing on the first Tuesday in April 1995, Council members 1, 3
and 5 shall be elected for terms of four years; at the general election on the
first Tuesday in April, 1997, Council members of Wards 2 and 4 shall be elected
for terms of four years. The terms of officials elected under this section
shall begin at 12:00 p.m. on the second Monday following their election, and
they shall serve until their successors are elected and qualified.
   (C)   Each elected Council member shall be compensated as follows: $150 per
month.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 5-4-2021)
§ 1-202 CITY COUNCIL POWERS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, all powers of the city, including
the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the Council.
Without limitation of the foregoing, the City Council shall have the following
powers granted by the Constitution and statutes of the state:
   (A)   To have a common seal and alter the same;
   (B)   To purchase, hold, sell or convey any estate, real or personal, for
the use of the city, so far as such purchase may be necessary to carry out the
objects contemplated;
   (C)   To organize fire companies and the like and govern their activities;
   (D)   To declare what constitutes a nuisance and to take whatever measures
are necessary to remove, abate and prevent the same, and such other measures as
they deem necessary for preservation of public health;
   (E)   To restrain any animals from running at large;
   (F)   To restrain and prohibit gambling and other disorderly conduct; to
suppress and prohibit keeping houses of ill fame; and to authorize the seizure
and destruction of gambling apparatus;
   (G)   To establish and regulate markets and build market houses; to direct
the location of slaughterhouses;
   (H)   To lay out, open, grade and otherwise improve the streets, alleys,
sewers, sidewalks and crossings and to keep them in repair;
   (I)   To appoint Street Commissioners and Fire Wardens, not exceeding three;
   (J)   To prohibit encumbrance of the sidewalks, and riding or driving
thereon, except to cross the same;
   (K)   To provide means for keeping and preserving the peace and quietness by
appointment of a City Marshal and/or other means;
   (L)   To ensure the public property of the city;
   (M)   To purchase, lay out and regulate cemeteries;
   (N)   To plant trees upon public grounds and along the streets, provide for
their culture and preservation, and to enclose any public square or public
grounds within the city;
   (O)   To provide for annual taxes;
   (P)   To make and establish such bylaws, ordinances and regulations not
repugnant to the laws of this state, as may be necessary to carry into effect
the provisions of this code, and to repeal, alter or amend the same as they
shall seem to the Council to require; but every bylaw, ordinance or regulation,
unless in case of emergency, shall be published in a newspaper of the city, if
one be printed therein, or posted in five public places, at least ten days
before the same shall take effect;
   (Q)   To enact fines, penalties and forfeitures for violation of this code,
or of any bylaw or ordinance by them established, which fine may be recovered
by action in the name of the city; but such Council may remit the whole or any
part of the fine, penalty or forfeiture; and
   (R)   To authorize the construction and maintenance of streets, water mains,
water pipes, gas mains and pipes, electric lines and telephone wire along or
through the streets and alleys within the corporate limits, and to grant rights
and franchises to persons, associations or corporations for such purpose, under
the provisions of Article 18, §§ 5a and 5b of the State Constitution; but no
exclusive right shall be granted for any such purpose. The use of streets may
be granted on the same terms to all desiring to compete with each other in the
business of furnishing gas, electricity, telephone accommodations or water, and
all shall be subject to reasonable regulations by ordinance, which ordinance
may be changed at the pleasure of the City Council.
§ 1-203 CITY COUNCIL; OTHER POWERS.
   (A)   The Council may levy and collect a license tax on auctioneers,
contractors, druggists, hawkers, peddlers, brokers, bankers, pawnbrokers,
merchants of all kinds, grocers, confectioners, restaurants, butchers, taverns,
public counseling houses, billiard and pool tables, bowling alleys, carts,
wagons and all other vehicles used in the city or village for pay; hay scales,
lumber dealers, furniture dealers, saddle and harness dealers, jewelers, real
estate agents, express companies or agencies, shows, theaters, all exhibitions
for pay, doctors, dentists, blacksmiths, all manufacturing establishments,
cotton gins, mills and elevators and plumbers; provided, however, that all
scientific or literary lecturers and entertainments shall be exempt from
taxation, and also all concerts and musical or other entertainments given
exclusively by citizens of the city. The tax so levied and collected therefrom
shall be applied for the use and benefit of the city as may be directed by the
City Council of Council members thereof.
   (B)   The Council may establish or adopt a pension, retirement and/or Social
Security system or systems for any or all groups of the officers and employees
in the service of the city, either alone or in cooperation with the state or
federal government, or both.
§ 1-204 CITY COUNCIL; APPROPRIATION OF MONIES.
   All monies, however derived, belonging to the city, shall only be
appropriated for such objects and defraying such expenses as accrue or
necessarily arise in the exercises of powers granted the Council members by
this code.
§ 1-205 CITY COUNCIL; INDUCTION INTO OFFICE, MEETINGS.
   (A)   On the second Tuesday following their election, the Council members
shall initiate their terms of office by taking and subscribing, before a person
of authority to administer the same, the usual oath or affirmation for the
faithful performance of their duties.
   (B)   The Council shall meet regularly at least once monthly at such times
as it may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. Special meetings may be called
by the Council members. All meetings shall be open to the public and the
journal of its proceedings shall be given to public inspection.
§ 1-206 CITY COUNCIL; REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   The Mayor or any other member may be removed from office for any cause
specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers, and by the
method or method prescribed thereby.
§ 1-207 CITY COUNCIL; VACANCIES.
   The Council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies
in its own membership for the unexpired term.
§ 1-208 CITY COUNCIL; QUORUM, RULES, YEAS, NAYS.
   A majority of all the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. The Council shall
determine its own rules and may compel the attendance of absent members in the
manner and under penalties as the Council may prescribe. On the demand of any
member, the vote on any question shall be by yeas and nays and shall be entered
in the minutes. An abstention shall be a no vote.
§ 1-209 ORDINANCES; ENACTING CLAUSE.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be “Be it
Ordained by the Council of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma,” and of all
ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative “Be it
Ordained by the People of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.”
§ 1-210 ORDINANCES; PASSAGE, WHEN IN EFFECT.
   Every proposed ordinance shall be read and a vote of a majority of all the
Council members shall be required for the final passage of an ordinance. The
vote on final passage of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays and shall be
entered in the journal. The Mayor shall have no power to veto. Every ordinance,
except an emergency ordinance, shall be published in full or by title when such
is allowed by the statutes of the state, within 15 days after its passage, in a
legal newspaper of general circulation within the city. Every ordinance except
an emergency ordinance shall become effective 30 days after its final passage
unless it specifies a later time.
§ 1-211 ORDINANCES; EMERGENCY.
   An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which, in the judgment of the
Council, is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health or
safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary
ordinance would become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain, as part
of its title, the words “and declaring an emergency,” and in a separate section
herein called the emergency section shall declare the emergency. The Council
shall vote on the emergency section separately and must adopt the section by a
vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the Council, which vote
shall be by yeas or nays and be entered in the journal. An emergency ordinance
shall take effect upon passage unless it specifies a later time.
§ 1-212 ORDINANCES; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The Council, by ordinance, may adopt by reference codes, ordinances and
standards relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and
milk products and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. Such
a code, ordinance or standard so adopted need not be enrolled in the book of
ordinances; one copy shall be filed and kept in the office of the City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall keep copies of every such code, ordinance or standard in
force for distribution or sale at their approximate cost.
§ 1-213 ORDINANCES; CODIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES AND PENAL ORDINANCES,
PUBLICATION, FILING.
   (A)   The City Council or a Council member may, from time to time, authorize
a codification of its ordinances. Such a code may be kept up to date by use of
a loose leaf system and the process of amendment.
   (B)   At least three copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the
City Clerk for public use, inspection and examination. The City Clerk shall
keep copies of the code for distribution or sale at a reasonable price.
   (C)   Notice of the publication of the code shall be in the manner provided
for publication by title of certain codes and ordinances by 11 O.S. § 14-107
(A).
   (D)   (1)   Penal ordinances of the city shall be compiled and published in
a permanent form, either printed or typed, periodically, but not less than once
every ten years. The city shall also publish biennial supplements to the
permanent volume of compiled penal ordinances. No municipal ordinance shall be
enforced if it is not reflected in such a permanent volume or supplement if the
ordinance was adopted before the latest compilation or supplement. A
codification of municipal ordinances which includes all penal ordinances is
sufficient for complying with these compilation requirements if the code is
issued as a permanent volume with biennial supplements and if the procedure for
filing and notice, as outlined below have been complied with.
      (2)   Provided, further, the ten-year codification requirement shall be
satisfied if the code complies with the compilation requirement and the
biennial supplements are made a part of the permanent volumes which are
maintained in permanent form either bound or in a loose leaf form.
   (E)   (1)   When the city has compiled and published its permanent volume or
biennial supplement of penal ordinances, the City Council shall adopt a
resolution notifying the public of the publication. A copy of the resolution
shall be filed in the office of County Clerk. At least one copy of the
permanent volume and each biennial supplement shall be deposited free of cost
by the municipality in the County Law Library.
      (2)   The permanent volume or biennial supplement of compiled penal
ordinances shall be available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price.
ARTICLE 3. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 1-301 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor. The Mayor shall
be elected in each odd-numbered year at the first Council meeting held after
member terms begin or as soon thereafter as practicable. The Mayor shall serve
until his or her successor has been elected and qualified.
   (B)   The Mayor shall preside over meetings of the Council and may call
special meetings thereof. He or she shall sign all warrants properly and
legally drawn upon the City Treasurer.
   (C)   The Mayor shall certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances
and resolutions passed by the Council. He or she shall be recognized as the
head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for
the purposes of military law. He or she shall sign such written obligations of
the city as the Council may require.
   (D)   The Mayor shall have all the powers, rights, privileges, duties and
responsibilities of a member, including the right to vote on questions.
   (E)   During the absence, disability or suspension of the Mayor, the Council
shall elect from among its members an acting Mayor. When a vacancy occurs in
the office of Mayor, the Council shall elect another Mayor from among its
members to serve for the duration of the unexpired term.
   (F)   The Mayor shall perform all other duties prescribed by law or
ordinance.
§ 1-302 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be an officer of the city and shall have custody
of the records, books and papers of the City Council and shall attend all
meetings and record the proceedings of said Council to include all bills and
warrants as to name, amount and claim number.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall be custodian of the seal of the city and shall
attest and affix the seal to documents when required in accordance with the
applicable law or ordinance.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall keep a condensed summary of all ordinances passed
which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and kept there for public
use and inspection and examination.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall make the records of the city available to the
public in accordance with the provisions of the State Open Records Act, being
51 O.S. § 24A.1, and have custody of the archives, documents and records of the
city.
   (E)   The City Clerk is authorized and empowered to issue a second or
duplicate warrant or voucher that has been lost or destroyed; but not until
after an affidavit setting forth the facts as to the loss or destruction of
said original warrant or voucher has been filed with the City Clerk together
with an indemnifying bond, running to the City Treasurer, in the amount of such
lost or destroyed warrant or voucher.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall have such other duties as prescribed by law,
ordinance or the City Manager. The salary for the City Clerk shall be set by
the City Council.
§ 1-303 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be an officer of the city and shall deposit
daily funds received for the city in depositories as the City Manager may
designate.
   (B)   (1)   The salary for the City Treasurer shall be set by the City
Council. The City Treasurer may be required to perform certain other duties
which shall be described by the City Manager.
      (2)   The pay for such additional duties shall also be set by the City
Council.
   (C)   The books and accounts of the City Treasurer shall be subject at all
times to examination by the City Manager.
   (D)   The same person may hold both the office of the City Treasurer and the
office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 23-015, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 1-304 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Manager. He or she
shall be of good moral character, licensed to practice law in the state and
shall be subject to removal at the request of the City Manager.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to give legal advice on
questions submitted to him or her by the City Manager (or other city officials)
when the subject matter concerns their powers or the performance of their
duties. Additionally, he or she shall draw such ordinances, resolutions,
notices, forms, leases, deeds, papers or other documents as may be required of
him or her by the City Manager.
§ 1-305 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Chief
of Police may appoint police officers as he or she deems necessary, subject to
the approval and confirmation of the City Manager.
   (B)   The Chief of Police and police officers shall possess the powers and
be subject to the liabilities possessed and conferred by law in executing their
orders or enforcing the code of ordinances of the city.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, Chief of Police and/or
police officers to bring justice to all violators of city ordinances, federal
and state laws, and to turn such violators over to the proper authorities. The
Chief of Police shall serve all warrants, writs, executions and other process
properly directed and delivered to him or her.
   (D)   The Chief of Police and each police officer shall be paid such
compensation as the City Manager may prescribe.
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall perform all other duties prescribed by law
or ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   All personal property which comes into the possession of any
police officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out
of the possession of any prisoner or person suspected of or charged with being
a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim
thereto, shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into
the charge of the Chief of Police.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall, in a permanent record book kept for that
purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was
taken or the place where it was found, and the record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser and the amount for which it was sold. (Sales shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of 11 O.S. § 34-104.)
§ 1-306 MUNICIPAL JUDGE AND ALTERNATE AND ACTING JUDGES.
   (A)   There shall be one judge of the court, and he or she shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The City Council
may decide upon a proposed appointment by a majority vote at a quorum present
and acting. The Mayor may be designated as judge upon approval of the City
Council.
   (B)   The Judge shall be at least 21 years of age, and, if he or she is not
an attorney, a resident of the city or a suitable person residing within 20
miles of the boundaries of the city. A judge who is a licensed attorney may be
a nonresident, but he or she must reside in the county or an adjacent county or
maintain a permanent office in the municipality. He or she may engage in the
practice of law in other courts, but he or she shall not accept employment
inconsistent with his or her duties as a judge, or arising out of facts which
give rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court,
pending therein, or which might become the subject of proceedings therein. A
resident of the municipality need not be an attorney licensed to practice law.
   (C)   If the Judge of the Municipal Court is not a licensed attorney, the
trial shall be to the court and the court may not impose a fine and costs
which, taken together, exceed $50, and may not order the defendant imprisoned,
except for the nonpayment of fines or costs.
   (D)   The official term of the Judge shall be two years expiring on the
second Monday of January, in each odd-numbered year. The Judge, unless sooner
removed by majority vote of the Council, shall serve until his or her successor
is appointed and qualified.
   (E)   The Judge of the Court shall receive a salary as prescribed by the
City Council, paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of the
city.
   (F)   The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state
and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of
the courts.
   (G)   There may be appointed an alternate judge of the court possessed of
the same qualifications as the Judge. His or her appointment shall be for the
same term and made in the same manner as the Judge. He or she shall sit as
acting judge of the court in any case if the Judge is absent from the court,
unable to act as judge or disqualified from acting as judge in any case. If at
any time there is no judge or alternate judge duly appointed and qualified
available to sit as judge, the Mayor shall appoint some third person possessing
the qualifications required by this chapter for the Judge, who shall preside as
acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such
time as a judge or alternate judge shall be available.
   (H)   An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid as prescribed by
the City Council for each day devoted to the performance of his or her duties,
except that, for any month, the total payments so calculated shall not exceed
the salary of the Judge in whose stead he or she sits. An alternate or acting
judge who sits for an entire month shall receive the amount specified in this
chapter as the salary of the Judge in whose stead he or she sits.
   (I)   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the City Council for
the causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the state for the removal
of public officers.
   (J)   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent dies,
resigns, ceases to possess the qualifications for the office, or is removed and
the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings, or
are no longer subject to judicial review. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in
the office of judge, the City Council shall appoint a successor to complete the
unexpired term upon the same procedure as an original appointment is made.
§ 1-307 CITY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   The City Council may constitute a Board of Health which shall perform
all the duties provided or required by law.
   (B)   The Board of Health shall be under the supervision of the County
Department of Health and the State Department of Health.
   (C)   It shall be the general duty of the Board of Health to examine and
consider all measures necessary for the preservation of the public health of
the city to see that all ordinances and regulations in relation thereto are
observed.
   (D)   To assist in carrying out the provisions of this section, the Board of
Health may appoint a Health Officer to serve the city.
§ 1-308 FIRE DEPARTMENT COMPOSITION.
   The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, the
assistant Fire Chief and other such officers (investigators, inspectors,
training, mechanical shop and firefighters) as may be designated from time to
time by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 24-011, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 1-309 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   Office created. There is hereby created the office of Chief of the
Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall have general supervision over all
property and employees of the Fire Department and shall see that each employee
does his or her duty. The Fire Chief shall designate which position and what
employment each employee shall take in the Department. The Fire Chief shall
have the power to suspend any employee of the Department, subject to the
approval of the City Manager and shall be responsible for all duties contained
within division (B) below. Within 30 days of the vacancy of this position, the
Fire Department shall notify the members of the City Council and the City
Manager of the individual chosen by the Fire Department, according to their own
bylaws and/or such other internal regulations as they see fit, to serve in the
capacity of the Chief of the Fire Department. Such individual shall be
considered and may be appointed by the City Manager. He or she shall hold this
position until removed for the good of the service or until death, resignation
or incapacity.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Fire Chief shall be at the head of the Fire Department, subject
to the laws of the state and the provisions of this article and other
ordinances of the city. He or she shall diligently perform the duties imposed
upon him or her by law and by ordinance.
      (2)   The Chief shall be held responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the Department and the training of members.
      (3)   The Chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
Department, the fire hydrants, cisterns and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year.
      (4)   The Chief shall maintain a library file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members.
      (5)   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct
the officers and members in the performance of their duties.
      (6)   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department.
      (7)   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case.
      (8)   The Chief shall file the appropriate fire loss reporting forms with
the State Fire Marshal in Oklahoma City each quarter of the calendar year in
those instances that include loss of life, personal injury or property damage
exceeding $15,000. The report shall include, but shall not be limited to,
notification of all fire related injuries and deaths, amount of property damage
and of firefighter injuries in the line of duty requiring the services of a
physician.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 4-6-2021; Ord. 2022-005, passed 11-1-2022; Ord. 24-011,
passed 7-2-2024)
§ 1-310 ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF.
   The assistant Fire Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the
Fire Department. In the absence of the Chief, the assistant Fire Chief shall
command the Department and be held responsible therefore in all respects, with
the full powers and responsibilities of the Chief.
(Ord. 24-011, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 1-311 FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of the Fire Marshal. The individual
holding the position of the Fire Chief and the Fire Marshal may be one and the
same. The Fire Marshal and all officer designated by the Fire Marshal, if any
shall be responsible for enforcing all ordinance requirements, for approving
equipment materials and installation relating to fire prevention and inspection
and correction of fire hazards and life safety regulations affecting or
relating to structures, processes and premises and safeguards from the hazard
of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures,
materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public
welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises from fire hazards in the
structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation; and, matters related
to the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire
suppression and alarm systems.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal may, but shall not be required to, define fire
districts and boundaries thereof. For all fire districts so designated, if any,
or for the city as a whole, if no districts have been established the Fire
Marshal shall make an inspection of every building. It shall be the Fire
Marshal’s special duty to enforce a strict compliance with all the fire
provisions of the International Fire Code, as amended, published by
International Code Council, Inc., with certain amendments thereto and deletions
therefrom, and as may be further amended from time to time by resolution of
Council, and the same as so amended and changed is hereby adopted and
incorporated and considered as a part of this code.
(Ord. 24-011, passed 7-2-2024)
§ 1-312 FIRE DEPARTMENT; COMPANY OFFICERS.
   The officers of the Fire Department companies shall be selected upon their
ability to meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Their knowledge of firefighting;
   (B)   Their ability to lead people; and
   (C)   Their knowledge of firefighting equipment.
§ 1-313 FIRE DEPARTMENT; SECRETARY-TREASURER.
   One member elected by the Fire Department shall be Secretary-Treasurer. His
or her duties shall consist of the following:
   (A)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
   (B)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
   (C)   Collecting any money due the Department by members.
§ 1-314 FIRE DEPARTMENT; NEW MEMBERS.
   All new members shall be on probation for one year after their appointment.
New volunteer members, upon completion of their probation period, must be
approved by the majority of the Fire Department.
§ 1-315 FIRE DEPARTMENT; BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Department shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following.
   (A)   All volunteer firefighters are required to respond to alarms of fire
and other emergencies when notified.
   (B)   A volunteer firefighter is required to be present at all regular
meetings, call meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the
firefighters.
   (C)   There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month.
   (D)   Any volunteer firefighter having two unexcused absences in succession
or three unexcused absences in a period of three months will be expelled from
the Fire Department rolls.
   (E)   Volunteer firefighters leaving the municipality for an extended period
of time will be required to notify the Chief.
   (F)   Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes provided
for him or her will be expelled from the rolls.
   (G)   Any volunteer member of the Fire Department shall be expelled from the
rolls for the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      (5)   Conviction of a felony.
   (H)   Volunteer members shall be paid $10 per fire per run.
   (I)   These bylaws hereby incorporate the provision of 11 O.S. §§ 49-103 et
seq. concerning volunteer Fire Departments.
§ 1-316 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION; CREATION, MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The City Planning Commission shall consist of not less than five
citizens, all of whom shall reside in the city.
   (B)   (1)   All members shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council. The term of office shall be for three years; provided, however, that
in the first instance, one-third shall be for three years, one-third shall be
for two years and one-third shall be for one year.
      (2)   The members of said Planning Commission, having already been
nominated and confirmed, shall serve their abbreviated terms in accordance
herewith.
   (C)   The Mayor and City Engineer shall be ex officio members of the City
Planning Commission.
   (D)   The members of the City Planning Commission shall serve without
salary.
   (E)   Members may be removed by the City Council only for inefficiency,
neglect of duty or malefaction in office; vacancies occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of a term shall be filled only for the unexpired term by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council.
   (F)   (1)   Within five days of the appointment and qualification of the
members of the City Planning Commission, the Commission shall meet and elect
one of its number as Chairperson, one as Vice Chairperson and one as secretary;
in addition, the Commission may create and fill such other offices as it may
deem necessary.
      (2)   The term of all such offices shall be one year, with eligibility
for reelection.
   (G)   The City Planning Commission shall have the power and duties as
prescribed for such a body by the statutes of the state.
§ 1-317 OFFICE OF STREET SUPERINTENDENT CREATED.
   (A)   The Street Superintendent shall be appointed at the beginning of each
fiscal year and shall serve until his or her successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
   (B)   The Street Superintendent shall be responsible for reporting to the
Council on all matters concerning the streets and alleys of the city or as the
Council may direct and at all times be under the supervision of the Council.
§ 1-318 CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Appointment. The City Council is charged and empowered to appoint and
remove the City Manager as provided by law.
   (B)   Duties. The City Manager shall be the Chief Executive Officer and head
of the administrative branch of the city government. He or she shall execute
the laws and administer the government of the city and shall be responsible
therefor to the Council. He or she shall:
      (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove,
demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided
by law. The Manager or the Council, by ordinance, may authorize the head of a
department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such
department, office or agency;
      (2)   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and
agencies;
      (3)   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the Council and be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and
recommend to the Council any changes in the budget which he or she deems
desirable;
      (4)   Submit to the Council a report after the end of the fiscal year on
the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
      (5)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the city and make recommendations as he or she deems desirable; and
      (6)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
ordinance.
   (C)   Spending authority; emergency contracts.
      (1)   The City Manager and the General Manager of the City Public Works
Authority is hereby expressly authorized to enter into contracts and/or to make
purchases expending municipal funds as have been previously budgeted by the
City Council for purposes of the general running and management of the city
without prior approval of the City Council or the City Public Works Authority
without competitive bidding for contracts under $20,000.
      (2)   The amount herein designated may be change by the Council and LPWA
by resolution.
      (3)   Except as specified in division (C)(4) below, any expenditures,
whether by contracts or direct purchases, the City Manager and LPWA General
Manager seeks to make in excess of $20,000 must be submitted to the City
Council for approval by majority vote.
      (4)   (a)   If the City Manager in good faith determines that an
emergency exists such that inaction would be detrimental to the safety and
security of the city and its citizens, the City Manager shall be authorized
expend and/or enter into contracts for amounts not exceeding $100,000;
provided, however, that if the City Manager declares such an emergency, he or
she shall notify the City Council of such action within ten days.
         (b)   Such notification shall contain a statement of the reasons for
the action and the same shall thereafter be recorded in the official minutes of
the Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 24-010, passed 7-2-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 10-106(1) and 10-113
ARTICLE 4. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
§ 1-401 NOTICE OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Notice of a general municipal election or a special election shall be
given by publishing the resolution of the municipal governing body calling the
election. The resolution shall set forth:
      (1)   The date or dates of the election; and
      (2)   The offices to be filled or the questions to be voted upon at the
election.
   (B)   The resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least ten days before the beginning of the
filing period for a general municipal election or at least ten days before the
date of a special election.
§ 1-402 GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS, WHEN HELD.
   General municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in April in
each odd-numbered year.
§ 1-403 CONDUCT OF GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   The laws applicable to general elections shall govern general
municipal elections, except as otherwise provided.
   (B)   Elected officials, including those from wards, as well as at large,
shall be elected at large by the registered votes of the entire city.
§ 1-404 WHAT CANDIDATE’S NAME MAY BE PLACED ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT.
   No candidate’s name shall be printed upon the official ballot for a general
municipal election unless such candidate shall have been nominated by some
political party at the primary election or unless his or her name is presented
as an independent candidate as provided in §
1-409 of this article.
§ 1-405 UNOPPOSED CANDIDATES IN GENERAL ELECTIONS.
   Any candidate who is unopposed for an office in a general municipal election
shall be deemed elected and certified; and his or her name shall not appear on
the general election ballot. If there is only one candidate for each of the
offices which are to be filled at the election, and no questions are to be
voted upon at the election, the general municipal election shall not be held.
§ 1-406 PRIMARY ELECTIONS, WHEN HELD.
   A primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday of March in each odd-
numbered year, at which time the several political parties shall nominate
candidates for offices which are to be elected at the upcoming general
municipal election.
§ 1-407 CONDUCT OF PRIMARY ELECTIONS.
   The general laws relating to primary elections shall govern municipal
primaries, except as otherwise provided. Party candidates for office, including
those from wards, as well as at large, shall be nominated at large by the
registered voters of the respective parties of the entire municipality.
§ 1-408 MANNER OF BECOMING PARTY CANDIDATE, DECLARATION OF CANDIDACY.
   Any registered voter who is an actual resident of the city or of the ward
where the office is from a ward, may become a candidate for a political party
nomination in the municipality’s primary election. To become a party candidate,
a declaration of candidacy must be filed with the County Election Council no
earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the first Monday in February, and no later than 5:00
p.m. on the next succeeding Wednesday.
§ 1-409 INDEPENDENT CANDIDATES.
   An independent candidate may have his or her name printed upon the general
municipal election ballot as candidate for any office to be filled at the
election. To become an independent candidate, a declaration of candidacy must
be filed with the County Election Council no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on the
first Monday in February, and no later than 5:00 p.m. on the next succeeding
Wednesday. An independent candidate must also be a registered voter and an
actual resident of the city or of the ward where the office is from a ward.
Filing as an independent candidate in an election or voting for such candidate
shall not affect one’s party affiliation or regularity.
§ 1-410 UNOPPOSED CANDIDATES IN PRIMARY ELECTION.
   Any candidate who is unopposed for an office in a primary election shall be
deemed nominated and so certified; and his or her name shall not appear on the
primary election ballot. If there are unopposed candidates for each of the
offices which are up for election, no primary election shall be held.
§ 1-411 SPECIAL ELECTIONS, QUESTIONS WHICH MAY BE SUBMITTED.
   When the Council shall deem it advisable, it may, by resolution or
ordinance, authorize the Mayor to call a special election for the purpose of
submitting to the registered voters of the city the question of issuing
municipal bonds, of granting any franchise or for any other purpose authorized
by law.
§ 1-412 SPECIAL ELECTION BALLOT PREPARATION AND ARRANGEMENT.
   The ballot for a special election shall be prepared by the secretary of the
County Election Council and shall set forth the proposition or propositions to
be voted upon, and if more than one proposition is submitted, they shall be
arranged so that each proposition may be voted upon separately.
§ 1-413 CONDUCT OF SPECIAL ELECTIONS HELD FOR ELECTING OFFICERS.
   (A)   When the office of a municipal elected official is to be filled at a
special election, the resolution or order of the Council calling the election
shall contain the following facts:
      (1)   A filing period of three days, on a Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday,
not less than ten days from the date of the resolution or order;
      (2)   The date of the special primary election, not less than 30 days
after the close of the filing period; and
      (3)   The date of the special general election, not less than 30 days
after the date of the primary election.
   (B)   A copy of the resolution or order shall be filed with the secretary of
the County Election Council. The election shall be conducted under the laws
applicable to general municipal elections.
§ 1-414 POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Municipal employees may attend and express their views at City Council
meetings or any other public meetings of the city. Any municipal employee may
actively participate in partisan and nonpartisan political activities;
provided, that the political activity in which the employee participates shall
be exercised only during off-duty hours and while not in uniform. Any federal
statutes restricting the political activities of certain municipal employees
shall supersede the provisions of this section as to such employees. No city
employee shall file as a candidate for public office while employed by the city
unless the Council, by majority vote, approves continued employment.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 22.101.0
ARTICLE 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 1-501 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of
the city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the State
Constitution and state law shall be observed.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. §§ 15 et seq., 34 O.S. §§ 1 et seq. and
Article 18, §§ 4a through 4e of the State Constitution
§ 1-502 QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed
by this code and such additional qualifications as the Council may prescribe by
ordinance; the Council shall not prescribe additional qualifications for
Council members.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 8-101
§ 1-503 NEPOTISM; COMPATIBILITY OF OFFICES.
   (A)   No member of the City Council nor any other authority of the city
government may appoint or vote for the appointment of any person related to
himself or herself by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any
office or position of profit in the city government. The provisions of this
section shall not prohibit an officer or employee already in the service of the
city from continuing in such service or from promotion therein.
   (B)   Except as may be otherwise provided by ordinance, the same person may
hold more than one office or position in the same city government; provided,
however, that a member of the Council shall not receive compensation for
service in any municipal office or position other than his or her elected
office.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 8-106
§ 1-504 OFFICERS TO GIVE BONDS.
   The Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of Police of the city shall each give bonds,
payable to the city, within ten days after their election or appointment in the
following amounts:
   (A)   City Clerk: $1,000;
   (B)   City Treasurer: $15,000; and
   (C)   Chief of Police: $1,000.
§ 1-505 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The salary of the Police Chief, police officers, firefighters,
electricians, sanitation workers, clerical workers, Street Department and all
other employees shall be as set by the City Manager.
   (B)   The salary for the Municipal Judge shall be $200 per month. The salary
for the Civil Defense Director shall be $50 per month.
§ 1-506 CHANGE OF SALARIES.
   (A)   The salary or compensation of elected officers shall not be changed
after their appointment or election, or during their term of office.
   (B)   The Council may, from time to time, determine or regulate the number
and class of officers and employees and determine or change their compensation
by motion or resolution, except as to elected officers as set forth in division
(A) above.
§ 1-507 OATH OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his or
her office, shall take and subscribe to the following oaths.
 
   I,                        , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, obey and defend the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, and that I will not
knowingly receive, directly or indirectly, any money or other valuable thing, for the performance or
nonperformance of any act or duty pertaining to my office, other than the compensation allowed by
law. I further swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as
                        of the City of Lexington and of the Lexington Public Works authority to the
best of my ability.
 
   I,                                          , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, obey and defend the
Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, and will discharge the duties of my
office with fidelity; that I have not paid, or contributed, either directly or indirectly, any money or other valuable
thing to procure my nomination or election (or appointment), except for necessary and proper expenses expressly
authorized by law; that I have not, knowingly, violated any election law of the State, or procured it to be done by
others in my behalf; that I will not knowingly receive, directly or indirectly, any money or other valuable thing, for
the performance or nonperformance of any act or duty pertaining to my office, other than the compensation allowed by law,
and I further swear (or affirm) that I will not receive, use or travel upon any free pass or on free transportation
during my term of office.
 
   (B)   The oath shall be filed and kept in the City Clerk’s office. The
officer shall take and subscribe to the oaths required by state law and the
State Constitution.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 11 O.S. § 8-103 and Article 15, § 1 of the State
Constitution
§ 1-508 WHO MAY ADMINISTER OATHS.
   All officers authorized by federal or state law, the Mayor, the City Clerk,
the City Treasurer, the heads of all other administrative departments, the
Municipal Judge, the City Attorney and other officers as the Council may
authorize, may administer oaths.
§ 1-509 CITY MANAGER MAY LAY OFF, SUSPEND, DEMOTE AND REMOVE.
   The City Manager shall have direct supervision of all employees, including
office personnel, and may lay off, suspend, demote or remove any officer or
employee.
§ 1-510 ACTING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The City Manager may appoint or elect the successor of an officer or
employee during the temporary absence, disability or suspension of such officer
or employee, or in case of vacancy, until a successor is appointed.
§ 1-511 PUBLICITY OF RECORDS.
   All records and accounts of every office, department or agent of the city
government shall be open to public inspection if authorized and allowed by the
State Open Records Act.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq.
§ 1-512 FILING OF MINUTES.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to prepare and file at the City Hall
the tentative minutes of every regular and/or special meeting of the City
Council or the utilities authority. Such minutes shall be prepared and filed
within five days after such regular and/or special meeting.
§ 1-513 LOCATION OF RECORDS.
   All records of the city and the City Public Works Authority shall be
prepared, kept and maintained at the City Hall located at 121 East Broadway,
Lexington, Oklahoma, except that police, fire and ambulance records may be kept
and maintained at the office of the Police Department at 330 N. Main,
Lexington, Oklahoma. No person may remove any records from said offices, except
that rules for the removal of records may be promulgated by the City Council.
§ 1-514 STARTING SALARY FOR POLICE OFFICERS.
   The starting salary for certified police officers shall be as set by the
City Manager.
§ 1-515 HOLDING OF DUAL OFFICES.
   (A)   Any person holding an office or position, either as an employee or as
the head or assistant head of a department, of the municipality of the city
shall be prohibited from also holding elected office in the governing body of
the city at any point during the same period of time.
   (B)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Persons who are no longer employed by the city but receiving
government pensions or retirement due to previous employment, and persons who
are employees or hold offices outside of the city, whether other municipal,
county, state or federal;
      (2)   Any part-time employee of the city or volunteer of any city
department or agency, including, but not limited to, the City Volunteer Fire
Department, provided nothing in this article shall permit compensation in
violation of 11 O.S. § 8-106; and
      (3)   Any individual who, as of the date this article is passed, is
currently employed or holding any position prohibited by this article within
the city and also serving as an elected official, provided such exemption shall
only apply for the duration of such individual’s current elected term.
(Ord. 2022-06, passed 11-1-2022; Ord. 2023-001, passed 2-7-2023)
ARTICLE 6. SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
§ 1-601 NEW CODE TO GO INTO EFFECT WHEN APPROVED BY COUNCIL.
   This code of ordinances shall go into effect 30 days from the date of
approval by the City Council unless an emergency is declared.
§ 1-602 ORDINANCES CONTINUED.
   All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this code, shall
continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own
limitation.
§ 1-603 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES CONTINUED.
   All officers and employees of the city under all previous ordinances shall
continue in the offices and employments which they respectively hold after this
code goes into effect, until their services may be terminated in accordance
with the provisions of this code.
§ 1-604 BOOKS AND PROPERTY TO BE DELIVERED TO SUCCESSOR.
   All books, vouchers, monies or other property belonging to the city and in
charge or possession of any officer of the city shall be delivered to his or
her successor when qualified.
CHAPTER 2: CITY MANAGEMENT
Section
Article 1. City Finance, Business, Purchasing and Sales Procedures
2-101 Fiscal year
2-102 Statements of conditions and needs; appropriations
2-103 Transfer of appropriation balances
2-104 Funds; deposit and investment of funds
2-105 Audits of books and accounts
2-106 Audits; contents of reports
2-107 Audits; failure to file reports
2-108 Claims
2-109 Bonds; issuance, sale
2-110 Warrants; disbursement of funds
2-111 Purchasing and sales procedures
2-112 Purchasing and sales procedures; “contractual service” defined
2-113 Purchasing and sales procedures; City Council
2-114 Purchasing and sales procedures; supplies, materials or equipment
belonging to city
2-115 Public improvements
2-116 Property and vehicle insurance
Article 2. Social Security for City Officers and Employees
2-201 Extension of benefits
2-202 Execution of agreements
2-203 Withholdings from salaries
2-204 Contributions by city
2-205 Excluded officers and employees
Article 3. Firefighters’ Pensions
2-301 Participation in State Firefighters’ Relief and Pension Funds
Article 4. Sales Tax
2-401 Citation
2-402 Subsisting state permits
2-403 Purpose of revenues
2-404 Tax rate; sales subject to tax
2-405 Payment of street improvements
2-406 Exemptions
2-407 Other exempt transfers
2-408 Tax due when; returns; records
2-409 Payment of tax
2-410 Tax to constitute prior claim
2-411 Classification of taxpayers; permit to do business
2-412 Vendor’s duty to collect tax
2-413 Returns and remittances
2-414 Exemption of gross proceeds from sale and purchase of feed, agricultural
fertilizer and farm machinery
2-415 Amendments
2-416 Provisions cumulative
2-417 Discount, delinquent taxes
2-418 Definitions
2-419 Interest and penalties; delinquency
2-420 Waiver of interest and penalties
2-421 Erroneous payments; claim for refund
2-422 Fraudulent returns
2-423 Records confidential
2-424 Provisions severable
Article 5. National Flood Insurance Program
2-501 National insurance program
2-502 Land use and control measures
2-503 Permit requirements
2-504 Application
2-505 Review of applications
2-506 Governmental approval
2-507 Requirement for approval
2-508 Subdivision review
2-509 Water systems
2-510 Sanitary sewer systems
2-511 Flood elevation data required
2-512 Review of flood data
2-513 Elevation data
2-514 Notice
2-515 Mobile home requirements
2-516 Flood map
2-517 Definitions
2-518 Variance procedure
2-519 Conditions for variances
2-520 Warning and disclaimer of liability
2-521 Specific standards
2-522 Floodways
Article 6. Validity
2-601 Validity
Article 7. Sick Leave
2-701 Definition
2-702 Accruals
2-703 Limitations
2-704 Expiration on separation from employment
2-705 Extended leave
Article 8. Employee Retirement
2-801 Employee retirement system
Article 9. Excise Tax
2-901 Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of intangible, personal
property levied
2-902 Exemptions
2-903 Time when due; returns; payments
2-904 Tax constitutes debt
2-905 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
2-906 Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining place of business
within state or both within and without state; permits
2-907 Revoking permits
2-908 Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states
2-909 Interest and penalties; delinquency
2-910 Waiver of interest and penalties
2-911 Erroneous payments; claim for refund
2-912 Fraudulent returns
2-913 Records confidential
2-914 Provisions cumulative
2-915 Provisions severable
2-916 Definitions
2-917 “Tax collector” defined
2-918 Classification of taxpayers
2-919 Subsisting state permits
2-920 Purpose of revenues
Article 10. Gross Receipts Tax on Power, Light, Heat, Gas, Electricity and
Water
2-1001 Tax
2-1002 Application
2-1003 Term
2-1004 Penalty
2-1005 Tax a lien
2-1006 Revocable permit
ARTICLE 1. CITY FINANCE, BUSINESS, PURCHASING AND SALES PROCEDURES
§ 2-101 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on July 1 and shall end
on June 30 of every calendar year.
§ 2-102 STATEMENTS OF CONDITIONS AND NEEDS; APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council shall prepare an itemized statement of estimated
needs and probable income from sources other than ad valorem tax for the
current fiscal year. Said statements shall be made, filed and published as
required by law.
   (B)   The County Excise Board will then make appropriations and supplemental
appropriations for the city as provided by law.
§ 2-103 TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATION BALANCES.
   Unencumbered appropriation balances of items of less immediately urgent
need, or any part thereof, may be transferred to other items of appropriation
to meet more immediately urgent needs by the County Excise Board, upon written
request of the City Council.
§ 2-104 FUNDS; DEPOSIT AND INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The funds of the city shall be deposited as required by law.
   (B)   With approval of the City Council, the City Treasurer shall have
authority to deposit surplus funds of the city in his or her custody in banks
on a time deposit basis at the highest rate of interest obtainable for such
time deposit.
   (C)   The deposits of the city shall be secured by the unit collateral
system provided by state statutes, and the provisions of the statutes are
hereby adopted insofar as they are applicable to the city.
   (D)   Money deposited with the city as water meter deposits may be invested
as provided by state statutes.
§ 2-105 AUDITS OF BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The books of the City Treasurer shall be subject to examination by the
City Council at all times. Likewise, the records of the City Clerk and of all
other officers and employees of the city shall be subject to inspection by the
City Council at all times.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council shall designate a qualified public accountant
to audit the financial records and transactions of the City Treasurer, the City
Clerk and all other personnel of the city who keep financial records and make
financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at least; such
accountant shall make such audit and shall report to the City Council.
      (2)   Certified copies shall be filed with the County Clerk and the State
Auditor within nine months after the close of the fiscal year. The expense of
the audit shall be paid from the General Fund.
§ 2-106 AUDITS; CONTENTS OF REPORTS.
   Each audit report shall contain:
   (A)   A statement of the scope of examination;
   (B)   The auditor’s opinion as to whether the audit was made in accordance
with generally accepted auditing standards applicable in the circumstances;
   (C)   The auditor’s opinion as to whether the financial statements included
in the audit report present fairly the results of the operations during the
period audited;
   (D)   The auditor’s opinion as to whether the financial statements
accompanying the audit were prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles applicable to cities and towns;
   (E)   The reason(s) an opinion is not rendered with respect to any
requirement, in the event the auditor is unable to express an opinion with
respect thereto; and
   (F)   Financial statements presented in such form as to disclose the
operations of each fund and each department of the city and a statement of the
operation of all funds and departments.
§ 2-107 AUDITS; FAILURE TO FILE REPORTS.
   In the event the city, subject to the provisions hereof, does not file a
copy of its audit as provided in §
2-106, the State Auditor shall notify the State Tax Commission which shall
withhold from the city its monthly allocations of gasoline taxes until such
report is filed.
§ 2-108 CLAIMS.
   (A)   Claims against the city shall be made and processed as provided by the
applicable state statutes.
   (B)   (1)   The City Manager shall be responsible for the review and
approval for payment of claims for all expenditures of the city. All claims
shall be made on purchase orders properly issued by the Accounting and Finance
Department, which shall certify that the amount is within the approved budget
for the account charged. All claims must be signed by the encumbering clerk or
a purchasing officer and the City Manager.
      (2)   A monthly report shall be prepared listing all approved payments
made for the preceding month. A copy of the payment listing shall be presented
at the City Council meeting prior to payment.
   (C)   All payments shall be made on regular schedules which shall assure
payment of bills in a timely manner. Exceptions to regular payment schedules
must be authorized by the City Manager or his or her designee.
§ 2-109 BONDS; ISSUANCE, SALE.
   Bonds of the city shall be issued, sold, paid and handled in all respects as
provided by the applicable state statutes.
§ 2-110 WARRANTS; DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   Warrants shall be issued and processed and funds of the city disbursed only
for legal purposes and in accordance with the state statutes.
§ 2-111 PURCHASING AND SALES PROCEDURES.
   The City Council shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase
authorizations for all supplies, materials and equipment for the offices,
departments and agencies of the city government in accordance with state law
and shall use competitive bidding, if required by state law.
§ 2-112 PURCHASING AND SALES PROCEDURES; “CONTRACTUAL SERVICE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTUAL SERVICE. Services performed for the city by persons not in the
employment of the city and may include the use of equipment or the furnishings
of commodities in connection with such service under express or implied
contract. CONTRACTUAL SERVICE shall include travel, freight, express, parcel
post, postage, telephone, telegraph, utilities, rents, printing and binding,
repairs, alterations and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets, bridges
and other physical facilities of the city by persons not in the employ of the
city.
§ 2-113 PURCHASING AND SALES PROCEDURES; CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   No member of the City Council may sell or furnish for a consideration
any materials or supplies for use of the city; and any member of the Council
voting for or consenting to or being a party to such contract or purchase is
personally liable as provided by state statutes.
   (B)   The City Council shall not make any contract with any of its members
or in which any of its members shall be directly or indirectly interested.
   (C)   No officer of the city may become directly or indirectly interested
individually in any sale, lease or contract which he or she is authorized to
make.
§ 2-114 PURCHASING AND SALES PROCEDURES; SUPPLIES, MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT
BELONGING TO CITY.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, surplus or obsolete
supplies, material or equipment belonging to the city may be sold by the City
Council.
   (B)   No sale shall be made under this section until the City Council has
declared the supplies, materials or equipment involved to be surplus or
obsolete.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) below, the City Council
shall advertise any sale under this section in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city or in such other manner as deemed necessary to
adequately reach prospective buyers to give them an opportunity to make bids.
All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and
place, except when the sale is by auction. The City Council may repeatedly
reject all bids and advertise again. The Council shall sell such supplies,
materials or equipment to the highest responsible bidder and, if necessary,
shall cast lots in case of a tie to determine to whom to sell.
   (D)   The City Council may sell the following without giving an opportunity
for competitive bidding: surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment,
the total value of which does not exceed $100 in a single transaction.
Statutory reference:
   Sale of personal property by Chief of Police, see 11 O.S. § 34-104
§ 2-115 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Public improvements may be made by the City Council itself or by contract.
The City Council shall award all contracts for such improvements. Competitive
bidding shall be used if required by law.
§ 2-116 PROPERTY AND VEHICLE INSURANCE.
   (A)   The City Council may insure property of the city as authorized by
state statutes. Any money received as a result of destruction, damages or loss
of such insured property shall be accounted for and used as provided for by
said statutes.
   (B)   The City Council may purchase insurance to pay damages to persons
sustaining injuries or damages to property as a result of negligent operation
of motor vehicles or motorized equipment of the city.
ARTICLE 2. SOCIAL SECURITY FOR CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 2-201 EXTENSION OF BENEFITS.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend to
the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or this article, and
whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the
benefits of the system of federal old age and survivors insurance, as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through
307, and amendments thereto, including Pub. Law No. 734, 81st Congress. In
pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to professional
employees, including ambulance service providers.
§ 2-202 EXECUTION OF AGREEMENTS.
   The Mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all
necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the State Department of Public
Welfare, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as
provided in this article.
§ 2-203 WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES.
   Withholding from salaries or wages of employees and officials is hereby
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the
state or federal agency designee by such laws and regulations.
§ 2-204 CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   There shall be appropriated by the city, from available funds, such
amounts for such items as may be required by applicable state or federal laws
or regulations for employer’s contributions to the Old-Age, Survivors and
Disability Insurance Program.
   (B)   Such funds shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by said laws or regulations.
§ 2-205 EXCLUDED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   There is hereby excluded from this article and the benefits
established hereunder any authority to make any agreement with respect to any
position of any employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by
any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official
of the city.
   (B)   There is hereby excluded from this article and the benefits
established hereunder any authority to make any agreement with respect to any
position or any employee or official, compensation which is on a fee basis or
any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, including, but not limited to,
professional employees and ambulance service providers.
ARTICLE 3. FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSIONS
§ 2-301 PARTICIPATION IN STATE FIREFIGHTERS’ RELIEF AND PENSION FUNDS.
   The volunteer Fire Department of the city shall be subject to all of the
provisions of the State Firefighters’ Relief and Pension Act, being 11 O.S. §§
49-101 et seq., all of the provisions of which are hereby accepted by the city
for the use and benefit of its volunteer Fire Department, which shall be
subject to all of the obligations thereunder.
ARTICLE 4. SALES TAX
§ 2-401 CITATION.
   This article constitutes, shall be known and may be cited as the “Lexington
Sales Tax Ordinance.”
§ 2-402 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Tax Code are, for the purposes of this
article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirements for
an additional city permit for the same.
§ 2-403 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues
for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city.
§ 2-404 TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 4% for a period of ten years
commencing January 1, 2014, at 12:00 a.m., and terminating on December 31,
2024, at 12:00 a.m., at which time the tax rate shall revert to 3.5%, subject
only to intervening tax increases or decreases approved by the voters of the
city.
   (B)   The excise tax shall be upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts
derived from all sales taxable under the sales tax law of the state, including,
but not exclusive of, the following:
      (1)   Tangible, personal property;
      (2)   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam or any other
utility or public service, except water;
      (3)   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of
transportation for hire;
      (4)   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or
users, including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This
shall include all services and rental charges having any connection with
transmission of any message;
      (5)   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds and characters and
the service of printing or overprinting;
      (6)   Service of furnishing rooms by hotels, apartment hotels, public
rooming houses and tourist camps;
      (7)   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels
and parking lots;
      (8)   Foods, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
      (9)   Advertising of all kinds, types and characters, including any and
all devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices;
      (10)   Dues or fees to clubs, and the sale of tickets or admission to
places of amusement, to athletic, entertainment or recreational events or dues
or fees for the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement,
entertainment, athletic or recreational facilities, including free or
complimentary passes, tickets, dues or fees which are hereby declared to have a
value equivalent to the sale price of tickets, passes, admissions, fees or dues
of like kind or character;
      (11)   For the purpose of this article, sales of services and tangible,
personal property made for the purpose of developing real estate even though
such real estate is intended for resale as real property, are hereby declared
to be sales to consumers or users. Sales of service and tangible, personal
property, including material, supplies and equipment made to contractors who
use same in the performance of any contract, are hereby declared to be sales to
consumers or users and not sales for resale. Sales of tangible, personal
property to persons who are primarily engaged in selling their services shall
be deemed sales to consumers or users and, therefore, taxable. Sales of
tangible, personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salespersons who
do not have established places of business shall be deemed to be sales to
consumers or users and, therefore, taxable; and
      (12)   Any other sales the state is authorized to assess tax in
connection therewith.
(Ord. 2014-05, passed 10-7-2014; Ord. 23-014, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 2-405 PAYMENT OF STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The revenues generated by 3.5% of the 4% excise tax levied pursuant to
§ 2-404 of this article shall be used solely to pay for the improvement,
maintenance or construction of streets and alleys and other capital
improvements and payment of principal and interest on indebtedness incurred on
behalf of the city for street and/or capital improvements. The remaining 0.5%
shall be placed in the General Fund of the city to be used for any lawful
purpose for a period of ten years commencing December 31, 2024, at 12:00 a.m.
and terminating on December 31, 2034, at 12:00 a.m.
   (B)   With respect to the 0.5% excise tax on the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the sales tax laws of the state,
said additional limited time 0.5% excise tax levied pursuant to this section
may be expended as follows.
      (1)   Funds derived from this 0.5% excise tax shall be used for any
lawful purpose to include, but not be limited to, the upgrading of sewer, water
and electric facilities, street maintenance, equipment for use in all
departments of the city, salaries, payment of lawful debts of the city and the
purchase of supplies for all departments of the city.
      (2)   Determining that the 0.5% excise tax shall begin at 12:00 a.m., on
December 31, 2024, and shall terminate at 12:00 a.m. on December 31, 2034.
(Ord. 2014-05, passed 10-7-2014; Ord. 23-014, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 2-406 EXEMPTIONS.
   There is specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the gross
receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the sales tax law of the state.
§ 2-407 OTHER EXEMPT TRANSFERS.
   Also, there is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied the transfer
of tangible, personal property exempted from the sales tax law of the state.
§ 2-408 TAX DUE WHEN; RETURNS; RECORDS.
   The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state
tax law of the state.
§ 2-409 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   Payment. The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at
the time and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax
under the state tax law of the state.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term TAX COLLECTOR
means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state
duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer
the collection of the tax herein levied.
§ 2-410 TAX TO CONSTITUTE PRIOR CLAIM.
   Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall, at all times,
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as by any other debts.
§ 2-411 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS; PERMIT TO DO BUSINESS.
   For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for the purposes of the State Sales Tax
Code.
§ 2-412 VENDOR’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to
collect from the consumer or user, the full amount of the tax levied by this
article, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average
equivalent thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as
other debts.
   (C)   (1)   A vendor, as defined herein, who willfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied herein
or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or
indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied,
or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which
infers that he or she is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer
or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any
manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 and costs.
      (2)   In the event the penalty or fine allowed by law to be assessed by
municipalities shall be increased, said fine shall increase accordingly.
§ 2-413 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Sales Tax Code.
§ 2-414 EXEMPTION OF GROSS PROCEEDS FROM SALE AND PURCHASE OF FEED,
AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER AND FARM MACHINERY.
   Exemptions of the sales of poultry and livestock feed, agricultural
fertilizers and farm machinery, as prescribed by the State Sales Tax Code,
shall be equally applicable as exemptions from the tax herein levied.
§ 2-415 AMENDMENTS.
   The people of the city, by their approval of this article at the election
hereinabove provided, hereby authorize the City Council, by ordinances duly
enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the
method and manner of administration and enforcing this article as may be
necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the
tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified
electors of the city as provided by law.
§ 2-416 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing ordinances.
§ 2-417 DISCOUNT, DELINQUENT TAXES.
   At the time of transmitting the returns required under this article to the
collecting authority, the taxpayer shall remit therewith to the collection
authority, except as hereinafter provided, 97% of the tax due under the
applicable provisions of this article, and failure to remit such tax at the
time of filing the returns shall cause said tax to become delinquent; provided,
however, in the event the payment of any tax due under the applicable
provisions of this article becomes delinquent for a period of five days, the
taxpayer forfeits his or her claim to 3% discount and must remit to the
collecting authority 100% of the amount of tax due plus any penalty due. This
discount is allowed the seller or taxpayer to remunerate him or her for keeping
sales tax records, filing reports and remitting the tax when due as required by
this article.
§ 2-418 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the definitions of words, terms and phrases
contained in the State Sales Tax Code are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part hereof.
§ 2-419 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   68 O.S. § 217 and all amendments is hereby adopted and made a part hereof,
and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are
hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and
paying the tax levied by this article; provided, that failure or refusal of any
taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time
and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent.
§ 2-420 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer’s failure to pay the sales tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in
administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220; and to
accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said §
220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
§ 2-421 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the sales tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes
of this section, the applicable provisions of said § 227 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this article.
§ 2-422 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   (A)   In addition to all civil penalties provided herein, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this article shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine of $100 and costs.
   (B)   In the event the fines allowed by state law for municipalities to
assess increases, the fine shall be increased accordingly.
§ 2-423 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the sales tax herein levied is legislatively recognized
and declared in order to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. §§ 205 and
205.1 of the State Sales Tax Code, and each subsection thereof is hereby
adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the
administration of the city sales tax as if herein set forth in full.
§ 2-424 PROVISIONS SEVERABLE.
   The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any
section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held
invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause thereof.
ARTICLE 5. NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM
§ 2-501 NATIONAL INSURANCE PROGRAM.
   The City Council realized that the city is subject to flooding and that
relief is available in the form of federal subsidized flood insurance by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through 4106,
national flood insurance and as further set forth by the applicable state
statutes.
§ 2-502 LAND USE AND CONTROL MEASURES.
   The Council assures the Federal Insurance Administration that it will enact
as necessary and maintain in force for those areas having flood hazards,
adequate land use and control measures with effective enforcement of provisions
consistent with the criteria set forth in § 1910 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.
§ 2-503 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve,
move or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate
permit for each building or structure from the designated responsible person.
   (B)   No human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations shall be commenced until a separate
permit has been obtained from the designated person for each change.
   (C)   No mobile home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate
without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from the
designated responsible person.
§ 2-504 APPLICATION.
   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit application on a
form furnished for that purpose. The form must be completed and submitted to
the designated responsible person before the issuance of a permit will be
considered. The application shall include, but not be limited to: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structure, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
   (A)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
   (B)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
   (C)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria; and
   (D)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 2-505 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector, hereinafter referred to as the responsible
person, is appointed as the person responsible for receiving applications and
examining the plans and specifications for the proposed construction or
development. The responsible person shall also be known as the Flood Management
Administrator.
   (B)   After reviewing the application, the responsible person shall require
any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of
this article.
§ 2-506 GOVERNMENTAL APPROVAL.
   The responsible person shall review proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from
which approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1927, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
§ 2-507 REQUIREMENT FOR APPROVAL.
   The responsible person shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements (including the placement of prefabricated buildings
and mobile homes) shall:
   (A)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
   (B)   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage; and
   (C)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
§ 2-508 SUBDIVISION REVIEW.
   (A)   The responsible person shall review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new development to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably
safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development
is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood-prone area;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (B)   In any development or improvement of property, the developer or owner
may be required to provide at his or her own expense a preliminary drainage
study for the total area to be ultimately developed. It shall be the
responsibility of the responsible person or the City Planning Commission to
determine whether or not the need exists for such a study and, if required, the
study will be submitted to an engineer retained by the city for review. The
city reserves the right to require improvements to preclude any backup or tail
water inundating any areas outside of the development as a result of the base
flood. No excavating and/or grading and/or leveling and/or landscaping or
filling of any lot or tract shall be commenced prior to approval of the
preliminary grading plan or building permit.
   (C)   Storing and other drainage facilities shall be dedicated to the public
and maintained by the public unless the facilities are an integral part of the
development, in which case the ownership and maintenance of said facilities may
remain with the private sector.
§ 2-509 WATER SYSTEMS.
   The responsible person shall require within flood-prone areas new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
§ 2-510 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS.
   The responsible person shall require within flood-prone areas:
   (A)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters; and
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
§ 2-511 FLOOD ELEVATION DATA REQUIRED.
   The responsible person shall require that all subdivision proposals and
other proposed new developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data.
§ 2-512 REVIEW OF FLOOD DATA.
   The responsible person shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, until
such other data has been provided by the Administrator as criteria for
requiring that:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood level; and
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or floodproofed
to or above the base flood level.
§ 2-513 ELEVATION DATA.
   For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk
premium rates within Zone A on a community’s FHBM, the responsible person
shall:
   (A)   Obtain or require the applicant to furnish the elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures and whether or not such structures
contain a basement;
   (B)   Obtain or require the applicant to furnish, if the structure has been
floodproofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
structure was floodproofed; and
   (C)   Maintain a record of all such information.
§ 2-514 NOTICE.
   The responsible person shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the
Administrator.
§ 2-515 MOBILE HOME REQUIREMENTS.
   The responsible person shall require that all mobile homes to be placed
within Zone A on the community’s flood hazard boundary map shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over the top and
frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that:
   (A)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and
mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side;
   (B)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional
ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long
requiring four additional ties per side;
   (C)   All components of the anchoring systems be capable of carrying a force
of 4,800 pounds; and
   (D)   Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
§ 2-516 FLOOD MAP.
   The flood hazard boundary map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration
for this community, dated with panel numbers 400043-H01 and any officially
published revisions to this map is adopted as the official map for the
enforcement of this article. Zone A on this map delineates the area within
which the requirements of this article will be enforced.
§ 2-517 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Flood Management Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO Zone on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile
home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction
of street) is completed before the effective date hereof.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring concrete or the
construction of street).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal water; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the flood
boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOOD or FLOODING).
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HABITABLE FLOOR. Any floor usable for living purposes or which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. A
floor used only for storage purposes is not a HABITABLE FLOOR.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. The term includes, but is not
limited to, the definition of MOBILE HOME as set forth in regulations governing
the mobile home safety and construction standards program (24 C.F.R. § 3282.7
(2)).
   NEW. When prefacing any other words, construction which is completed on or
after the effective date hereof.
   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The placement of permanent construction of a
structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings or any work beyond the state of excavation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways or excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms;
nor the installation of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling sites. For mobile homes, it means the affixing of the
mobile home to the permanent site including the construction of streets and
installation of utilities and pads in mobile home subdivisions.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as
well as a mobile home.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
§ 2-518 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment, as established by the city, shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
article.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by
the Flood Management Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
article.
   (C)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the county district court.
   (D)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this article, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program of that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   Upon consideration of the factors set forth above and the purposes of
this article, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
article.
   (F)   The Flood Management Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
§ 2-519 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level; provided, that §
2-518(D)(1) through (D)(11) have been fully considered.
      (2)   As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (B)   Variances may be used for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that a failure to grant a variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public as
identified in § 4.4-1(4) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (F)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
flood elevation.
§ 2-520 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 2-521 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided, the following standards are required: New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, shall:
   (A)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
   (B)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
   (C)   Be certified by the registered professional engineer or architect that
the standards of this section are satisfied.
§ 2-522 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development unless a technical evaluation demonstrates
that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge;
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article; and
   (C)   Prohibit the placement of any mobile homes, except in an existing
mobile home park or existing mobile home subdivision.
ARTICLE 6. VALIDITY
§ 2-601 VALIDITY.
   The invalidity of any section or provision of this article or of the code
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.
ARTICLE 7. SICK LEAVE
§ 2-701 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SICK LEAVE.
      (1)   A period in which the employee is incapacitated for the performance
of his or her regular duties caused by sickness, injury or disease; or by a
medical, surgical, dental or optical examination or treatment; or where said
employee’s presence might jeopardize the health of others by reason of his or
her contraction of a contagious disease.
      (2)   Such other emergency situations not provided for herein or
situations involving the health of an employee’s family members are subject to
qualification as sick leave only upon written approval of the City Manager.
      (3)   Any employee who is absent from work for three consecutive days and
such absence is attributed to a cause which will classify the absence as
subject to sick leave as defined above, must furnish the City Manager of the
city with a doctor’s statement detailing the illness or injury and its
severity.
      (4)   The City Manager of the city may require a doctor’s statement
certifying the employee’s degree of incapacity and severity of illness at any
time and in connection with any sick leave. This request is to be wholly within
the discretion of said manager.
      (5)   An employee may use his or her sick leave time for family leave for
up to ten days per year when the family member is one of the following: spouse,
child, stepchild, parent, brother, sister, grandchild, father-in-law or mother-
in-law.
§ 2-702 ACCRUALS.
   (A)   All full-time employees shall accrue sick leave at full pay at the
rate of ten hours for each calendar month of service.
   (B)   Part-time employees shall not be entitled to sick leave for any
reason.
   (C)   No employee, without the written consent of the Mayor, shall be able
to use sick leave until he or she has been employed by the city for one
calendar month. Said employees shall be credited for the sick leave which
accrued during their first calendar month of employment after they complete
said first calendar month of employment.
§ 2-703 LIMITATIONS.
   Sick leave shall not:
   (A)   Be used for vacation leave;
   (B)   Be taken in advance;
   (C)   Accumulate beyond 45 days; or
   (D)   Accrue during a leave of absence without pay, a suspension or layoff.
§ 2-704 EXPIRATION ON SEPARATION FROM EMPLOYMENT.
   All sick leave accrued shall expire and be extinguished on the date of the
employee’s separation from employment with the city. No employee shall be
entitled to be compensated or reimbursed for sick leave outstanding at the time
of termination of employment. However, if said employee is re-employed within a
period of one year from the date of said separation, sick leave accrued during
the previous period of employment may be reinstated solely at the discretion of
the Mayor and subject to §
2-703 of this article.
§ 2-705 EXTENDED LEAVE.
   If an absence because of illness or injury extends beyond the sick leave
accrued to the credit of the employee, such additional time may be charged to
the accrued annual leave, where applicable. If all accrued sick leave and
accrued annual leave is exhausted, the employee may be granted sick leave
without pay, other leave without pay or may have his or her employment
terminated. This will be decided by the Mayor and is wholly within his or her
discretion.
ARTICLE 8. EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT
§ 2-801 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference, as though set forth herein in
its entirety, an employee retirement system.
   (B)   A copy of said retirement system provisions, and amending ordinances,
shall be and remain on file and available for inspection in the office of the
City Clerk.
ARTICLE 9. EXCISE TAX
§ 2-901 EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF INTANGIBLE, PERSONAL
PROPERTY LEVIED.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible,
personal property purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on
the storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of such property at
the rate of 3.5% of the purchase price of such property.
      (2)   Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise
consuming, within the municipality, tangible, personal property purchased or
brought into the municipality.
      (3)   The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of
importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall be
assessed to only property purchased outside the state; provided, that the tax
levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended
solely for use outside the municipality, but which is stored in the
municipality pending shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily
retained in the municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing,
alteration, maintenance or other service.
   (B)   Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein may deduct
from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or
services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that
would have been due if the taxes imposed by the municipality had been levied on
the sale of such goods or services.
§ 2-902 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply:
   (A)   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in this
municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
municipality;
   (B)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for
resale, before being used;
   (C)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the State Use Tax
Code and the city’s use tax ordinance, has been paid by the person using such
tangible, personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was levied
under the laws of the state or some other state or municipality of the United
States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been
subjected to a tax by the state or any other state or municipality in respect
to its sale or use, in an amount less that the tax imposed by both the State
Use Tax Code and the city’s use tax ordinance, the provisions of this article
shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the
rate provided by both the State Use Tax Code and the city’s use tax ordinance
and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed;
   (D)   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the municipality.
Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is
incorporated into and is directly used in the process of manufacturing property
subject to taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality. For the
purpose of this division (D), the term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and
generally recognized as such;
   (E)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the municipality;
   (F)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident
of this municipality where such personal property is for such individual’s
personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads; or
   (H)   In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and brought into
this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes and which is later resold.
§ 2-903 TIME WHEN DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENTS.
   The tax levied by this article is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the State Use Tax Code.
§ 2-904 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
§ 2-905 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR.
   (A)   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within
and without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a
place of business outside this state for use in this municipality shall at the
time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this article from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form
prescribed by the Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall by regulation
require such receipt.
   (B)   Each retailer or vendor shall list with the Tax Commission the name
and address of all his or her agents operating in this municipality and
location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places
of business in this city.
§ 2-906 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING PLACE OF
BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE; PERMITS.
   (A)   The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize
the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of
tangible, personal property for use in this municipality and by the out of
state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of
business both within and without the state and making sales of tangible,
personal property at such out of state place of business for use in this
municipality. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit
to collect such taxes, by the Tax Commission in such manner and subject to such
regulations and agreements as it may prescribe.
   (B)   When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to
collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his or her
knowledge for use within this municipality. Such authority and permit may be
canceled when at any time the Tax Commission considers that such tax can more
effectively be collected from the person using such property in this
municipality. Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are
made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this municipality by the
retailer or vendor in such retailer’s or vendor’s vehicle, whether owned or
leased (not by common carrier) such sales or transaction shall continue to be
subject to applicable municipal sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax
shall be collected and reported under taxpayer’s sales tax permit number
accordingly.
§ 2-907 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article or
the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state, may, after notice and hearing above
provided, cancel said corporation’s license to do business in this state and
shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this article, the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules or
regulations of the Tax Commission.
§ 2-908 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Use Tax Code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes.
§ 2-909 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and
interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are
hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and
paying the tax levied by this article; provided, that the failure or refusal of
any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax
in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be
delinquent.
   (B)   In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days,
the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed
under this article.
§ 2-910 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the municipal tax herein levied may be
waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance
as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220,
and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of
said § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
§ 2-911 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the municipal use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure and under the same limitations of time as provided for administration
of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the
purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said § 227 are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
§ 2-912 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   (A)   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the
willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances
herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this article shall be an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 and costs.
   (B)   Each day of noncompliance with this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 2-913 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the municipal use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, of the State
Use Tax Code and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the municipal use tax
as is herein set forth in full.
§ 2-914 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of the municipal ordinances.
§ 2-915 PROVISIONS SEVERABLE.
   The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any
section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held
invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof.
§ 2-916 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions, as well as the
definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the State Use Tax Code, 68
O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article.
   CITY/TOWN. The City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   TRANSACTION. Sale.
§ 2-917 “TAX COLLECTOR” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the municipal government of the official
agency of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by
law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
§ 2-918 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Use Tax Code.
§ 2-919 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax Commission
pursuant to the State Use Tax Code are for the purpose of this article hereby
ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional
municipal permit for the same purpose.
§ 2-920 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues
for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
municipality and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the
governing body of the municipality for any purpose for which funds may be
lawfully expended as authorized.
ARTICLE 10. GROSS RECEIPTS TAX ON POWER, LIGHT, HEAT, GAS, ELECTRICITY AND
WATER
§ 2-1001 TAX.
   From and after the effective date hereof (May 18, 1998), there is hereby
levied and assessed an annual tax of 2% upon the gross receipts from
residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas, electricity or
water in said city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license,
occupation or excise tax levied by such city, all as provided by 68 O.S. §§
2601 through 2605.
§ 2-1002 APPLICATION.
   The tax levied under §
2-1001 of this article shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms,
associations or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing power,
light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the city limits, except it shall
not apply to any person, firm, association or corporation operating under a
valid franchise from said city, nor to the city when providing any such
services.
§ 2-1003 TERM.
   The tax levied under §
2-1001 of this article shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and
shall be payable monthly and placed in the General Revenue Fund of the city.
§ 2-1004 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when
levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from such city and,
in addition hereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or
corporation for the amount of the tax and all expenses of collecting the same,
including reasonable attorneys’ fees.
§ 2-1005 TAX A LIEN.
   The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within said city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the
city limits of the city.
§ 2-1006 REVOCABLE PERMIT.
   Any persons, firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing gas within the city limits, not operating under a valid franchise
from said city, and upon whom the tax provided under §
2-1001 of this article is imposed, is hereby granted a revocable permit by said
city for so long as this article remains in effect that the taxes are paid in
accordance with the terms of this article to acquire, construct, erect,
install, extend, repair, remove, relocate, replace, operate and maintain a
system of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus, structures and appurtenances in,
across, upon and under the streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks,
parkway, sidewalks, parking driveways, right-of-way, utility easements and
other public ways, places, areas and grounds, all being sometimes referred to
herein as “streets, alleys, avenues and other public ways, places and grounds,”
in the city, as now constituted, and as may be added to hereafter, for the
purpose of transporting, distributing and selling gas to said city, its
inhabitants and the public generally for domestic, commercial and industrial
uses, and for any and all other purposes for which gas, during the period of
this revocable permit may be used, together with the right to enter upon the
streets, alleys, avenues and other public ways, places and grounds of said city
for the purpose of constructing, erecting, installing, extending, relocating,
operating, maintaining, removing and repairing said works, pipes, pipelines and
all necessary apparatus, machinery, structures and appurtenances.
CHAPTER 3: GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
Article 1. Federal, State and Local Law
3-101 Federal and state law and Constitutions
3-102 Relationship of state, federal and local codes defined
3-103 Enumeration of provisions
3-104 How code designated and cited
3-105 Catchlines of sections
Article 2. Rules of Construction
3-201 Rules of construction; definitions
3-202 Amendments or additions to code
Article 3. Miscellaneous Provisions
3-301 Certain ordinances not affected by code
3-302 Code does not affect prior offenses, rights
3-303 Code and ordinances effective outside city on property owned or
controlled by city
3-304 Separability of parts of code
3-305 Salvage yards
3-306 Charge for returned checks
3-307 Purchasing agent
3-308 9-1-1 VoIP service fee
3-309 Fair housing
Article 4. Additional Duties of Council Members
3-401 Duties
3-402 Objectives
3-403 Council members not obligated
Article 5. Penalty
3-501 General penalty for violations of code and ordinances; continuing
violations
ARTICLE 1. FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAW
§ 3-101 FEDERAL AND STATE LAW AND CONSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   Whereas, the state acts as the agent of the federal government when
acting in matters relating to the enforcement of federal law, regardless of
geographic boundaries of local government jurisdiction within the state; and
   (B)   Whereas, the city acts as the agent of the state in matters relating
to the enforcement of state law within the geographic boundaries of the city;
   (C)   Now, therefore, the City Council hereby acknowledges and incorporates
the State Civil and Penal Codes into the code of the city and hereby adopts,
ratifies and confirms the same as if set out in full herein.
§ 3-102 RELATIONSHIP OF STATE, FEDERAL AND LOCAL CODES DEFINED.
   All officers and employees of the city shall be required to swear or affirm
that the laws and Constitutions of the state and the United States will be
carried out and upheld to the best of their ability as well as the ordinances
and regulations of the city.
§ 3-103 ENUMERATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Provisions of the state law which affect the city because of its
general relationship to the state will not be enumerated herein but are
declared to be an inseparable part of this code.
   (B)   Provisions of the state law which prescribe specific actions or laws
for the city and its citizens may be included in this code for purposes of
clarity. Provisions of state law in matters of wider public concern which are
not enumerated herein but which affect the city and its citizens in a general
way may not be enumerated herein, but are nevertheless hereby made a part of
this code.
   (C)   (1)   All provisions of the city code shall be specifically enumerated
herein which are of purely local concern. Only the regulations, rules,
prohibitions, nuisances, offenses and other provisions which are of purely
local concern to the city as provided by state law and are specifically
enumerated herein in detail shall be enforced by the city.
      (2)   The city and its duly authorized officers and agents shall have all
power, duties and responsibilities necessary to enforce the same.
§ 3-104 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in this and all other chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Lexington,
Oklahoma” and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the “Lexington
City Code or City Code of Lexington.”
§ 3-105 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, unless
expressly so provided.
ARTICLE 2. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
§ 3-201 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY, THE CITY or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Lexington, Cleveland County,
Oklahoma.
   CITY ATTORNEY or CORPORATION COUNSEL. The City Attorney for the City of
Lexington, Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   CITY TREASURER. The City Treasurer of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   CLERK, CLERK OF THE MUNICIPALITY or CITY CLERK. The Clerk of the City of
Lexington, Oklahoma.
   CODE. The code of ordinances of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to
be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which such notice is given or such act is done shall be excluded in computing
the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be included.
   COUNTY. Cleveland County, Oklahoma.
   GENDER. A word imparting the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   HEALTH OFFICER or HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Sanitarian or County Health
Department unless specific reference is made to the appointed Health Officer of
the city or state.
   HIGHWAY. Any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square,
bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city dedicated
or devoted to public use.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Any word imparting the single number shall include the plural and
any word imparting the plural number shall include the singular, except where a
contrary intention plainly appears.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND THE LIKE. Whenever any officer, department, board,
commission or other agency is referred to by title alone, such reference shall
be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.”
   OR; AND. OR may be read AND, and AND may be read OR, if the sense requires
it.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. The word PERSON shall extend and be applied to associations,
corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as
to individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word PERSON, as
applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members
thereof; and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   POLICE CHIEF or CHIEF OF POLICE. The City Marshal of the City of Lexington,
Oklahoma.
   POLICE OFFICER. The City Marshal or any deputy marshal or police officer of
the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PRESIDENT OF THE CITY COUNCIL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER or MAYOR. The
President of the City Council of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of
the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
   STATUTORY REFERENCES. Reference to the statutes of the State of Oklahoma
means the statutes as they now are or as they may be amended to be; a reference
to a particular year of statutes also means any amendments and the comparable
provision when included in future codifications or supplementation of the
statutes.
   STREET. Includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place, square,
bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated
or devoted to the public use.
   TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. Unless otherwise designated, a calendar year.
§ 3-202 AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS TO CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof,
such repealed portions may be excluded from this code by omission thereof from
reprinted pages. Such inclusion of ordinances passed subsequent to this code
which amend or add to this code (except in the case of repeal) shall be prima
facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the
City Council.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section of the code of ordinances, City
of Lexington, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows.” The new
provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to
be added, the following language or any language substantially similar of
conveying the same meaning shall be used: “That the Code of Ordinances, City of
Lexington, Oklahoma, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
which said section reads as follows:                              .” The new
section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   ARTICLE 3. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 3-301 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence
of the city’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of
taxes, for an annual budget or prescribing salaries for city officers and
employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory
as a part of the city or zoning any property;
      (4)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or granting any franchise;
      (5)   Any ordinance authorizing or otherwise relating to any special
public improvement; and/or
      (6)   Any temporary or special ordinance.
   (B)   All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
§ 3-302 CODE DOES NOT AFFECT PRIOR OFFENSES, RIGHTS.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any
contract or right established or accruing, before the effective date of this
code.
§ 3-303 CODE AND ORDINANCES EFFECTIVE OUTSIDE CITY ON PROPERTY OWNED OR
CONTROLLED BY CITY.
   All provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city now in effect
or adopted in the future are hereby extended to all real property belonging to,
or under the control of, the city, outside the corporate limits of the city,
and shall be in full force and effect thereon, insofar as they are applicable.
Any words in any such provision indicating that its effect is limited to the
corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also such
outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 3-304 SEPARABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
separable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the
same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in
this code of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
§ 3-305 SALVAGE YARDS.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or corporation to own,
operate or maintain within the corporate limits of the city, a salvage yard for
the salvaging, wrecking or dismantling of vehicles, including, but not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, trailers of any kind or lawn mowers without a license
therefor. It shall further be unlawful and an offense to keep or place any of
the above said vehicles on any unlicensed lot or parcel within the corporate
limits of the city, when such are not in a usable condition. Each day such
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable under the
appropriate provisions of this code.
§ 3-306 CHARGE FOR RETURNED CHECKS.
   There shall be a $10 charge assessed to the maker thereof for all checks
returned to the city for insufficient funds, closed account or any other
reason.
§ 3-307 PURCHASING AGENT.
   (A)   The City Council, by motion, shall appoint a purchasing agent for the
city. The City Council shall also appoint any alternate purchasing agents
deemed necessary in its discretion. The purchasing agent shall have such
authority and shall follow such procedures as may be authorized by state law.
   (B)   All purchases shall be made in compliance with state law concerning
purchase orders.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified, the City Manager shall serve as the
purchasing agent.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 62 O.S. §§ 310.1 et seq.
§ 3-308 9-1-1 VoIP SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   A 9-1-1 service fee is hereby adopted and imposed by the City Council
upon interconnected voiceover internet protocol telephone service customers
whose businesses or residences are located within the city limits, at the rate
of $0.50 per month for each VoIP service user, pursuant to 63 O.S. §§ 2855 et
seq.
   (B)   In addition, all VoIP carriers having customers within the city shall
provide an annual census of customers to the city no later than 60 days after
the first day of each calendar year.
(Ord. 2006-05, passed 12-5-2006)
§ 3-309 FAIR HOUSING.
   (A)   Policy. It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES. An act that is unlawful under divisions
(D), (E) and (F) below.
      DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as
or designed or intended for occupation as a residence by one or more families
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
      FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
      PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
      TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
   (C)   Unlawful practices.
      (1)   Subject to the provisions of divisions (C)(2) and (G) below, the
prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth
in this division (C) shall apply to all dwellings, except as exempted by
division (C)(2) below.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall apply to:
         (a)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided,
that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-
family houses at any one time; provided further that, in the case of the sale
of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in
such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (C)(2)
shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period;
provided, further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own
any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
excepted from the application of this title only if such house is sold or
rented:
            1.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such facilities
or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of
any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and
            2.   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of division (D)(3) below.
However, nothing in this division (C)(2)(a) shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as is necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
         (b)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied
or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently
of each other, if the owner maintains and occupies one such living quarters as
his or her residence.
      (3)   For the purpose of division (C)(2) above, a person shall be deemed
to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
         (a)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
         (b)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
an agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; and
         (c)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
   (D)   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. As made applicable by
this section and except as exempted by divisions (C)(2) and (G) of this
section, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable
or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, gender
identity or any other characteristic protected by federal law;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling on in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, gender
identity or any other characteristic protected by federal law;
      (3)   To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, sex, color, religion, national origin, disability, familial status,
sexual orientation, gender identity or any other characteristic protected by
federal law, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, disability or familial status, sexual orientation, gender
identity or any other characteristic protected by federal law, that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is,
in fact, so available; and
      (5)   To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling, for profit, by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex,
color, religion, national origin, disability, familial status, sexual
orientation, gender identity or any other characteristic protected by federal
law.
   (E)   Discrimination in financing or housing. It shall be unlawful for any
bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation,
association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in
the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial
assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate
against him or her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or
other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of
race, sex, color, religion, national origin, disability, familial status,
sexual orientation, gender identity or any other characteristic protected by
federal law, of such person or of any person associated with him or her in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such
loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners,
lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given, provided that
nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of
the exception contained in division (C)(2) above.
   (F)   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. It shall be
unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple-listing service, rental or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him or her in the terms
or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race,
sex, color, religion, national origin, disability, familial status, sexual
orientation, gender identity or any other characteristic protected by federal
law.
   (G)   Exemption. Nothing in this policy shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental
or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
sex, color, national origin, disability, familial status, sexual orientation,
gender identity or any other characteristic protected by federal law. Nor shall
anything in this policy prohibit a private club, not, in fact, open to the
public which, as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
   (H)   Administration.
      (1)   The authority and responsibility for administering this policy
shall be in the Chief Executive Officer of the city.
      (2)   The Chief Executive Officer may delegate any of these functions
duties and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties and powers, with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or
otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this policy. The
Chief Executive Officer shall, by rule, prescribe such rights of appeal from
the decisions of his or her hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to
other officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself or herself, as
shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
      (3)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their
programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
to affirmatively further the purposes of the policy and shall cooperate with
the Chief Executive Officer to further such purposes.
   (I)   Education and conciliation. Immediately after the enactment of this
policy, the Chief Executive Officer shall commence such educational and
conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this policy. He or she
shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested
parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this policy and his or her
suggested means of implementing it and shall endeavor, with their advice, to
work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement.
   (J)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by
a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Chief Executive Officer. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as
the Chief Executive Officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the
Chief Executive Officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint or
within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under division
(J)(3) below, the Chief Executive Officer shall investigate the complaint and
give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to
resolve it. If the Chief Executive Officer decides to try to eliminate or
correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of
conference, conciliation and persuasion, nothing said or done in the course of
such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this policy without the written consent of the persons
concerned. Any employee of the Chief Executive Officer who shall make public
any information in violation of this provision shall, upon conviction, be fined
not more that $100 or imprisoned not more than ten days.
      (2)   A complaint under division (J)(1) above shall be filed within 180
days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and, with the leave of the Chief Executive Officer, which
shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend
his or her answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
      (3)   If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the Chief
Executive Officer, the Chief Executive Officer has been unable to obtain
voluntary compliance with this policy, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The Chief Executive Officer will assist in this filing.
      (4)   If the Chief Executive Officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30
days thereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court against the
respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or protected by
this policy insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If
the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about
to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or
order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
      (5)   In any proceedings brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
      (6)   Whenever an action by an individual shall come to trial, the Chief
Executive Officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary
compliance.
   (K)   Investigations, subpoenas, giving of evidence.
      (1)   In conducting an investigation, the Chief Executive Officer shall
have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents,
individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine,
record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statement
of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the
investigation; provided, however, that the Chief Executive Officer first
complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable
searches and seizures. The Chief Executive Officer may issue subpoenas to
compel his or her access to or the production of such materials or the
appearance of such persons and may issue interrogatories to a respondent to the
same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas
or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United
States District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking
place. The Chief Executive Officer may administer oaths.
      (2)   Upon written application to the Chief Executive Officer, a
respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of
subpoenas by and in the name of the Chief Executive Officer to the same extent
and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the Chief Executive
Officer himself or herself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent
shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall
state that they were issued at his or her request.
      (3)   Witnesses summoned by subpoenas of the Chief Executive Officer
shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in
proceedings in United States District Courts. Fee payable to a witness summoned
by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or
her. Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person
may petition the Chief Executive Officer to revoke or modify the subpoena. The
Chief Executive Officer shall grant the petition if he or she finds that the
subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place,
that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter
under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity
the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous or for
other good reason.
      (4)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Chief
Executive Officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition
for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which
the person to who the subpoena was addressed resides, was served or transacts
business.
      (5)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or
to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other
evidence, if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or
lawful order of the Chief Executive Officer shall be fined not more than $100
or imprisoned not more than ten days, or both. Any person who, with intent to
mislead the Chief Executive Officer, shall make or cause to be made any false
entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record or other document
submitted to the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to his or her subpoena or
other order or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made
full, true and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records or other
documents or shall willfully mutilate, alter or by any other means falsify any
documentary evidence shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more
than ten days, or both.
      (6)   The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the Chief
Executive Officer participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this
section.
   (L)   Enforcement by private persons.
      (1)   The rights granted herein by divisions (C), (D), (E) and (F) above
may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general
jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the
court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or
division (J)(4) above from time to time before bringing it to trial if the
court believes that the conciliation efforts of the Chief Executive Officer are
likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing
practice complained of in the complaint made to the Chief Executive Officer and
which practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided, however,
that any sale, encumbrance or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any
court order issued under the authority of this policy and involving a bona fide
purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant, without actual notice of the existence of
the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this policy,
shall not be affected.
      (2)   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any
permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order or other order
and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000 punitive
damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees in the case
of a prevailing plaintiff, provided that said plaintiff, in the opinion of the
court, is not financially able to assume said attorneys’ fees.
   (M)   Interference, coercion or intimidation. It shall be unlawful to
coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or
enjoyment of or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed or on
account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by divisions (C), (D),
(E) or (K) above. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
   (N)   Separability of provisions. If any provision of this policy or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
remainder of the policy and the application of the provision to other persons
not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
   (O)   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases. Whoever, whether or
not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force, willfully injures,
intimidates or interferes with or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere
with:
      (1)   Any person because of his or her race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, disability, familial status, sexual orientation, gender
identity or any other characteristic protected by federal law, and because he
or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or
occupation of any dwelling or applying for or participating in any service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings;
      (2)   Any person because he or she is or has been or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or class of persons from:
         (a)   Participating without discrimination on account of race, sex,
color, religion, national origin, disability, familial status, sexual
orientation, gender identity or any other characteristic protected by federal
law, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described
in division (O)(1) above; or
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, sex, color, religion, national origin, disability, familial status,
sexual orientation, gender identity or any other characteristic protected by
federal law, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities
described in division (O)(1) above or from participating lawfully in speech or
peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate
shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than ten days, or
both; and if bodily injury results, shall be fined not more than $100 or
imprisoned not more than ten days, or both; and if death results, shall be
subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 11-5-2019)
ARTICLE 4. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS
§ 3-401 DUTIES.
   In addition to the other duties of the city, the City Council members shall
have the following objectives and duties.
§ 3-402 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   To aid, assist and advise the city by investigation, suggestion and
planning concerning matters of paving, street maintenance, permits, building
and moving permits, operation of vehicles on streets, curbing, city
improvements, highways, rights-of-way, disposal plants, waterworks and any
other form of city improvements or convenience.
   (B)   All requests for building or moving permits, adding to any structures
or altering any structures, shall be submitted to the Council members with a
written application or request for approval, and the same shall be considered
in accordance with the restrictions in the dedication and plat and such city
ordinances as may be in existence or may be later passed, with a permit fee.
The permit fee shall be as determined by the City Council by motion and/or
resolution. The request shall be approved or disapproved by the City Council
members.
   (C)   Said Council members shall have the right and duty to make
recommendations if they so desire concerning any of the above-mentioned matters
for consideration.
§ 3-403 COUNCIL MEMBERS NOT OBLIGATED.
   The City Council members shall not be obligated in any way to enact or pass
or approve any recommendations made to the Council members, but only after
consideration of such as they deem necessary to the best interest of the city.
ARTICLE 5. PENALTY
§ 3-501 GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF CODE AND ORDINANCES; CONTINUING
VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or whenever
in such code or ordinance, the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such
ordinance shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not exceeding $100 and
payment of any costs. Each day on which any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such.
CHAPTER 4: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Article 1. State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
4-101 State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act adopted
4-102 Definitions and interpretations
Article 2. Alcoholic or Intoxicating Beverages
4-201 Occupation tax
4-202 Annual report
4-203 Location of business
4-204 Hours of sale
4-205 License required
4-206 Nudity and drink solicitation prohibited
4-207 Violations of state laws prohibited
4-208 Inspections and enforcement
Article 3. Nonintoxicating Beverages
4-301 Definitions
4-302 Licenses
4-303 Persons under 21 years of age
4-304 Hours of sale
4-305 Sales prohibited in certain locations
4-306 Persons under 21 consuming nonintoxicating beverages
4-307 Employment of persons under 18 years
Article 4. Penalty
4-401 Penalty
4-402 Grounds for suspension and revocation of license
Article 5. Special Events
4-501 Special event license
4-502 License fee
Article 6. Gatherings Where Minors May Consume Alcoholic Beverages
4-601 Definitions
4-602 Consumption of alcohol by minors
4-603 Hosting, permitting or allowing gathering where minors consume alcohol
prohibited
4-604 Penalties
ARTICLE 1. STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT
§ 4-101 STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT ADOPTED.
   The State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 through 1-
168, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code of ordinances, and all
provisions of the Act are hereby declared to be in force as if they were
written herein in complete detail.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 1-101
§ 4-102 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All
words, phrases and terms used in this chapter and not defined herein shall be
interpreted and construed in conformity with the definitions of the same set
forth in the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101
through 1-168, with the same force and effect as if set forth in full herein,
and such definitions are made a part hereof by reference.
   ALCOHOL. Hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine
from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does not include wood
alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced as denatured in
accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, beer and wine as those terms are
defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings.
   BEER. Any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. BEER may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products.
BEER includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and
other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice
wine.
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGES. Beverages containing more than 3.2% alcohol by
weight.
   MIXED BEVERAGE. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part
of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size
for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed
beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or special
event license.
   NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES. Beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An entertainment, recreation or marketing event that occurs
at any single location on an irregular basis and at which alcoholic beverages
are sold.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage, other than wine or beer, which contains more than
0.5% alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by distillation, whether or not
mixed with other substances in solution and includes those products known as
whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs, cordials and fortified wines and
similar compounds, but shall not include any alcohol liquid completely
denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and regulations pursuant
thereto.
   WINE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume and not more
than 24% alcohol by volume at 60°F obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits vegetables, honey, milk or other products containing sugar,
whether or not other ingredients are added, and includes vermouth and sake,
known as Japanese rice wine.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
ARTICLE 2. ALCOHOLIC OR INTOXICATING BEVERAGES
§ 4-201 OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   The city shall collect an annual occupational tax for the privilege of
operating as a retailer, mixed beverage, caterer or special event licensee,
bottle club, manufacturer, wholesaler or Class B wholesaler, within the city
limits, to be identical in amount to that collected by the state for such
licenses. The license tax shall be levied only if the licensee has his or her
principal place of business within the city municipal limits.
   (B)   The city shall not have the authority to determine or regulate the
issuance of the license but shall issue the license if the licensee has
obtained a license from the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Annual license fees, see 37A O.S. §§ 2-101v1 through 2-101v2
§ 4-202 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The city shall report annually all occupational taxes levied to the ABLE
Commission for the fiscal year showing the number and class of licensees and
the amount of money received therefrom.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. §§ 1-104 and 1-105
§ 4-203 LOCATION OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   The location of a retail package store, mixed beverage establishment
or bottle club shall be subject to the zoning ordinances of the city and is
specifically prohibited within 300 feet from any church property primarily and
regularly used for worship services and religious activities or public school;
provided, that if any such church or school, shall be established within 300
feet of any licensed premises after such premises has been licensed, this shall
not be a bar to continuous force and effect.
   (B)   The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the
nearest property line of such church or school to the nearest public entrance
door of the premises of such package store, mixed beverage establishment or
bottle club along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct
route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points.
   (C)   For the purpose of determining measured distance, property situated on
the opposite side of the street from such church or school shall be considered
as if it were located on the same side of the street with such church or
school. Furthermore, a license shall not be issued for a location on any city
block where a school or church is located.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-204 HOURS OF SALE.
   No alcoholic beverages shall be dispensed, served or consumed on the
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 3-124
§ 4-205 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   There is hereby levied upon each person, partnership, firm or
corporation holding a lawful license issued by the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board for a principal place of business located in the city an annual
occupation tax in the amount of $1,000 the first year and $900 for each renewal
year. The occupation tax shall be levied from July 1 to June 30 of the
following year. The amount of the tax shall increase or decrease to conform to
maximum allowed by any municipality due to any changes or amendments to 37A
O.S. § 4-104.
   (B)   No municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the City
Clerk without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state
and county permits required by law and has in all other respects complied with
the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 through 1-
168.
   (C)   All licenses shall expire on June 30 of the year following issuance;
provided, however, that any failure to continue operation of the business for
more than 30 days or issuance of a license to another party at the same
location shall void the license. A new license must thereafter be obtained by
any prior license holder without regard to the license year. A license fee
shall be paid in connection with each application. The license may not be
transferred.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-206 NUDITY AND DRINK SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
   No private club licensee, operator, partner or manager, employee or any
other person having supervisory control shall permit any person to remain in or
upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her
pubic hair, anus, genitals or female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola. Nor shall any such person permit any person to remain in
or upon the licensed premises who solicits drinks from any patron of the
business.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-207 VIOLATIONS OF STATE LAWS PROHIBITED.
   No private club nor any officer, director, stockholder, owner or manager
thereof licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall violate any
of the provisions of the State Alcoholic Beverage Law, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101
through 1-168, nor any of the gambling laws of the state, nor knowingly permit
the violation thereof on any premises subject to the control of said private
club.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-208 INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police, Fire, Health and Sanitation Departments shall inspect all
private clubs regularly to enforce all the terms of this article and report any
violations to the City Council. The city shall enforce all of the provisions of
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 through 1-168, as
required by 37A O.S. § 5-115 and shall be entitled to initiate a license
suspension or revocation proceeding as allowed by state law.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 3. NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES
§ 4-301 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES. All beverages containing more than 0.5%
alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
      RETAIL DEALER. Any person, firm, corporation, association or
concessionaire who sells, distributes or dispenses, at retail, any alcoholic
beverage within the corporate limits of the city, without regard to any place
where such beverages may be consumed or used.
   (B)   The provisions of 37A O.S. § 1-103 are incorporated herein by
reference, and all provisions contained therein are declared to be in force as
if they were written herein in complete detail.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 4-302 LICENSES.
   (A)   (1)   No person, association, firm or corporation shall maintain or
operate any private club in the city without first paying to the City Clerk the
license fee hereafter prescribed and making application for license therefor on
forms provided by the City Clerk and receiving a license from the City Council.
In addition to the receipt of the City Clerk, any applicant for a license for a
private club shall file with the City Clerk true copies, in duplicate, of the
articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the applicant be a corporation; true
copies, in duplicate, of any articles of association and bylaws, if the
applicant is an association; and a list of the officers, directors, owners and
managers of said club and any stockholders who receive a financial return on
their stock.
      (2)   The annual license fee shall be $200 and shall be due and payable
on or before July 1 of each year.
   (B)   No municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the City
Clerk without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state
and county permits required by law, and has in all other respects complied with
the state law. All such licenses shall expire on June 30 of the year following
reissuance. No license shall be transferable.
   (C)   The City Council shall have the power, after public hearings, to
revoke any license granted hereunder for violation of law or ordinance by the
license holder.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-303 PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person firm, or corporation who holds a license
to sell and dispense any alcoholic beverage or any agent, servant or employee
of said license holder to sell, barter or give to any person under the age of
21 years any alcoholic beverage. It shall also be unlawful for any person who
holds a license to sell and dispense any alcoholic beverage for consumption on
the premises, or any agent, servant or employee of said licensee to permit any
person under 21 years of age to be admitted to or remain in a separate or
enclosed bar area of the licensed premises unless said person’s parents or
legal guardian is present, which has as its main purpose the selling or serving
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21
years of age from being admitted to an area which has as its main purpose some
objective other than the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, in which sales
or serving of said beverages are incidental to the main purpose, as long as
persons under 21 years of age are not sold or served said beverages; however,
the incidental service of food in the bar areas shall not exempt a licensee,
agent, servant or employee from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 4-304 HOURS OF SALE.
   It is unlawful for such beverages as herein defined to be sold for
consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any
day or to sell such beverages on Sunday.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 3-124
§ 4-305 SALES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption is
specifically prohibited within 300 feet from any public school or church
property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities; provided, that if any such church, or school, shall be established
within 300 feet of any licensed premises after such premises has been licensed,
this shall not be a bar to renewal of such license so long as there has not
been a lapse of more than 60 days. The distance indicated in this section shall
be measured from the nearest property line of such church or school to the
nearest public entrance door of the premises of any place licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption along the street right-of-way
line providing the nearest route usually traveled by pedestrians between such
points.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining measured distance, property situated on
the opposite side of the street from such church or school shall be considered
as if it were located on the same side of the street with such church or
school; provided, further, that the above restrictions shall not affect
premises already licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption on premises which may presently or in the future be licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption even though a school or
church is subsequently established within 300 feet of such licensed premises.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 4-306 PERSONS UNDER 21 CONSUMING NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall consume or possess with intent to
consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place. The provisions of this
section shall not apply when such persons are under the direct supervision or
control of a parent or guardian, but in no instance shall this exception be
interpreted to allow such persons to consume such beverages in any place
licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 3-124
§ 4-307 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to be
employed or permitted to work in any capacity whatsoever in a place where
alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be
employed or permitted to work, in any capacity whatsoever, in the separate or
enclosed bar area of a place where the main purpose of the area is the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages. The provisions of this division (B) shall
not apply to any area which has as its main purpose some objective other than
the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages, in which sales or serving of said
beverages is incidental to the main purpose; however the incidental service of
food in the bar area shall not exempt a holder of a license to sell alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises from the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-102
ARTICLE 4. PENALTY
§ 4-401 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed the
amount set forth in §
3-501.
   (B)   Each day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-402 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, including the
City Municipal Court, of violating any of the provisions enumerated in this
section or the omission of acts enumerated in this section shall constitute
grounds for the suspension or revocation of any private club license issued
pursuant to this article by the City Council, after reasonable notice has been
given to the licensee, and a public hearing held by the City Council.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         REVOCATION. A permanent termination of a private club license and
requires application for a new license.
         SUSPENSION. The temporary cessation of the private club license for a
period of time which includes the cessation of all rights and privileges to
operate a private club.
   (B)   The following shall constitute offenses and shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of a private club license.
      (1)   No private club licensee shall allow the private club to remain
open during prohibited hours established by state law and local ordinances.
      (2)   No private club licensee shall employ any person under the age of
18 years or permit any person under the age of 21 years to handle, distribute
or serve alcoholic beverages.
      (3)   No private club licensee shall knowingly serve or furnish any
alcoholic beverage to an insane or mentally deficient person.
      (4)   No private club licensee shall knowingly serve or furnish any
alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of 21 years.
      (5)   No private club licensee shall knowingly allow the distribution of
controlled and dangerous substances as defined in 63 O.S. within the areas
under the control of the private club.
      (6)   No private club licensee shall allow any person who shall become
disorderly or violent to remain upon the private club premises; nor shall any
firearms be carried into or used on the premises.
      (7)   No private club licensee shall knowingly allow solicitation for
prostitution to occur upon the private club premises or to knowingly permit any
person who shall make such solicitation to remain upon the private club
premises.
      (8)   No private club licensee shall knowingly allow gambling on the
private club premises.
      (9)   No private club licensee shall willfully provide any false
information in any application for a private club license or in application for
renewal of such license.
      (10)   No private club licensee shall allow any designated fire exit to
be locked, blocked or access to such exit impeded in any manner during hours of
operation of the private club.
      (11)   No private club licensee shall knowingly serve or furnish any
alcoholic beverage to an intoxicated person.
      (12)   No private club nor any officer, director, stockholder, owner or
manager thereof licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
violate any of the provisions of the State Alcoholic Beverage Law, being 37A
O.S. §§ 1-101 through 1-168, nor any of the gambling laws of the state, nor
knowingly permit the violation thereof on any premises subject to the control
of said private club.
      (13)   No private club licensee, operator, partner or manager, employee
or any other person having supervisory control shall permit any person to
remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion
of his or her pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a verified complaint alleging violation or violations,
the City Council may instigate an investigation to determine if a license
holder has violated any of the provisions contained in division (B) above. Upon
determination by the Council that probable cause exists to believe that a
violation or violations have been committed, then it shall schedule a public
hearing within a reasonable period of time to determine whether the Council
shall suspend or revoke the license, giving written notice to the licensee of
the alleged violation or violations and informing the licensee of his or her
right to have counsel present at the hearing, his or her right to cross-examine
any complaining witness and his or her right to present evidence in his or her
behalf. After conducting a public hearing, the Council shall determine, based
upon the preponderance of the evidence, whether the license should, under the
evidence presented and circumstances, be revoked or suspended. In making its
determination, the Council shall prepare written findings of fact and
conclusions of law. If the Council finds that the license should be suspended
or revoked, the Council may suspend or revoke the private club license based on
the following standards.
      (1)   The Council may suspend the private club license for a period up to
five days for the first determination by the Council that the private club
license should be suspended.
      (2)   The Council may suspend the private club license for a period up to
ten days in cases where the Council has conducted a prior hearing and has
suspended the club’s license and has conducted a second public hearing and
determined that the license should again be suspended.
      (3)   In cases where the City Council has suspended a private club
license pursuant to divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above and has conducted a third
hearing and determined that the private club license should again be suspended,
the Council may revoke the private club license for the remaining period of the
license year and shall, upon such revocation, order the City Clerk’s office not
to accept an application for that club’s license until 12 months have elapsed
from the date of the revocation.
   (D)   Any person, partnership, corporation or association which has operated
or held an ownership interest, in excess of 30%, in any private club at the
time of the revocation shall be prohibited from being a manager, owner or
operator of any private club or stockholder or officer of any corporation,
partnership or association, owning or operating a private club for a period of
12 months from the date of revocation.
   (E)   Any partnership, corporation or association operating a private club
while the license thereof is under revocation shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of
this section occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 5. SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 4-501 SPECIAL EVENT LICENSE.
   (A)   A special event license may be issued to a business or restaurant
which is already authorized to sell alcoholic beverages doing business in the
city on behalf of an organization association, or nonprofit corporation
organized for political, fraternal, charitable religious or social purposes.
   (B)   The holder of the special event license is authorized to sell and
distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on the property immediately
outside the building in which the business or restaurant is normally run but
still on the premises owned or leased by the business or restaurant.
   (C)   The special event license may include permission to sell and
distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on city property, such as a
block on an adjacent street which has been blocked off from automobile traffic
by the city, or a city park. The license will specify the parameters of the
property to be used for the event and the length of time the event may last. No
persons may be excluded from city property during the event solely for the
reason that he or she is not a member of the group sponsoring the event.
   (D)   The special event license must be approved by the City Manager and the
City Attorney. The license may be granted or denied on a case by case basis,
giving due consideration to the inconvenience to the citizens of the city and
the amount of city property sought to be used and the length of time for which
the permit is sought.
   (E)   The license will allow the business or restaurant to continue to sell
and distribute any other food or beverages it normally offers for sale, and the
licensee must offer substantial food items at the event.
(Ord. 2005-02, passed 9-6-2005; Ord. 23-002, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 4-502 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a special event without first obtaining a
license from the City Clerk. No particular application form is required, but
the application must specify the property sought to be used, whether it be
property owned by the restaurant or business or city property, the nature of
the event, the number of people expected, the amount of noise expected and the
length of time it is expected to last.
   (B)   A $100 fee shall be required to obtain a license pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2005-02, passed 9-6-2005)
ARTICLE 6. GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS MAY CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 4-601 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GATHERING. A party, gathering or event where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or a social
activity.
   MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
   PARENT. Includes adoptive parent, foster parent, stepparent and guardian.
   PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
   RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire
and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Salaries for the amount of time responding to a gathering in
violation of this article and the administrative costs attributable to such
response;
      (2)   The costs of any medical treatment for any responders;
      (3)   The costs of repairs or use of city equipment involved in response
to a gathering in violation of this article; and
      (4)   Any other costs directly related to the enforcement of this
article.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-602 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY MINORS.
   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to consume an
alcoholic beverage at any public or private place unless said minor is being
supervised by his or her parent.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-603 HOSTING, PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERING WHERE MINORS CONSUME ALCOHOL
PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly
host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least
one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage. This section does not apply to
conduct involving the use of alcohol by a minor when said minor is with his or
her parent.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 4-604 PENALTIES.
   (A)   A person who violates the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of up to $200.
   (B)   The city reserves its right to sue a violator of this article for its
response costs in district court.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
CHAPTER 5: ANIMALS
Section
Article 1. General
5-101 Definitions
5-102 Exemptions
5-103 Zoning ordinance to prevail
5-104 Animal control officer to inspect
5-105 Removal of dead animals
5-106 Penalty
5-107 Authority of animal control officer
5-108 Duties of animal control officer
5-109 Fees, charges and deposits
Article 2. Keeping, Confining Animals; Nuisances
5-201 Buildings for animals; construction, conditions
5-202 Pasturing in public areas
5-203 Livestock
5-204 Wild, exotic or dangerous animals
5-205 Nuisances
5-205-1 Animal nuisance
5-205-2 Keeping nuisance animals deemed public nuisance
5-205-3 Animals that are nuisances or uncontrollable
Article 3. Birds and Bees
5-301 Dangerous birds
5-302 Parakeets
5-303 Bees
5-304 Bird sanctuary
5-305 Keeping of chickens
Article 4. Dogs and Cats
5-401 Dogs and cats to be vaccinated
5-402 Dog license; registration; tag
5-403 Tags to be placed on collar; lost tags
5-404 Placing counterfeit tags on dogs
5-405 Permitting dogs or cats to deposit solid waste material on places open to
the public or on certain private property prohibited
Article 5. Kennels; Pet Shops; Catteries
5-501 License; operating requirements
5-502 Limitation on number of dogs
Article 6. Vicious Animals
5-601 Vicious animals unlawful
5-602 Impoundment of vicious animals
5-603 Officer to file report
5-604 Notice of hearing to determine nature of impounded dog
5-605 Hearing and adjudication
5-606 Exemptions
5-607 Animals suspected of rabies
5-608 Confinement of animals required; exceptions
5-609 Control of animals trespassing on public or private property prohibited
5-610 Impoundment of animals otherwise; destruction in lieu of apprehension
Article 7. Animals at Large; Animal Shelter
5-701 Animals not to be at large
5-702 Turning animals at large unlawful
5-703 Animal shelter
5-703-1 Shelter established
5-703-2 Animals to be impounded
5-703-3 Breaking shelter
5-703-4 Fees for impounding
5-703-5 Disposition of impounded animals
5-703-6 Owner may claim excess money
Article 8. Rabies Procedures and Control
5-801 Management of dogs, cats or ferrets that have bitten a person
5-802 Management of other animals that bite a human
5-803 Severe bite wounds inflicted
5-804 When dogs and cats confined
5-805 Confinement required
5-806 Supervising veterinarian’s responsibility
5-807 Responsibility for costs incurred
5-808 Confinement by owner
5-809 Enforcement
5-810 Destruction or observation
5-811 Animals considered exposed
5-812 Vaccinated domestic animals exposed to rabid animals
5-813 Disposal of remains of disease suspect animal
Article 9. Cruelty to Animals
5-901 Poisoning animals
5-902 Encouraging animals to fight
5-903 Animal protection; other acts prohibited
Article 10. Disposal of Shelter Animals
5-10-01 Procedure for disposal
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
§ 5-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any warm-blooded mammal.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person or persons designated by the City Manager
as an enforcement officer for this chapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises officially designated by the city for the
purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found in violation of this
chapter.
   AT LARGE. An animal is:
      (1)   Off the premises of its owner and not securely and physically
restrained by means of chain, cord, harness, leash, rope or other device
necessary to restrain such animal; or
      (2)   On the premises of the owner and not confined by a fence or other
means not under the control of the owner by leash or otherwise.
   CAT. Any Felis catus.
   CATTERY. Any premises operated for profit where there is being maintained or
harbored a total of four or more cats, except veterinary hospitals.
   CHICKEN(S). For the purpose of §
5-305, CHICKEN or CHICKENS shall refer only to the female sex of Gallus gallus
Domesticus. This specifically does not include any rooster, pea hen or other
pea fowl.
   CHICKEN COOP. A small structure or enclosure where chickens nest, roost or
perch and may include feeding and water(ing) devices.
   CHICKEN RUN. An enclosed area physically connected to the coop where
chickens are able to walk or run about which may include feeding and watering
devices.
   CONFINED ON THE PREMISES. The condition in which a dog or cat is securely
and physically confined and retained on and within the premises of the owner or
keeper by means of walls or fences.
   CURRENTLY VACCINATED. Properly immunized by or under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian with an anti-rabies vaccine licensed and approved by the
United States Department of Agriculture for use in that animal species or
meeting conditions specified in rules, regulations and statutes promulgated by
the state and/or the county and/or the city. The vaccine must have been given
at appropriate time intervals for the age of the animal and type of vaccine
administered.
   DANGEROUS BIRD. Any warm-blooded, feathered vertebrate, which may constitute
a physical threat to human beings.
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Lexington, Oklahoma, or local animal control
authority.
   DEPARTMENT DESIGNEE. An employee of the city who is acting within his or her
scope of employment designated by and/or through the City Manager.
   DOG. Any Canis familiaris, excluding hybrids.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A companion animal, including dogs, cats and ferrets, an
equine animal or a livestock animal.
   EUTHANIZE. The humane killing of an animal generally performed by a
veterinarian or personnel at an animal control facility under the indirect
supervision of a veterinarian or other person trained for that purpose.
   EXPOSURE TO RABIES. A bite or physical contact with the saliva or other
potentially infectious tissues from an animal, confirmed or suspected of being
infected with rabies.
   FERRET. Any Mustela putorius furo.
   FIRST PARTY OWNERSHIP. A situation where the owner of a biting animal is
directly related to the bite victim; that is: parent-child, sibling,
grandparent, child or when the legal residence of the animal owner and the bite
victim are the same.
   HARBORING. Any person who allows any animal to habitually remain or lodge or
to be fed within his or her home, store, yard, enclosure or place of business
or any other premises in which such person resides or controls.
   HOME QUARANTINE. Confinement and observation of an animal allowed at the
animal owner’s property for a specified time period, where one of the following
acceptable methods of confinement for a dog is used: complete indoor housing;
caging or kenneling in an enclosure with a securely latched door; or yard
confinement with perimeter fencing that the dog is unable to climb over or dig
under. Acceptable methods of confinement for a cat or ferret are: complete
indoor housing or caging in an enclosure that prevents escape. The animal’s
needs for ambient temperature control, water, nutrition, elimination and space
to comfortably stand up and lie down must be adequately provided by the
selected confinement method. Should the animal exhibit neurological signs, die
or disappear during the specified period, a state licensed veterinarian and the
Department shall be immediately notified.
   HYBRID. An offspring of wild animals crossbred to domestic dogs or cats,
considered to be wild animals under any state, federal or local statute, rule,
regulation or ordinance.
   IMMEDIATE PHYSICAL CONTROL. Confinement in a vehicle or control exercised
through the personal physical presence of a person who, at all times, has in
his or her possession the chain, rope, cord or leash to which the dog is
attached.
   K-9 DOG. A dog trained and being used as a canine security animal.
   KENNEL. Any premises where there is being maintained or harbored a total of
four or more dogs over 14 weeks of age, except veterinary hospitals.
   LIVESTOCK. All animals, other than dogs, cats, small caged birds or small
aquatic or amphibian animals.
   NUISANCE. An animal which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling,
yelping or other noise or action disturbs any person or neighborhood within the
city limits. Any animal which scratches or digs into any flowerbed, garden,
tilled soil, shrubbery and, in so doing, injures the same or which habitually
prowls around or over any premises not the property of its owner to the
annoyance of the owner or occupant of such premises, or which overturns any
garbage can or vessel for waste products, or scatters the contents of such
garbage can or vessel, or an animal which chases or kills any fowl or animal
owned by another is also declared a NUISANCE. A female dog in season at large
is a NUISANCE. It is unlawful and a NUISANCE for any person to keep or harbor
within the city any dog or other animal which, by barking, howling or
otherwise, disturbs the peace and quiet of any person.
   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation keeping, possessing, harboring or
having the care or custody of an animal, except the proprietor of a KENNEL or
CATTERY, as defined in this section, or a veterinary establishment.
   QUARANTINE. Physical confinement of an animal during a specified time period
when the animal is monitored for the development of disease. During this time
period, the animal is prevented from having contact with other animals and
human contact is limited to as few caretakers as possible.
   RABIES. An acute disease of humans and warm-blooded mammals caused by the
rabies virus (genus Lyssavirus) that affects the central nervous system and is
almost always fatal.
   RECOGNIZED ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY. Any facility operating for the purpose
of stray animal control and/or animal welfare that is under contract or letter
of agreement which identifies a licensed veterinarian responsible for animal
quarantines.
   RESTRAINT AND UNDER RESTRAINT. An animal which is:
      (1)   Controlled by a leash not more than eight feet in length, which
leash prevents the animal from access to the property of another;
      (2)   At “heel” beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s
commands; or
      (3)   Confined on the premises of its owner.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
   STRAY. Any animal which does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry, to have an
owner.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   An animal which, while unleashed and off the premises of its owner,
has attacked, menaced, chased, displayed threatening or aggressive behavior or
otherwise threatened or endangered the safety of any domestic animal or person;
      (2)   An animal which, while unleashed and off the premises of its owner,
has bitten a human being or a domestic animal without provocation;
      (3)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose
of fighting, or any animal trained for fighting; or
      (4)   An animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals.
   WILD ANIMAL. An animal considered as wildlife; any animal not normally
adapted to live in intimate association with humans nor raised for consumption
by humans.
   WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal of the larger variety which is
usually not a domestic animal and which can normally be found in the wild state
with or without mean or vicious propensities, including, but not limited to,
lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles, apes,
foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses and all forms of poisonous snakes, lynxes,
raccoons, skunks, monkeys and other like animals.
   ZOONOTIC DISEASE. A disease that is transmissible from animals to humans
under natural conditions.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2022-003, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 5-102 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to animals or fowl kept in medical
laboratories, veterinary hospitals, other veterinary establishments or
educational institutions for medical research except in the case of specific
references to such establishments or persons in charge thereof or employed
therein.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-103 ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL.
   In case of conflict between this chapter and
Chapter 26 of this code or any future zoning ordinance(s), the provisions of
Chapter 26 of this code or such future zoning ordinance(s) shall prevail and
supersede the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-104 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER TO INSPECT.
   (A)   The animal control officer, upon complaint of any person, shall
inspect any structure or place where an animal is kept and may do so on his or
her own initiative.
   (B)   He or she may issue such reasonable order(s) as he or she may deem
necessary to the owner of an animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided
in this chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance.
   (C)   He or she may make a complaint before the Municipal Judge against any
person for violation of any provision of this chapter or of any such reasonable
order, but this procedure shall not abridge the right of others to make such
complaint.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-105 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city
shall, within 24 hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and
failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall further be deemed a
nuisance per se.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-106 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
or who violates or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made
by the animal control officer pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined a maximum of up to $200, plus court costs. The penalties
provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedies of the
city and shall not be construed as exclusive.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-107 AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   The animal control officer, for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, possesses all the authority of police officers in
the city.
   (B)   The animal control officer is specifically authorized to use whatever
means necessary to impound animals in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the use of tranquilizer guns.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-108 DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   In addition to those duties specified otherwise in this chapter, the animal
control officer shall have the following duties.
   (A)   The animal control officer is responsible for the administration and
maintenance of the shelter or to contract with another agency/municipality for
those services.
   (B)   The animal control officer or other persons designated by the City
Council shall pick up all animals in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and shall impound them in the shelter and/or cite the owners.
   (C)   The animal control officer may search out and destroy with firearms or
other methods wild or domesticated dogs running at large in packs in the
agricultural areas of the city. For the purpose of this division (C), a PACK is
defined to be four or more dogs at large.
   (D)   The animal control officer shall impound all animals lawfully brought
to him or her and shall provide suitable and necessary sustenance for all
animals impounded in any shelter.
   (E)   The animal control officer shall release no impounded animal to its
owner until all impoundment fees, room and board charges and any required
vaccination deposits are paid in full unless directed otherwise by the
Municipal Judge, Municipal Attorney or Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-109 FEES, CHARGES AND DEPOSITS.
   Fees, charges and deposits shall be determined by the City Council by
resolution from time to time.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 2. KEEPING, CONFINING ANIMALS; NUISANCES
§ 5-201 BUILDINGS FOR ANIMALS; CONSTRUCTION, CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Every stable, kennel or building wherein any animal or fowl is kept
within the city shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that
it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times and not be offensive or
dangerous to the public health and/or those living within the immediate
vicinity.
   (B)   (1)   Every such building, if located within 200 feet of any tenement
or apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store,
retail sales outlet, building used for educational, religious or hospital
purposes or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which such animal is kept, shall be provided with a watertight
and flytight receptacle for manure or droppings of such size as to hold all
accumulations of manure or droppings.
      (2)   The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance and shall be kept
covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse. No manure or droppings shall be allowed to accumulate on such
premises, except in the receptacle.
   (C)   No building or any other establishment wherein animals are kept shall
be maintained closer than 40 feet to any tenement or apartment house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, retail sales outlet, building
used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or residence other than
that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animals
are kept.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-202 PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any
public school ground, or other public, federal, state, county or city property,
or any railroad right-of-way, or on any property without the written consent of
the person owning or controlling such property.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-203 LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful to keep any livestock in the city, with the exception of
those kept for FFA or 4-H projects on public school property and with the
exception of that property zoned agricultural. No such animal(s) will, however,
be allowed to become a nuisance regardless of where they are located.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-204 WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild, exotic or dangerous animal
in the city limits as a pet or for display or for exhibition purposes, whether
gratuitously or for a fee, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to such animals kept for temporary
periods of time for exhibition purposes only by circuses, zoos and educational
institutions. For the purpose of this division (B), the term TEMPORARY PERIODS
OF TIME shall be defined as, and shall be limited to, a period of time not to
exceed one week per year per applicant.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-205 NUISANCES.
§ 5-205-1 ANIMAL NUISANCE.
   It is unlawful to own or harbor an animal which is determined to be a
nuisance as provided for herein.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-205-2 KEEPING NUISANCE ANIMALS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The keeping or maintaining, or permitting to be kept or maintained, of any
animals within the city in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and subject to abatement.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-205-3 ANIMALS THAT ARE NUISANCES OR UNCONTROLLABLE.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any animal that is a nuisance.
   (B)   Notwithstanding §
5-205-2:
      (1)   If an animal is found by the Municipal Court Judge, upon notice and
hearing, to be uncontrollable by its owner to the extent that such animal poses
a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public, then such animal
shall be ordered removed from the city limits or destroyed, at the owner’s
option, within ten days of the order;
      (2)   Such a finding by the Municipal Court Judge shall be based upon,
but not limited to, evidence of three convictions, pleas of guilty or nolo
contendere to violations of §§
5-205-2,
5-701 or
5-702 against the current owners within a 12-month period concerning the same
animal; and
      (3)   Noncompliance with an order entered pursuant to division (B)(2)
above shall be a violation punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine as
provided in §
5-106. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 3. BIRDS AND BEES
§ 5-301 DANGEROUS BIRDS.
   The raising or keeping of dangerous birds shall be permitted in accordance
with the provisions of 29 O.S. § 4-108, as well as any applicable provisions of
Chapter 26 of this code and subsequent amendments thereto.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-302 PARAKEETS.
   The raising of parakeets or other small birds or similar fowl shall be
permitted within the city without license or permit requirements, subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   All activities associated with the raising of parakeets shall be
completely enclosed and out of the public view;
   (B)   Premises utilized for the raising of parakeets shall be maintained in
accordance with this article; and
   (C)   All requirements of
Chapter 26of this code shall be met.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-303 BEES.
   The keeping or raising of bees within the corporate limits shall be
permitted only in those areas zoned for agricultural purposes and in accordance
with
Chapter 26 of this code. No license or permit shall be required to keep or
raise bees.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-304 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (A)   The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is
hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
   (B)   It is unlawful to hunt, trap or shoot, or to attempt to shoot or
molest in any manner, any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl
nests. However, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in
such numbers in a particular locality, such that they constitute a nuisance or
menace to health or property in the opinion of the City Council, the City
Council shall hold a public meeting at a regularly scheduled monthly meeting to
discuss alternatives to such a nuisance.
   (C)   If, as a result of such meetings, no satisfactory alternative is found
to abate such nuisance, the birds may be destroyed in such number and in such
manner as is deemed advisable by the City Council under the supervision of the
Police Chief of the city.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-305 KEEPING OF CHICKENS.
   Except as provided otherwise, chickens or laying hens may be kept and
maintained in any zoning district of the city so long as:
   (A)   Such chickens or laying hens are maintained on land upon which the
owner or occupant resides; and
   (B)   Chickens or laying hens may only be kept under the following
conditions:
      (1)   No more than one chicken or laying hen are allowed for every three
square feet of any given zoned parcel;
      (2)   Roosters are not allowed;
      (3)   The chickens are kept within a designated chicken coop and/or
chicken run, unless supervised as described in division (B)(13) below;
      (4)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be located in the rear or
backyard of a residential property. No part of the coop or run shall be located
in the side or front yard;
      (5)   The chicken coop and chicken run shall be attached and shall be
located no closer than five feet from any side or rear property lines and no
closer than 20 feet from any dwelling unit other than the owner’s. Movable
chicken enclosures are permitted as long as they meet the setbacks as indicated
in this division (B)(5);
      (6)   The minimum size for a chicken coop shall be three square feet per
animal and the chicken run shall be eight square feet per animal;
      (7)   During daylight hours, the chickens shall have access to a chicken
run and a chicken coop;
      (8)   From dusk until dawn, chickens shall be kept within the chicken
coop as protection from predators;
      (9)   Chicken coops shall be predator resistant and any open walls or
windows shall be designed to prevent access by predators;
      (10)   Chicken runs shall be adequately fenced and protected from
predators;
      (11)   The outside openings of any enclosure shall be screened to prevent
the spread of disease by flies and vermin;
      (12)   Water shall be provided on-site and accessible to chickens at all
times;
      (13)   Chickens are permitted to be outside of a run or coop during
daylight hours but must be supervised and contained inside a fenced yard at all
times; chickens that stray outside the fenced yard may be regarded as nuisance
animals under the provisions of this chapter;
      (14)   All chicken enclosures shall be cleaned regularly to prevent an
accumulation of food, fecal matter or nesting material from creating a nuisance
or unsanitary condition due to odor, vermin, debris or decay; and
      (15)   Outdoor slaughter of chickens is prohibited.
(Ord. 2022-003, passed 6-7-2022)
ARTICLE 4. DOGS AND CATS
§ 5-401 DOGS AND CATS TO BE VACCINATED.
   (A)   Required immunization of dogs, cats and ferrets.
      (1)   The owner or custodian of a domestic dog, cat or ferret shall cause
the animal to be vaccinated against rabies by the time the animal is four
months of age or within 15 days of arrival in the city and at regular intervals
thereafter according to the label directions of an approved rabies vaccine for
use in that species or as prescribed by ordinances or rules adopted by a
municipality within whose jurisdiction the animal owner resides.
      (2)   A veterinarian who administers or supervises the rabies vaccination
of a dog, cat or ferret shall issue to the animal’s owner/custodian a
vaccination certificate that meets the minimum standards set forth in O.A.C. §
310:599-3-7. Animal identification, including, but not limited to, species,
gender, age and predominant breed and coloring must be indicated on the
vaccination certificate.
   (B)   Record of recognized rabies vaccination.
      (1)   Record of vaccination by a veterinarian must be provided to
determine the animal to be currently vaccinated against rabies. Veterinarians
shall be required to keep a record of a rabies vaccination for a minimum period
of three years.
      (2)   This record must include: name, address and telephone number of the
owner of the animal; date of vaccination; animal identification; and brand name
of vaccine used, vaccine expiration date and producer of the vaccine.
   (C)   Administration of rabies vaccine.
      (1)   It is prohibited for anyone to administer rabies vaccine to any
animal unless such vaccine is licensed for use in the particular animal species
in question. Exceptions to this include, but are not limited to, the
vaccination of wolf-dog hybrids with a rabies vaccine approved for domestic
dogs.
      (2)   Animals vaccinated per these exceptions will still be considered as
a wild animal species if involved in a bite to a person and will be handled
according to O.A.C. § 310:599-3-4.
      (3)   Rabies vaccines presently licensed are listed in the most current
“Compendium of Animal Rabies Control” published annually by the National
Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. Copies are available
from the Communicable Disease Division, State Department of Health, 1000 N.E.
Tenth Street, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73117-1299.
   (D)   Consumer notification required for over-the-counter rabies vaccine
sales.
      (1)   Each supplier or retailer of over-the-counter (OTC) animal rabies
vaccine for administration by any person other than a licensed veterinarian
shall post notification to the consumer that only the records of a licensed
veterinarian will be acceptable documentation of a rabies vaccination in the
application of requirements in O.A.C. Chapter 310:599.
      (2)   The standard written notice shall be obtained from the Department
and posted directly over or near the retail location of the OTC rabies vaccine
in a manner that the text of the notice is easily visualized by consumers.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-402 DOG LICENSE; REGISTRATION; TAG.
   (A)   Charge levied. A lifetime charge as set by the Council for every male
or female dog more than six months of age is hereby levied upon the owner of
any such dog kept or harbored within the city.
   (B)   Exceptions. The tax levied in this section shall not apply to a dog
only temporarily brought and kept within the city for a period less than 15
days; nor to a dog brought within the city to participate in a dog show; nor to
a guide dog, signal dog or service dog that is actually being used by a blind,
physically handicapped, deaf or hard of hearing person to aid that person in
going from place to place; nor to dogs being kept in kennels or pet shops for
sale.
   (C)   Times for payment. The owner shall pay the tax levied to the City
Clerk for every calendar year at the following times:
      (1)   Before July 1 of each calendar year; or
      (2)   If the dog is acquired or brought into the city after July 1 or
becomes six months of age after July 1, within seven days after acquiring or
bringing the dog into the city or its becoming six months of age. The fee for
part of the year may be prorated based on the number of days left in the year,
but in no instance shall the fee be less than one-half of the annual rate.
   (D)   Certificate of vaccination required. Before the city accepts any money
offered in payment of the tax for a dog or issues a license for it, the person
offering the tax shall present to the City Clerk the certificate of a
veterinarian or other person legally authorized to immunize dogs, showing that
the dog has been immunized against rabies during the calendar year.
   (E)   Registration. The owner of the dog shall, at the time of paying the
tax, register the dog by giving the name and address of the owner; the name,
breed, color and sex of the dog; and such other reasonable information as the
City Clerk may request.
   (F)   Tag. The City Clerk or designee thereupon shall deliver an original
receipt to the taxpayer and also an appropriate tag to him or her for the dog.
Such tag shall constitute a license for the dog.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-403 TAGS TO BE PLACED ON COLLAR; LOST TAGS.
   (A)   The owner shall cause the tag received from the City Clerk to be
affixed to the collar of the dog upon which the tax has been paid so that the
tag can easily be seen by officers of the city. The owner shall see that the
tag is so worn by the dog at all times.
   (B)   In case the tag is lost before the end of the year for which it was
issued, the owner may secure another by applying to the City Clerk, presenting
to him or her the original receipt and paying to him or her a fee as set by the
Council.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-404 PLACING COUNTERFEIT TAGS ON DOGS.
   No person shall counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any tag issued for a
dog as provided in this article. No person except the owner or veterinarian
treating a dog shall take from any dog a tag legally placed upon it, and in no
case shall such tag be placed upon a dog for which the tag was not specifically
issued.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-405 PERMITTING DOGS OR CATS TO DEPOSIT SOLID WASTE MATERIAL ON PLACES OPEN
TO THE PUBLIC OR ON CERTAIN PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person having control of any
dog or cat to permit such dog or cat to defecate upon any sidewalk, public
park, street, alley or other place open to the public, or on private property
without the permission of the owner thereof. In the event that the owner,
keeper or person having control of any animal is unable to prevent the deposit
of fecal material in violation of this section, it shall be the duty of such
person to properly collect and dispose of such waste material within a
reasonable time and before leaving the immediate area.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 10-5-2021)
ARTICLE 5. KENNELS; PET SHOPS; CATTERIES
§ 5-501 LICENSE; OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Kennels to be licensed. No person shall own, maintain or operate a
kennel within the corporate limits of the city unless such kennel is licensed
as provided in this article.
   (B)   Application for kennel license; required information; compliance with
zoning regulations. Application for such license shall be made to the City
Clerk and shall state the name and address of the owner or operator of the
kennel, with the street address and legal description of the property upon
which the kennel is located. Such license will not be issued unless the kennel
is in compliance with any applicable portions of any present or future zoning
regulations adopted by the city.
   (C)   Kennel license fee. The annual kennel license fee shall be as set by
the city and such license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the
premises.
   (D)   Issuance of license. Licenses shall be issued for a period of one year
beginning on July 1 of each year. The kennel license fee shall be pro rated for
licenses issued during the year.
   (E)   Proof of vaccination. A kennel owner must show proof of rabies
vaccination on all animals over four months of age when applying for a license.
   (F)   Sanitary conditions. Any person maintaining a kennel, whether for
profit or not, shall maintain such kennel in a sanitary condition and shall be
subject to the provisions of this article and in compliance with this code and
any future code or ordinance of the city. Nonconforming kennels shall be deemed
a public nuisance per se.
   (G)   Requirements for pet shops, catteries and kennels. All pet shops,
catteries and kennels shall:
      (1)   Maintain records and retain such records for a two-year period on
all dogs and cats maintained in such facility. Such records shall show breed,
color, markings, sex, age, date and source of the animal; period for which the
animal is maintained; date and disposition of the animal (including name and
address of the new owner); and disease prevention or treatment and by whom;
      (2)   Provide general environmental conditions to assure adequate
physical space for each animal, control of parasites, clean food and water,
weather protection and clean and sanitary facilities; and
      (3)   Provide cages and pens of easily cleanable materials, if used for
confinement, and keep such cages and pens clean and sanitary.
   (H)   Pet shops.
      (1)   Pet shops shall be subject to the same requirements for licensing
as kennels.
      (2)   Any other requirements of this chapter which may involve specific
animals sold in a pet shop shall also be included in those regulations
applicable to pet shops.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-502 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS.
   No person shall own, keep or harbor more than four dogs over 14 weeks old on
any lot, premises or any structure without having obtained a kennel license as
provided for in this article. Not more than one litter of puppies born to
different female dogs may be kept on any lot or premises or kept in any
structure, except in a kennel.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 6. VICIOUS ANIMALS
§ 5-601 VICIOUS ANIMALS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, possess or maintain within
the city limits any animal which is determined to be vicious as defined by the
ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-602 IMPOUNDMENT OF VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Threats to public health and safety. Animal control officer(s) of the
city shall make a reasonable effort to take into custody and impound in the
city animal shelter or other designated shelter any animal where the officer
determines in good faith from personal observation or other evidence that the
animal is an immediate threat to the public health and safety and such animal
is upon the public streets or lands and unleashed. Any law enforcement officer
of the city shall take into custody and impound in the city animal shelter or
other designated shelter any unleashed animal which is upon public property,
upon the determination by such officer that the animal is an immediate threat
to the public health and safety and that delay of impoundment to await an
animal control unit will jeopardize the public safety. No costs for impoundment
in the city animal shelter or other designated shelter shall be assessed
against the owner of the animal for the period during which the animal is
impounded, if such animal is determined not to be a vicious animal under the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Leashed or confined animals. Animals restrained by leashes while upon
the public streets, ways or property and animals confined to an owner’s
premises by fences or direct restraint shall not be impounded except by order
issued by a Municipal Judge upon a showing of probable cause that such animal
has, while unleashed and off the premises of its owner, bitten a human being or
a domestic animal without provocation.
   (C)   Providing information to requesting officer. Any person in custody of
a leashed animal while upon the public streets, ways or property shall, upon
request of an animal control officer or police officer, furnish his or her
name, address, telephone number and registration number of the leashed animal
to the requesting officer. No officer shall make any such request of a person
unless the officer has determined that there is a reasonable suspicion that the
animal in the custody of the person concerned is a vicious animal within the
scope and intent of this article.
   (D)   Determination of probable cause; delivery of vicious animal.
      (1)   A Municipal Judge, upon the presentment of a verified complaint by
an animal control officer or any law enforcement officer, shall determine
whether probable cause exists to believe that, at a specified location within
the city, a vicious animal is being kept. If the Municipal Judge determines
that probable cause exists, the Judge shall issue an order of the Municipal
Court describing the animal with reasonable certainty, setting forth the
approximate time, place and actions giving rise to the alleged vicious nature
of the animal, and specifying the address at which such animal is being kept.
The Judge shall direct the officer to serve a certified copy of the order upon
a person aged 18 or older who is a resident at the premises where such animal
is located. Any such person, upon the service of the aforesaid certified copy
of the court’s order, shall be bound to deliver over to the law enforcement
officer the animal which is the subject of the order. Any such impoundment
order issued by a Municipal Judge may, in the alterative, authorize and direct
the law enforcement officer to take into custody the subject animal from
private premises by means not giving rise to a breach of the peace, in the
event that such animal can be seized without entering into any domestic
residence or commercial building and no person 18 or older is upon the premises
where the subject animal is found.
      (2)   In the case of an impoundment accomplished without personal service
of an impoundment order, a copy of the impoundment order shall be left on the
premises in a manner calculated to be discovered by the occupant and sent to
the occupant by certified mail.
   (E)   Retention of impounded animals. Animals impounded under the authority
of this section shall be retained in the city animal shelter or other
designated shelter or, at the written request of the owner and at his or her
sole liability for the costs, at a duly licensed veterinary clinic or kennel
until the City Attorney declines to file an information in the case alleging a
violation of this article or until a further order of the Municipal Court has
been issued requiring release or destruction of the impounded animal.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-603 OFFICER TO FILE REPORT.
   The officer who impounds an animal pursuant to this article shall make a
written report and deliver it to the Municipal Court clerk with a copy to the
City Attorney within 24 hours of the impoundment.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-604 NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE NATURE OF IMPOUNDED DOG.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall determine by the end of the third working day
after receipt of the impoundment report whether prosecution will be undertaken
or declined under this article with respect to the impounded animal. If
prosecution is determined, the City Attorney shall file an information with the
Municipal Court clerk and a copy shall be served upon the person who had
physical custody of the subject animal at the time of impoundment or, in the
case of an impoundment accomplished from private property without personal
service of a court order, service of the information shall be made upon a
person age 18 or older who is a resident at the premises from which the animal
was impounded.
   (B)   In the case of an animal impounded off the premises of the owner, the
impounding officer shall make reasonable effort through the use of any
identification tags found on the animal in order to bring about personal
service of the information on the owner as set forth in this section.
   (C)   Return of the service of such order shall be promptly filed with the
Municipal Court clerk. The information shall state on its face the date, time
and place at which a hearing will be conducted by the Municipal Court to
determine the nature of the impounded animal under this article and the action
to be taken with respect to such animal and its owner.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-605 HEARING AND ADJUDICATION.
   (A)   If the owner does not appear at the hearing, the Judge may order the
animal destroyed upon the presentation of a prima facie case establishing the
animal is a vicious animal under this article.
   (B)   The Municipal Court Judge may order the destruction of the animal, a
fine and court costs, or both, at the court’s discretion, after the
presentation of all evidence at the hearing if the Judge finds the animal is a
vicious animal. If requested by the City Attorney or by the owner, the court
shall view the subject animal before an order to destroy the animal may be
entered.
   (C)   If the Municipal Court judgment is appealed to a higher court, as
provided by the statutes of the state and the law of the city, the animal shall
not be destroyed until the appellate court disposes of the appeal.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-606 EXEMPTIONS.
   A K-9 dog which approaches a person in an apparent attitude of attack or
which attacks or bites a human being upon command of its owner shall not, by
reason of such incident, be deemed to be a VICIOUS ANIMAL. The owner of any
such dog shall not, however, by virtue of this article, be exempted from any
legal liability that may otherwise arise by reason of any such action commanded
of a K-9 dog by the owner.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-607 ANIMALS SUSPECTED OF RABIES.
   Any animal which has bitten or is suspected of having bitten any person, or
which has been exposed to or is suspected of having been exposed to rabies,
shall be subject to all the provisions of Article 8 of this chapter as well as
any and all amendments thereto and all state regulations.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-608 CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Confinement required; means of confinement. Every person who owns,
possesses or harbors any animal within the city shall confine the animal to
premises owned or controlled by him or her. Confinement shall be accomplished
by means of a substantial fence or similar enclosures of sufficient strength
and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom, or by keeping the
animal inside a house or other building, or by a leash at least ten feet in
length consisting of a metal chain or other material of sufficient strength to
prevent the animal from escaping from the premises when the leash is stretched
to its full length.
   (B)   Persons to whom section applicable. Every person who owns, possesses
or harbors any animal within the city shall confine the animal as required
under this section.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to any person who takes an animal upon
private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property or upon a street or other public place when the animal is confined in
a vehicle or by means of a chain or leash of sufficient strength and length to
control the actions of the animal.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to agricultural areas. For the purpose
of this article, AGRICULTURAL AREAS shall be all areas zoned agricultural under
Chapter 26 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-609 CONTROL OF ANIMALS TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit any animal owned, possessed or harbored by him or
her:
   (A)   To trespass upon private property without the consent of the person
who owns or controls the property and without properly confining the animal to
that property as required by the provisions of this chapter; or
   (B)   To trespass upon any street or other public property unless the animal
is:
      (1)   Under the immediate physical control of the owner or other
responsible person by confinement in a vehicle; or
      (2)   Under the immediate physical control of the owner or other
responsible person by means of a chain, rope, cord or leash of not more than
six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the actions of the
animal.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-610 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS OTHERWISE; DESTRUCTION IN LIEU OF APPREHENSION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this article, any animal which is not
confined as provided in this article shall be impounded by the animal control
officer or his or her duly appointed representative or by any law enforcement
officer.
   (B)   If the animal is so vicious that it cannot be safely impounded, the
officer seeking to apprehend it may destroy it.
   (C)   Any impounded animal shall be confined in the city animal shelter or
other designated shelter.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 7. ANIMALS AT LARGE; ANIMAL SHELTER
§ 5-701 ANIMALS NOT TO BE AT LARGE.
   (A)   No owner shall permit any animal which is owned, harbored or kept by
him or her to be at large within the city or to trespass upon the property of
another.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any animal to be at large at any time within the
city.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-702 TURNING ANIMALS AT LARGE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal is
confined as required by this chapter so as to turn the animal at large or in
any manner to turn the animal at large.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-703 ANIMAL SHELTER.
§ 5-703-1 SHELTER ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A city animal shelter may be established under the jurisdiction of the
Police Department. It shall be under the immediate control of an animal control
officer or of such other person as may be officially designated. The person in
charge of the shelter shall provide proper sustenance for all animals impounded
and shall treat them in a humane manner. The city may contract with another
agency/municipality for the use of a shelter maintained by that agency/
municipality.
   (B)   Donations received by the city animal shelter established pursuant to
division (A) above may only be utilized for the purchase of:
      (1)   Food, veterinary services and medication costs;
      (2)   Supplies for cleaning and grooming animals and kennels/animal
spaces;
      (3)   Bedding; and
      (4)   Items for the enrichment of the animals’ lives, including, but not
limited to, toys, treats and bowls/feeders.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 24-007, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 5-703-2 ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED.
   (A)   The animal control officer, a police officer or such other officer or
employee of the city as may be authorized by the City Manager may take into
custody and impound any animal running at large or in violation of any
provision of this chapter and may enter upon the premises of the owner or other
private premises to take such animal into custody.
   (B)   Animals to be taken into custody as provided in this chapter shall be
destroyed by an acceptable humane method by the officer or employee of the city
in charge of such animal, or by the animal control officer, after 14 days have
elapsed after taking the animal into custody, provided the animal is not
redeemed or claimed as provided in this article. A description of the animal,
the date impounded and the place of impoundment shall be kept by the animal
control officer or other officer in charge. If the owner can be identified by
tag or otherwise, the animal control officer shall send notice to the owner
orally by telephone or in writing at the address on the city’s registration
records that unless claimed by the owner, the animal will be disposed of as
provided in §
5-703-5.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 24-006, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 5-703-3 BREAKING SHELTER.
   No unauthorized person shall:
   (A)   Break or attempt to break open the shelter or take or let out any
animal therefrom;
   (B)   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
   (C)   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the
discharge of his or her duties relating to the taking into custody and
impounding of animals as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-703-4 FEES FOR IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall determine the fees to
be charged for impounding and keeping animals. In computing the fee, a fraction
of a day during which an animal has been fed shall be deemed a full day.
   (B)   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees
to the City Clerk and present his or her receipt therefor to the person in
charge of the animal shelter before the latter releases the animal. An owner of
an impounded animal or his or her agent may redeem the animal prior to its
disposition as provided for in §
5-703-5. However, when, in the judgment of the animal control officer, an
animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed.
   (C)   Any person redeeming a dog not licensed as required by §
5-402 shall pay the required license tax to the City Clerk and secure a tag and
present the receipt therefor and the tag to the person in charge of the animal
shelter before the latter releases the dog. If a dog has been licensed but is
not wearing the tag, the person in charge of the animal shelter shall require
adequate evidence of the proper licensing of the dog before releasing it.
   (D)   A vaccination deposit, set by resolution or motion of the City
Council, shall be required for each animal without proof of the required rabies
vaccination from a licensed veterinarian within the prior 12 months immediately
preceding its impoundment. The deposit shall be returned only if, within five
working days from the date of the deposit, the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, is presented a receipt from a licensed veterinarian documenting that
the animal had received a rabies vaccination within either the prior 12 months
immediately preceding the animal’s impoundment or the period within five
working days from the date of the deposit.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-703-5 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   As soon as practicable after any animal of apparent value has been
impounded, the animal control officer or other employee or officer impounding
the animal shall inform the Police Chief, and the Police Chief shall thereupon
post a notice thereof at the police office of the city. The notice shall
describe the animal and notify the owner to pay the charges thereon and remove
the same prior to a designated time. The notice shall also state that unless
the animal is redeemed, the animal will be disposed of by adoption as a pet, by
delivery to a licensed educational or research institution or by euthanization.
   (B)   Any sale of an impounded animal shall be for cash and shall be
conducted by or under the direction of the Police Chief. If an impounded animal
cannot be sold, the animal control officer and/or the Police Chief shall
destroy the animal or have it destroyed in an acceptable, humane method or
otherwise dispose of it in a legal manner.
   (C)   The purchaser of an animal at a sale held as provided in this section
shall acquire absolute title to the animal purchased.
   (D)   The Police Department shall pay to the City Clerk all monies received
from the sale of impounded animals on the day it is received or on the next day
upon which the office of the City Clerk is open for business.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-703-6 OWNER MAY CLAIM EXCESS MONEY.
   The owner of an impounded animal sold as provided in §
5-703-5 may claim the excess of the sale price of the animal above the fees for
impounding and keeping the same and a fee, as set by the Council by motion or
resolution, to reimburse the city for any expense it has had in making the sale
at any time within three months after the sale. If a claim is so made and
approved by the Council, the City Clerk shall pay the owner the excess. If a
claim is not made within the three-month period, the excess shall belong to the
city.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 8. RABIES PROCEDURES AND CONTROL
§ 5-801 MANAGEMENT OF DOGS, CATS OR FERRETS THAT HAVE BITTEN A PERSON.
   (A)   Any person or entity owning, harboring or keeping a dog, cat or ferret
which, in the preceding ten days, has bitten any person shall, upon receipt of
written notice by the local animal control officer or Department designee and/
or the Police Chief, place such animal in quarantine under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days from the date the person was
bitten. The impoundment and observation of the dog, cat or ferret shall be
conducted at the veterinarian’s facility or a recognized animal control
facility. Unvaccinated animals shall be vaccinated against rabies on the final
day of the ten-day observation period prior to discharge from the
veterinarian’s supervision.
   (B)   Exceptions to this rule include the following circumstances.
      (1)   Dogs, cats or ferrets involved in a first party ownership may be
allowed to be placed in a home quarantine for a ten-day period immediately
following the bite.
      (2)   Dogs, cats and ferrets meeting the criteria of currently vaccinated
against rabies and not inflicting a severe injury shall be placed in a home
quarantine until the end of a ten-day period from the bite. In some instances,
a certification of animal health obtained after examination by a licensed
veterinarian on the tenth day may be required by the Department.
      (3)   Animals in service to the blind or hearing impaired and search and
rescue dogs or other animals used for police enforcement duties shall be exempt
from the quarantine when a bite exposure occurs and proper record of
immunization against rabies is presented. A certification of animal health
obtained after examination by a licensed veterinarian at the end of ten days
may be required by the Department.
      (4)   Stray or unwanted dogs, cats or ferrets that have bitten any person
may either be quarantined for ten days at a veterinary facility or a recognized
animal control facility or immediately euthanized and the brain tissue
submitted to the State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing. Upon
successful completion of the ten-day period, a stray animal may be placed for
adoption at the discretion of the animal control officer.
      (5)   In rare instances, other good and valid health reasons of the owner
or animal may be considered for justification to home quarantine (e.g., a bitch
with a litter of very young puppies, an animal with a contagious disease and
the like). Approval for home quarantine will be determined by the Department or
its designee.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-802 MANAGEMENT OF OTHER ANIMALS THAT BITE A HUMAN.
   (A)   The final decision for animal destruction, quarantine or other
disposition of any animal other than a dog, cat or ferret that bites a person
or otherwise potentially exposes a person to rabies shall be determined by
either the animal control officer or a police officer. The matters to be
considered shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The epidemiology and risk of rabies in the species of animal in
question;
      (2)   Possible prior exposure to a rabies vector;
      (3)   Behavior of the animal at the time of the bite;
      (4)   Prior rabies vaccinations; and
      (5)   Other circumstances that may exist.
   (B)   In some situations, the animal control officer/police officer may
consider the initiative and willingness of the individual so exposed to submit
to post-exposure anti-rabies immunization after being adequately informed of
all potential risks.
   (C)   Any biting animal determined to be at significant risk for the
transmission of rabies shall, upon written order by the designated animal
control officer or a specifically designated representative, be humanely killed
and the brain tissue submitted to the State Department of Health laboratory for
rabies testing.
   (D)   The animal control officer/police officer may order the quarantine of
an animal determined to be at very low risk for the transmission of rabies for
a 30-day observation period as an alternate method to euthanasia and testing.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-803 SEVERE BITE WOUNDS INFLICTED.
   (A)   In special circumstances involving a bite to any person, the animal
control officer or a specifically designated representative may require the
immediate euthanasia of a specified animal for the performance of rabies
diagnostics.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES refers
to multiple and severe bite wounds or deep punctures or lacerations to the
face, head or neck.
   (C)   Such requirement for euthanasia will be made following investigation
of the bite report by the Department designee.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-804 WHEN DOGS AND CATS CONFINED.
   (A)   (1)   When the animal control officer determines and certifies that a
dog, a cat or other animal in the city or within five miles of the city is or
was infected with rabies and that an epidemic of rabies threatens the city, the
Council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined and, if deemed
desirable, all cats to be confined during a period of time to be determined by
the Council and within such radius of the city as determined by the Council.
      (2)   Such resolution or an adequate notice of its passage shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall go
into effect on the day following such publication unless the resolution
prescribes a later time.
   (B)   The City Manager, when he or she deems it necessary due to health,
safety and welfare conditions, may order emergency confinement of animals in
the city or a one-mile radius thereof. Such order shall not be effective for a
period of more than ten days. Notice of the order shall be by posting a copy
thereof in at least three places in the city, one of such places shall be the
City Hall.
   (C)   While any such resolution or order is in effect, it is unlawful for
any owner to permit a dog or cat to be at large in violation of such resolution
or order.
   (D)   The resolution or order may be enforced by the animal control officer,
the Health Officer or any police officer of the city.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-805 CONFINEMENT REQUIRED.
   Any person owning, harboring or keeping an animal, including a dog, cat or
other domestic pet which, in the preceding ten days, has bitten any person
shall, upon receipt of written or oral notice by the city animal control
officer, place such animal in confinement under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian for a period of ten days from the date the person was bitten.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-806 SUPERVISING VETERINARIAN’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the veterinarian in whose supervision the dog,
cat or ferret is placed to keep the animal isolated and secured in a separate
cage or kennel and under observation for any symptoms of rabies.
   (B)   The veterinarian shall report immediately to the Department designee
any changes occurring in the condition of the dog, cat or ferret.
   (C)   In the event the animal being observed dies or develops rabies-like
symptoms within the specified period of confinement, the animal, if alive,
shall be euthanized. The animal’s head shall be removed immediately and packed
in a shipping container in accordance with instructions published on the rabies
laboratory form, ODE form 460, and sent to the State Department of Health
laboratory, 1000 N.E. Tenth Street, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73117-1299, for
rabies testing.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-807 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS INCURRED.
   Payment of fees incurred for daily boarding, euthanasia, preparation and
transport of specimens for laboratory testing or any other costs incurred to
comply with O.A.C. § 310:599 shall be the responsibility of the person or
entity owning, keeping or harboring the animal. If the animal is a stray or
wild animal without a custodian, the bite victim or their legal guardian shall
be responsible for payment.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-808 CONFINEMENT BY OWNER.
   (A)   In the event there is not a licensed veterinarian to provide
supervision for isolation and observation of the suspect animal within the
county or where, in the opinion of the animal control officer, the person
owning, keeping or harboring the suspect animal will pay for expenses, such
person shall, in accordance with instructions received from the animal control
officer, keep the suspect animal securely penned and shall immediately advise
the animal control officer of any changes occurring in the condition of the
animal.
   (B)   In the event of the animal’s death or illness, the person so
designated as responsible for the animal shall immediately notify the animal
control officer and make arrangements for removal of the animal’s head,
properly packing it in a shipping container and shipping it to the State
Department of Health.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-809 ENFORCEMENT.
   It is the duty of the animal control officer and/or the Police Chief to
enforce this article, and, in instances where responsibility for the suspect
animal cannot be determined or established, he or she shall make arrangements
for the isolation and observation of the animal.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-810 DESTRUCTION OR OBSERVATION.
   Any domestic dog or cat which is not effectively immunized against rabies
virus encephalitis and is exposed to rabies through a rabid animal shall be
destroyed immediately either by the veterinarian in charge or by the local
animal control officer or his or her agent, or such nonimmunized, rabies
exposed dog or cat shall be strictly quarantined and observed for a period of
six months by either a veterinarian or by the local animal control officer or
his or her agent. Such animal shall be immunized against rabies at least 30
days prior to release. Expenses of quarantine and immunization shall be borne
by the owner or other person responsible for the animal.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-811 ANIMALS CONSIDERED EXPOSED.
   Unvaccinated domestic animals exposed to a rabid animal:
   (A)   Any dog, cat or ferret which is not currently vaccinated against
rabies and is exposed to a rabid animal shall be:
      (1)   Euthanized immediately either by a veterinarian of the owner’s
choice or the local animal control officer or his or her agent; or
      (2)   Placed in strict quarantine and/or observed for a period of six
months under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian either at a veterinary
facility or a recognized animal control facility. The exposed animal shall be
immediately vaccinated against rabies upon entry into quarantine and then given
booster vaccinations at the third and eighth week of the quarantine period.
Animals less than 16 weeks of age at the time of entry into quarantine may be
required to receive a booster vaccine in addition to the above protocol.
   (B)   Any livestock or equine animal which is not currently vaccinated and
is exposed to a rabid animal will be managed according to the most current
“Compendium of Animal Rabies Control” Published by the National Association of
State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. and any State Department of Agriculture
guidelines that may apply.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-812 VACCINATED DOMESTIC ANIMALS EXPOSED TO RABID ANIMALS.
   Any domestic animal which is currently vaccinated against rabies and is
exposed to a rabid animal shall be revaccinated within three days of
notification and isolated by leashing or confinement under the owner’s
supervision for a period of at least 45 days.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-813 DISPOSAL OF REMAINS OF DISEASE SUSPECT ANIMAL.
   When a veterinarian provides the service of head removal and preparation of
any animal specimen for testing of a zoonotic disease regulated under this
article, it shall be the responsibility of the veterinarian to properly dispose
of the bodily remains of the disease suspect animal in a manner that will
prevent any potential future exposure by any person or other animal to that
animal’s tissues. The veterinarian is entitled to charge and collect the usual
and customary fees for the disposal service.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 9. CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
§ 5-901 POISONING ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to willfully poison such animal or
knowingly to expose poison so that it may be taken by such an animal.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-902 ENCOURAGING ANIMALS TO FIGHT.
   It is unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage any fight between
animals or to instigate or encourage any animal to attack, bite, wound or worry
another, or to keep a house, pit or other place used in permitting any fight
between animals.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 5-903 ANIMAL PROTECTION; OTHER ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit within the limits of this
city any live animal with the intention of abandoning such animal.
   (B)   It is unlawful to carry out inhumane treatment against any animal. For
the purpose of this division (B), INHUMANE TREATMENT is hereby defined to
include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Any physical punishment inconsistent with the health of such
animal;
      (2)   Lack of food or water for more than a 24-hour period;
      (3)   Knowingly permitting obvious nutritional deficiencies or other
evident health problems involving any animal;
      (4)   Improper use of any collar or harness or a fixed leash for the
purpose of confining any animal which results in flesh laceration, obvious pain
or to cause choking to such animal;
      (5)   Depriving an animal of adequate shelter; and
      (6)   Inhumane killing or attempting to kill any animal.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to unjustifiably administer any
poisonous or noxious drug or substance to any animal or unjustifiably expose
any such drug or substance with intent that the same shall be taken by an
animal, whether such animal be the property of himself, herself or another.
   (D)   Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter for inhumane treatment
to any animal, it is unlawful for the owner or keeper of such animal to not
release such animal kept in inhumane conditions to an animal control officer
for disposition in accord with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 10. DISPOSAL OF SHELTER ANIMALS
§ 5-10-01 PROCEDURE FOR DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Any dog or cat maintained in the city animal shelter subject to
disposal, which is not the subject of an action to adopt, rehome or otherwise
subject to the disposition of any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be
disposed of in the following manner: The animal shall be transported to a
veterinarian licensed by the state for euthanasia, cremation and disposal in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
   (B)   This article shall not apply to an animal who is suspected of having
rabies, or having been exposed to rabies, subject to alternate disposal
pursuant to §
5-813.
(Ord. 23-007, passed 10-3-2023)
CHAPTER 6: BUILDING CODES
Section
Article 1. Special Provisions
6-101 City Inspector, office created, appointment
6-102 General powers and duties of City Inspector; assistant inspectors; salary
6-103 Building Official, City Inspector
6-104 Building permits required
6-105 Building permit applications
6-106 Issuance of permit; permit and deposit fees; penalty; and appeals
6-107 Authority of permit; work to begin within six months
6-108 Compliance with city code and inspections
6-109 Moving buildings, building not to detract
6-110 Certificates of occupancy required
6-111 When certificate required
6-112 Application for certificate; inspection
6-113 Temporary certificates
6-114 Inspections
6-115 Fee for inspection, reinspection
6-116 Water and electric services dependent on certificate
6-117 Inspection fees
6-118 Initial and yearly license fees for electricians, plumbers and
journeyman; examination of electricians; bond
6-118-1 Qualification for journeyman electricians
6-118-2 Fees for examination and licenses for journeyman electricians
6-118-3 Qualifications for master electricians
6-118-4 Fees for examination and licenses for master electricians
6-118-5 Failure to pass examination
6-118-6 Bonds required of master electricians and plumbers
6-118-7 Master electrician’s and plumber’s license
6-118-8 Fees for master and journeyman plumbers
6-118-9 Prohibited acts
Article 2. Plumbing Code and Regulations
6-201 Adoption of Plumbing Code
6-202 Additions, insertions and changes to Plumbing Code
6-203 Plumbing permits required; City Clerk to issue
6-204 Registration required
6-205 Revocation of registration
Article 3. Electrical Code and Regulations
6-301 Electrical Code adopted
6-302 Modifications of National Electric Code
6-303 Purpose of electrical regulations
6-304 Scope
6-305 Responsibility for safe work
6-306 Electrical Inspector
6-307 Powers of Electrical Inspector
6-308 Inspection required
6-309 Rough inspection
6-310 Faulty work
6-311 Rectification of faulty work
6-312 Final inspection
6-313 Work to be left open until inspection completed
6-314 Fees for registration of electricians
6-315 Revocation of registration
6-316 Certificate of registration; expiration
6-317 Registration card; renewal, replacement
6-318 Display of evidence of registration
6-319 Classification of registration for electricians
6-320 Method of registration; conduct of business
6-321 Permits required for electrical work
6-322 Exemptions
6-323 Permits refused
6-324 Appeals from decisions of Inspector or Electrical Board
Article 4. Building Code and Regulations
6-401 Building Code adopted
6-402 Additions and changes to Building Code
6-403 Variance from Building Code and ordinances
6-404 Distance of dwellings from side lines
6-405 Building permits
Article 5. Mechanical Code and Regulations
6-501 Policy of city
6-502 Mechanical Code adopted
6-503 New construction
6-504 Standards adopted; Standard Mechanical Code
6-505 Unsafe appliances
6-506 Records
6-507 Enforcement, right to enter
6-508 Registration required for gas fitters
6-509 Mechanical contractor’s license
6-510 Work to be left open until inspection completed
6-511 Certificate of registration; expiration
6-512 Registration card; renewal, replacement
6-513 Permits required for mechanical work
6-514 Exemptions
6-515 Permits refused
Article 6. Residential Code
6-601 Residential Code adopted
Article 7. Existing Building Code
6-701 Existing Building Code adopted
Article 8. Fuel Gas Code
6-801 Fuel Gas Code adopted
Article 9. Fire Code
6-901 Fire Code adopted
Article 10. Property Maintenance Code
6-1001 Property Maintenance Code adopted
ARTICLE 1. SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 6-101 CITY INSPECTOR, OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of City Inspector who shall be appointed
by the City Manager. The City Inspector may be removed, demoted, laid off or
suspended at any time by the City Manager. In case of absence or disability of
the City Inspector, the City Manager may designate some qualified person to
perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability.
(Ord. 23-008, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 6-102 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY INSPECTOR; ASSISTANT INSPECTORS;
SALARY.
   (A)   The City Inspector shall serve in such capacity and perform such
duties as the City Manager shall from time to time designate. The City
Inspector shall be primarily responsible for all inspections required by city
ordinances and state statutes, including, but not limited to, electrical,
plumbing and construction inspections. In conjunction with the City Manager,
the City Inspector shall inspect construction of off-site improvements. The
City Inspector may serve either on a full-time or part-time basis, as the City
Manager may determine is necessary. The City Inspector shall not be interested
directly or indirectly in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work
or service with or performed within the city.
   (B)   The City Inspector shall receive such salary or pay as the City
Manager determines is appropriate.
(Ord. 23-008, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 6-103 BUILDING OFFICIAL, CITY INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The City Inspector shall have the powers, duties and functions
prescribed for the “Building Official” by the code adopted by this chapter. The
powers, duties and functions of the Building Official may be performed by
authorized representatives of the Building Official and under his or her
supervision and control. The authorized representatives may bear such titles as
“Building Inspector,” “Gas Inspector,” “Plumbing Inspector,” “Electrical
Inspector” and so on, as may be deemed appropriate to indicate their respective
areas of concern. The authorized representative shall be appointed by the
governing body.
   (B)   When any ordinance or provision of any code adopted by this chapter
prescribes any power, duty or function for any of the authorized
representatives of the Building Official, the Building Official shall also have
such power, duty or function in the absence of the designated representative of
the Building Official.
§ 6-104 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, no person shall
engage in the following acts without having first obtained the necessary
permits from the City Clerk:
      (1)   The installation of any electrical, gas distribution or plumbing
systems, or the subsequent modification of existing systems by a builder or
contractor. Systems shall not include any electrical unit installed merely by
use of electrical plug;
      (2)   The alteration, construction, enlargement, removal, relocation or
repair of any building or other structure;
      (3)   The construction, alteration, cutting, mutilation or changing in
any manner for any purpose, any paved or traveled portion of any street or
alley, curb, gutter, catch basin or other appurtenance of a street or alley or
any sidewalk;
      (4)   The construction or repair of any off-site improvement within the
city limits; and
      (5)   The installation of any air conditioning, heating or refrigeration
system, or the subsequent modification of existing systems. System shall not be
deemed to include window units or freestanding units that are installed merely
by use of electrical plugs.
   (B)   No permit is required under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Where a public utility corporation installs electrical conductors
or equipment in the generation, transmission, sale or use of electrical energy
as outlined in their franchises with the city;
      (2)   Where the ordinary interior alterations or repairs of buildings or
structures do not exceed $1,000, such alterations or repairs do not include the
removal of any portion of a stone, concrete or brick wall, such alterations or
repairs do not include the removal, change or closing of any stairway or
opening in an exterior wall; or
      (3)   Where the construction, alterations, cutting and changing of a
portion of any street or alley, any curb, gutter, catch basin or other
appurtenance of a street or alley is under the direct supervision of the city
administration.
§ 6-105 BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   A person desiring a building permit shall submit an application
therefor to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. All
applications must be accompanied with a scaled plat plan showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, or improvements being
made. All easements, streets or alley rights-of-way must be shown, as well as
the exact size of the existing buildings or structures on the lot or tract of
land and their location thereon and the lines within which the proposed
building or structure is to be erected or altered either above or below the
ground.
   (B)   All new applications for building permits must be accompanied with
scaled, detailed plans and drawings or blueprints of the structure and shall
show all dimensions, lot lines, setbacks, easements, sewers, drains, plumbing,
gas, heating, air conditioning, electrical outlets, wiring diagrams and any
fixtures either above or below the ground.
§ 6-106 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; PERMIT AND DEPOSIT FEES; PENALTY; AND APPEALS.
   (A)   The City Inspector and City Manager shall approve all building
permits. The proposed building plans and specifications shall comply with the
ordinances of the city. The City Clerk, after approval and compliance as
required herein, shall issue the permit after the applicant has paid to the
City Clerk a permit fee as follows.
      (1)   (a)   Building permit fees for new single-family residential
construction are as follows.
 
0 - 500 sq. ft.         $100
501 - 1,000 sq. ft.     $150
1,001 - 1,500 sq. ft.   $175
1,501 - 2,000 sq. ft.   $200
2,001 - 2,500 sq. ft.   $225
2,501 sq. ft. and above $250
 
         (b)   In addition to the building permit fee, in accordance with the
above calculations, a $79.50 plumbing permit fee shall be charged; a $79.50
mechanical permit fee shall be charged; and a $79.50 electrical fee shall be
charged, which shall include $4.50 charged by the State Construction Industries
Board.
      (2)   (a)   Building permit fees for remodel of existing single-family
structures where the cost of such remodel exceeds $2,000 shall be $50 per
structure. Building permit fees for remodel of existing commercial structures
where the cost of remodel exceeds $2,000 shall be $75.
         (b)   Remodel of residential or commercial structures where the costs
do not exceed the thresholds established immediately above do not require a
building permit.
         (c)   However, all plumbing, electrical or mechanical work shall still
require applicable permits.
      (3)   (a)   Building permit fees for new commercial construction are as
follows.
 
0 - 500 sq. ft.         $125
501 - 1,000 sq. ft.     $150
1,001 - 1,500 sq. ft.   $200
1,501 - 2,000 sq. ft.   $225
2,001 - 2,500 sq. ft.   $250
2,501 sq. ft. and above $275
 
         (b)   In addition to the building permit fee in accordance with the
above calculations, a $79.50 plumbing permit fee shall be charged; a $79.50
mechanical permit fee shall be charged; and a $79.50 electrical fee shall be
charged, which shall include $4.50 charged by the State Construction Industries
Board.
      (4)   A $50 fee shall be charged for residential and commercial
structures in the event a reinspection becomes necessary.
      (5)   In addition to the above, the following permit fees shall be
required as applicable.
 
Residential                 Commercial
Roof                    $50 Roof                    $75
Safe room/storm shelter $25 Safe room/storm shelter $25
Sign with electric      $50 Sign with electric      $50
Sign without electric   $25 Sign without electric   $25
Swimming pool           $35 Swimming pool           $50
 
   (B)   Each application for building permits must be accompanied with a
deposit of $10 per $1,000 of estimated cost. The deposit will be applied toward
the permit fee if obtained by the applicant within 30 days from application
date. Otherwise, the deposit will be forfeited and the applicant shall apply
for a new permit.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$750, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both by such
fine and imprisonment for each such violation or failure to comply. Each day
that a violation or failure to comply exists shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense, and any one or more of such offenses may be set out in any
complaint or information filed. In addition, or as an alternative, to the
penalties set forth immediately herein, any person, firm or corporation who
violates any provision of this chapter may be charged as a permit fee an amount
equal to two times the amount of the regular fee levied in division (A) above.
   (D)   Prior to beginning construction on any off-site improvements, the
contractor shall submit a copy of the contract documents and the maintenance
bond required by the chapter on subdivision regulations of this code to the
City Clerk. Inspection fees as established by the City Council by motion or
resolution shall accompany the contract documents. Upon receipt of the permit
to construct from the Health Department, if required, the application of a
building permit, if deemed complete, will be processed.
   (E)   The property owner or his or her authorized agent shall have the right
to appeal a decision or determination made by the Building/Code Official
relative to the application and interpretation of the appropriate code as
adopted by this chapter to the City Council whenever such property owner
believes:
      (1)   The true intent of the adopted codes, or the rules legally adopted
thereunder, have been incorrectly or improperly interpreted;
      (2)   The provisions of those codes do not fully apply; and/or
      (3)   An equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
(Ord. 2003-06, passed 12-2-2003; Ord. 2022-07, passed 12-6-2022; Ord. 24-004,
passed 4-2-2024)
§ 6-107 AUTHORITY OF PERMIT; WORK TO BEGIN WITHIN SIX MONTHS.
   (A)   A building permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed
with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter
or set aside any of the provisions of this code, nor shall such issuance of a
permit prevent the city, through its authorized representatives, from requiring
a correction of errors in plans or in construction or of violations of this
code.
   (B)   Every permit issued shall automatically become invalid six months
after its issuance unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced
within the six-month period. Every permit issued shall automatically become
invalid if the work authorized by such permit is commenced but is thereafter
suspended or abandoned for a period of one year after the time the work is
commenced.
   (C)   For good cause shown, one or more extensions of time, for periods not
exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed in writing by the authorized
representative of the city if the extensions are applied for prior to the time
the permit becomes invalid.
§ 6-108 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY CODE AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Approval of the plans does not relieve the owner or his or her agent
of responsibility in complying with any and all other ordinances or provisions
of this code. The fact that any such approved plan contains matter contrary to
any ordinance or provision is not a bar to its strict enforcement.
   (B)   When the framing of any building or structure is completed, when any
rough electrical wiring or electrical installation work is completed, when any
rough plumbing is completed, or when any air conditioning, heating or
refrigeration system is initially installed, an inspection of that work shall
be given by the Building Inspector.
      (1)   No plumbing work or electrical wiring, installed electrical or gas
fixtures, or electrical or gas equipment requiring a building permit, shall be
used in a building or on any premises until it has also had a final inspection.
This provision shall not apply to use for purposes of construction prior to
final occupancy.
      (2)   All work found to be faulty or incorrectly or defectively installed
shall be corrected before any rough or final approval shall be given by the
Building Inspector; and when such has been corrected, notification for a
reinspection shall then be given to the Building Inspector.
      (3)   All inspections shall be made by the Building Inspector within two
working days from the receipt of the notification for the inspection or
reinspection.
      (4)   No work which is required to be inspected shall be covered over or
covered up prior to that particular inspection, and any covering in place shall
be removed upon the order of the Building Inspector.
§ 6-109 MOVING BUILDINGS, BUILDING NOT TO DETRACT.
   No building of any kind shall be moved into the city or moved from one
location in the city to another, whether the location is within a business zone
or a residential zone, unless such building is of such materials, construction
and appearance as not substantially to detract from the value and enjoyment of
the property in the locality where such building is to be located.
§ 6-110 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   No person shall occupy or use or permit the occupation or use of any
commercial, industrial or residential building or structure without having
first obtained a certificate of occupancy from the City Clerk under those terms
and requirements hereinafter provided.
§ 6-111 WHEN CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A certificate of occupancy is required on all commercial, industrial
or residential buildings or structures when such buildings or structures:
      (1)   Are newly constructed;
      (2)   Are structurally altered;
      (3)   Are enlarged through addition;
      (4)   Are unoccupied for a period of two or more years;
      (5)   Undergo a change of occupancy or usage inconsistent with the last
occupancy or usage; or
      (6)   Are situated upon a tract of land abutting a private roadway
easement as described by 11 O.S. § 45-104.
   (B)   The city, if requested, shall supply a certificate to any buyer or
lessee who is then negotiating for the sale or lease of such building or
structure.
§ 6-112 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; INSPECTION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a written application for a certificate of occupancy,
the City Inspector or other designated official of the city shall, within five
days, conduct an inspection of the building or structure. If the building or
structure complies with the requirements of this code, the certificate shall be
issued.
   (B)   Copies of the certificate shall be furnished at cost upon the request
of those persons having a proprietary interest in those buildings or
structures.
§ 6-113 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATES.
   The City Inspector or other designated official of the city may issue
temporary certificates for residential buildings or structures only under the
following conditions:
   (A)   The temporary occupancy or use would not jeopardize life or property;
   (B)   The applicants seeking a temporary certificate are in immediate need
of housing and are purchasing the particular residence;
   (C)   The temporary certificate shall be issued for a period of time not to
exceed 60 days; and
   (D)   The temporary certificate shall not be issued more than once to a
particular residential building or structure.
§ 6-114 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections for the issuance of certificates of occupancy shall be
made by the City Inspector or other designated official of the city.
   (B)   Inspections shall seek to ascertain:
      (1)   The proper installation of site improvements;
      (2)   The proper installation and operation of all fixtures;
      (3)   The attachment of all hardware and trim;
      (4)   The completion of other items specifically designated by the
appropriate inspector so as to ensure a building’s or structure’s immediate and
full occupancy or usage; and
      (5)   Compliance with the provisions of the Building Code adopted and in
force in the city.
§ 6-115 FEE FOR INSPECTION, REINSPECTION.
   (A)   The cost of an initial inspection shall be as set forth in §
6-117 of this article.
   (B)   The cost of any reinspection shall be as set forth in §
6-117 of this article.
   (C)   The costs of inspection for certificate of occupancy shall be borne by
that person, individual, partnership, corporation or other association which:
      (1)   Has title to the particular building or structure; and
      (2)   Undertakes or permits the undertaking of those activities listed in
§
6-111 of this article.
   (D)   The fee for the occupancy certificate shall be collected by the City
Clerk prior to the issuance of a building permit when a building permit is
required, or by either the City Clerk or by the City Inspector when no building
permit is required.
§ 6-116 WATER AND ELECTRIC SERVICES DEPENDENT ON CERTIFICATE.
   No person who is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be
entitled to water or electric services until such time as he or she has
obtained such certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy as
authorized under this chapter.
§ 6-117 INSPECTION FEES.
   The fees for inspections of buildings, occupancies, electrical, plumbing
installations, gas, heating and air conditioning, mechanical and other
installations, shall be as set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
Presently the permit rates are as follows.
   (A)   City permits, new and remodeling. These charges are set forth in §
6-106 of this article.
   (B)   Electrical permits and inspections. Each dwelling, multi-family
dwelling or business, upon completion of the basic wiring, will obtain a rough-
in inspection before any wall coverings (sheetrock, paneling and the like) are
attached to the walls. The cost for a rough-in inspection will be charged to
the master electrician and will be as follows:
      (1)   Base fee for the service, $25;
      (2)   This fee may be included in the building permit fee, as set forth
in §
6-106 of this article; and
      (3)   Failure to receive the rough-in inspection will result in a $35
fine to the master electrician and the wall coverings will have to be removed
for the inspection. In addition, each dwelling, multi-family dwelling or
business must receive a final inspection before occupancy. There will be no
charge for this inspection. Failure to receive a final inspection before
occupancy will result in a $35 fine for each day occupied without a final
inspection and will be payable by the master electrician. Provided, that no
permit fee set forth in this section shall be charged on any structure in a
zoned agricultural area.
   (C)   Plumbing permits, water, sewer, gas.
      (1)   Generally, $25; where reinspection is necessary on any permit, $50.
      (2)   This fee may be included in the building permit, as set forth in §
6-106 of this article, for residential new construction.
   (D)   Grace period. A grace period of seven days after notification of
violation will be allowed for compliance, after which a $25 per day fine will
be imposed.
(Ord. 2003-06, passed 12-2-2003)
§ 6-118 INITIAL AND YEARLY LICENSE FEES FOR ELECTRICIANS, PLUMBERS AND
JOURNEYMAN; EXAMINATION OF ELECTRICIANS; BOND.
§ 6-118-1 QUALIFICATION FOR JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIANS.
   (A)   Each person applying for a journeyman’s license shall have at least
two years of verifiable experience as an apprentice or hold a journeyman’s
license in the state, or may in lieu of taking an examination show proof that
they hold a license in the cities of Purcell, Norman or Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma. The latter may only be accomplished after the completion of an
application and with the approval of the Electrical Inspector.
   (B)   Each person applying for a journeyman’s license shall be employed at
the time of the application and during the time that the person holds the
license by a corporation or firm that holds a contractor’s license in good
standing with the city.
§ 6-118-2 FEES FOR EXAMINATION AND LICENSES FOR JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIANS.
   (A)   The fee of $5 will be assessed before the taking of each electrical
examination, payable to the city, to the City Clerk, during the regular
business hours of City Hall.
   (B)   The fee of $10 will be assessed for the journeymen’s license upon
successful completion of the examination, and $10 each year that it is renewed.
§ 6-118-3 QUALIFICATIONS FOR MASTER ELECTRICIANS.
   Each person applying for a master’s license shall have at least three years’
experience as a journeyman electrician in the state, or notarized proof if out
of state, or may in lieu of the examination show proof of a master’s license in
the cities of Purcell, Norman or Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The latter may only
be accomplished after completion of an application and with approval of the
Electrical Inspector.
§ 6-118-4 FEES FOR EXAMINATION AND LICENSES FOR MASTER ELECTRICIANS.
   (A)   The fee of $25 will be assessed before the taking of each master’s
examination, payable to the city, to the City Clerk during the regular business
hours of City Hall.
   (B)   The fee of $100 will be assessed upon successful completion of the
examination for the license and a fee of $40 for each year renewed.
   (C)   Fees for master’s and journeyman’s licenses will become due and
payable on July 1 of each year commencing the year of 1981 and each following
year. Failure to renew the license will result in having to take the
examination again.
§ 6-118-5 FAILURE TO PASS EXAMINATION.
   (A)   Failure to pass the examination (master or journeyman) by an
individual will allow that person to appeal to the Electrical Board the same
night of the test. If not satisfied with the decision, that person may appeal
to the City Council on its next meeting night. The appeal must be in writing
and presented to the City Clerk at least three working days prior to the next
City Council meeting and to be placed on the agenda.
   (B)   The City Council will appoint an Appeal Board to consist of one master
electrician and two journeymen. This Appeal Board shall decide on the meeting
time and place and contact all interested parties in writing. If the Appeal
Board upholds the decision of the Electrical Board, then the applicant may
retake the test on the next testing night. Failure to pass the second time will
require the applicant to wait 90 days before retaking the test again.
§ 6-118-6 BONDS REQUIRED OF MASTER ELECTRICIANS AND PLUMBERS.
   (A)   A corporate surety bond for licenses and permits in the sum of $1,000
payable to the city shall be required and shall be permanently deposited with
the City Clerk prior to the issuance of any master’s license.
   (B)   Said bond shall be executed by the applicant by a surety authorized to
do business in the state and shall be for a period coterminous with the
master’s license.
   (C)   Said bond will be conditioned upon all of the following conditions.
      (1)   The master and all his or her agents and employees shall faithfully
and properly conduct business in compliance with all provisions of this code.
      (2)   The master electrician or plumber shall pay all fines and/or
penalties imposed by the courts of competent jurisdiction for violations of
said applicable provisions.
      (3)   The master shall protect, save harmless and indemnify the city
against any liability imposed by law against said city for the negligence of
said master, his or her agents or employees, which arises from any act or
omission of said individuals engaged in work pursuant to this code.
      (4)   Any person aggrieved may bring action against said bond for the
recovery of the penalty thereof to the same extent and with equal rights as
though such aggrieved person had been named as the obligee in the bond.
§ 6-118-7 MASTER ELECTRICIAN’S AND PLUMBER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall install, alter, maintain or repair any electrical
conductors or equipment as a master or journeyman in either trade without first
obtaining a license as provided in this code.
   (B)   No corporation, partnership or business shall engage in the
installation or servicing, alteration or repairing of any electrical conductors
or equipment without an appropriate master as an active officer of the
corporation or an active member of the firm, and the name and address of such
master and the name and address of the corporation or firm shall be certified
and registered with the City Clerk.
§ 6-118-8 FEES FOR MASTER AND JOURNEYMAN PLUMBERS.
   (A)   Fees for master and journeyman plumbers shall be as follows:
      (1)   Master plumber: $100; renewal fee: $40; and
      (2)   Journeyman plumber: $10.
   (B)   Fees shall be due and payable on July 1 of each year commencing the
year of 1981 and each following year thereafter.
§ 6-118-9 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No master shall employ or hire anyone to work at, or permit any person to
work at, installing, servicing, altering or repairing any electrical conductors
or equipment, unless that person be a licensed journeyman, or that person be an
apprentice performing such work under the personal supervision of the licensed
journeyman or master.
ARTICLE 2. PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS
§ 6-201 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code,
2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Plumbing Code of the city for regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the office of
the City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 2-5-2013)
§ 6-202 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES TO PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   The following sections are hereby revised as follows.
      (1)   Section P-100.1 (page 5, second line). Insert “the City of
Lexington.”
      (2)   Section P-104.1 (page 6, second line). Insert “April 11, 1989.”
      (3)   Section P-114.2 (page 12, third line). Insert “as provided in the
city’s code of ordinances.”
      (4)   Section P-117.4 (page 13, fifth, sixth and seventh lines). Insert
“offense and punished as provided in the city’s code of ordinances.”
      (5)   Section P-118.2 (page 14, fifth line). Insert “fine as provided in
the city’s code of ordinances.”
      (6)   Section P-303.2 (page 32, third line). Insert “a distance in feet
as determined by the city code.”
      (7)   Section P-308.3 (page 33, second and third lines). Insert “a depth
in feet as determined by the City Inspector.”
   (B)   The BOCA Building Code shall be amended to require that all water and
sewer lines be installed with schedule 40 PVC or comparable lines.
§ 6-203 PLUMBING PERMITS REQUIRED; CITY CLERK TO ISSUE.
   No plumbing work shall be undertaken without a permit from the City Clerk
after review and approval of the City Inspector and City Manager; therefore,
applications for plumbing permits shall be made to the City Clerk. The
applicant shall provide such plans, specifications and other data as may be
reasonably required. The fee to be charged for a plumbing permit shall be as is
set from time to time by the City Council. Currently, the fee is $25. This fee
is included in the cost of the building permit for new residential
construction.
(Ord. 2003-06, passed 12-2-2003)
§ 6-204 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade or
occupation of a plumbing contractor (otherwise known as a master plumber), or
of a journeyman plumber, or of a plumber’s apprentice, in this city unless he
or she is registered with the City Clerk and has a current and valid
certificate of registration issued by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Only persons who have current and valid licenses as plumbing
contractors or as journeyman plumbers issued by the State Commissioner of
Health may register as such with the City Clerk. Only persons who have current
and valid certificates of registration as plumber’s apprentices issued by the
State Commissioner of Health may register as such with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Upon application to the City Clerk and the payment of the required
fees to the City Clerk’s office, the City Clerk shall register such applicants
and issue to them certificates of registration. The city certificates shall not
be valid after the termination or expiration of the state licenses or
certificates. Registration certificates of plumbing contractors and journeyman
plumbers issued by the city shall expire on June 30 of each year. The city
certificates of plumber’s apprentices shall expire when their state
certificates expire.
   (D)   A qualified person may register as a plumbing contractor, a journeyman
plumber or a plumber’s apprentice, in the same manner as in the original
instance and upon payment of the required fees.
§ 6-205 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   The City Council, upon at least ten days’ notice and adequate opportunity
for a public hearing, may revoke the city registration of any plumbing
contractor or journeyman plumber for violating any provision of the ordinances
or regulations of the city relating to the installation of plumbing or for any
other cause specified in the State Plumbing License Law.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 59 O.S. § 1010
ARTICLE 3. ELECTRICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
§ 6-301 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   For the purpose of the safeguarding of persons and of buildings and
their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light,
heat, power, radio, signaling and for other purposes; and providing for basic
minimum provisions considered necessary for safety, to protect the general
health and welfare of the public, the Electrical Code known as the National
Electrical Code, latest edition thereof, with all amendments, additions and
deletions made, of which at least one copy will be filed in the office of the
City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated hereby as fully as if set out at length
herein.
   (B)   From and after April 11, 1989, the provisions of the code and this
article shall be controlling in the use of electricity within the corporate
limits of the city.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 59 O.S. §§ 1680 through 1696
§ 6-302 MODIFICATIONS OF NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE.
   (A)   The City Inspector, who shall serve as the Electrical Inspector unless
another person is designated by the City Council, may modify any of the
provisions of the National Electric Code upon the written application of the
owner or the master electrician when:
      (1)   There are practical difficulties in the strict enforcement or
compliance with the letter of the National Electric Code;
      (2)   The spirit of the National Electric Code is nonetheless observed;
      (3)   Public safety is still secured; and
      (4)   The Building Official concurs.
   (B)   Any particular modification which is granted or allowed shall be
reduced to writing over the signature of the Chief Electrical Inspector, shall
be maintained in the Public Works Department and shall be furnished to the
applicant.
   (C)   The National Electric Code shall be amended to require that copper
wire of proper rating be used on all repair, remodel or new wiring, both
commercial and residential.
§ 6-303 PURPOSE OF ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS.
   The purpose of this article is the practical safeguarding of persons and
buildings and their contents from electrical hazards arising from the improper
use of electricity for light, heat, power and for other purposes.
§ 6-304 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this article shall apply to all installations of,
and work done on electrical conductors, fittings, electronic devices and signs,
within or on public and private buildings and premises with exceptions as
provided herein.
   (B)   On all installations of electrical conductors or equipment hereafter
made, and all existing installations which are altered, or for which the use
has changed, all work shall be done in a manner that will conform with the
requirements for sufficient and safe electrical structure and systems under
this article and the Electrical Code adopted by the city.
   (C)   Repair and maintenance work shall be such that if any “electrical
conductor or equipment” is removed and later replaced, same shall be replaced
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (D)   The words “this article” means this article and the National
Electrical Code adopted in this article.
§ 6-305 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SAFE WORK.
   The electrical regulations of this article and the Electrical Code shall not
be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any
person, firm or corporation owning, operating or installing electrical
conductors, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus or equipment for damages
to persons or buildings caused by any defect therein by reason of the
inspection herein authorized or the certificate of approved inspection issued
by the Electrical Inspector as herein provided; nor shall the city be held
liable for any damages by reason of the enforcement of this article.
§ 6-306 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector, whose duty it
shall be to inspect all electrical installations and to issue a certificate of
compliance upon completion of each inspection, along with such other duties as
set forth in this article. The Inspector shall have at least five years of
active experience in the electrical industry and shall have no interest, direct
or indirect, in any firm or corporation engaged in the electrical industry. The
Electrical Inspector may hold more than one office in the city and his or her
salary, if any, shall be as determined by resolution or motion of the City
Council. The Electrical Inspector shall possess such other additional
qualifications, abilities and knowledge as, in the opinion of the City Council,
are required to perform the duties, and shall hold office at the discretion of
the City Council.
§ 6-307 POWERS OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   The Electrical Inspector shall have the power:
   (A)   To order the electric service disconnected where improper or defective
wiring exists or where electrical construction or equipment has been installed
without a permit as required herein; and
   (B)   To order compliance with provisions of this article where a change of
occupancy occurs in a building which required changes or alterations to
existing wiring.
§ 6-308 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make connections from
a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, devices or equipment on
an installation for which a permit is required as set forth in this article
until a certificate of approval has been issued by the Electrical Inspector
authorizing such connection and the use of such wiring.
§ 6-309 ROUGH INSPECTION.
   When the rough wiring or installation work is completed on any premises, the
person responsible therefor shall notify the Electrical Inspector that the job
is ready for inspection, giving proper identification of the work and address.
The Electrical Inspector shall then make an inspection of the electric
installation within 24 hours from the time of notification, exclusive of
Sundays and legal holidays. If the wiring or installation work has been
installed in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article, the City
Electrical Inspector shall sign the inspection card, noting thereon the date of
approval of the work. More than one rough inspection may be made without charge
when the progress of construction requires such inspection.
§ 6-310 FAULTY WORK.
   If the electric wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment is found to
be faulty, incorrectly or defectively installed, the Electrical Inspector shall
notify the responsible person who installed such work of the changes necessary
to be made in order that the work may conform to this article.
§ 6-311 RECTIFICATION OF FAULTY WORK.
   The electrician shall make the changes ordered and shall proceed with the
work until the same is completed. Upon completion thereof and payment of the
reinspection fee, he or she shall notify the Electrical Inspector to the effect
that faulty work has been corrected. The latter shall then cause the
reinspection to be made, and if the work is found to comply with this article,
he or she shall sign the inspection card noting thereon the date of approval of
the work. If the Electrical Inspector shall again find the work incorrectly
installed, he or she shall notify the responsible electrician of the necessary
changes and shall collect an additional reinspection fee. If the responsible
electrician does not make the required changes within a reasonable time, the
Electrical Inspector shall refuse to issue to any such person any further
permits until the work in question is corrected and approved.
§ 6-312 FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   Upon the completion of all electrical wiring or installation of
fixtures or equipment in any building or on any premises, the electrician in
charge shall notify the Electrical Inspector, giving the address.
   (B)   The Inspector shall then make an inspection within 24 hours from time
of receipt of the notice (except Sundays and legal holidays).
   (C)   If any faulty wiring or equipment is found, the electrician in charge
shall be notified of the changes to be made in order that such work shall
conform to this article.
§ 6-313 WORK TO BE LEFT OPEN UNTIL INSPECTION COMPLETED.
   It is unlawful for any person to cover or cause to be covered any part of a
wiring installation with flooring, lath, wallboard or other material until the
Electrical Inspector shall have approved the wiring installation in part or as
a whole.
§ 6-314 FEES FOR REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICIANS.
   (A)   (1)   The fees for a certificate of registration to qualified persons
of each class shall accompany the application for registration. The
registration fee shall be paid to the Electrical Inspector or authorized city
employee before the issuance of a certificate of registration and only after
the person has been approved by the State Electrical Board.
      (2)   Fees for master electrician or contractor, journeyman electrician
or electrical apprentice shall be as follows.
 
Electrical apprentice            $10
   Renewal                    $5
Journeyman electrician           $10
   Renewal                    $10
Master electrician or contractor $100
   Renewal                    $40
 
   (B)   Fees are due and payable on July 1 of each year commencing on the year
of 1991 and each following year thereafter.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 59 O.S. §§ 1680 through 1696
§ 6-315 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   The City Council, upon at least ten days’ notice and adequate opportunity
for a public hearing, may revoke the city registration of any electrical
contractor or journeyman electrician for violating any provision of the
ordinances or regulations of the city relating to electrical work, or for any
other cause specified in the State Electrical License Law.
§ 6-316 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; EXPIRATION.
   A certificate of registration shall not be transferable and shall be issued
to the person examined by the Board and named on the certificate and known as
the holder of the certificate. A certificate of registration shall expire June
30 of each year and new application shall be required for reinstatement if the
required annual renewal fee is not paid within 30 days from the expiration
date.
§ 6-317 REGISTRATION CARD; RENEWAL, REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   A registration certificate or card of identification shall be issued
to each electrician. Each such registration certificate or card shall expire at
12:00 a.m. of June 30 of each year and a new card shall be issued each year
upon receipt of the annual renewal fee.
   (B)   Registration certificates or cards lost or destroyed during the year
for which they are issued shall be reissued by the city, provided satisfactory
evidence has been presented by the registrant of such loss or destruction, and
provided the registrant pays the City Clerk the sum of $1.
§ 6-318 DISPLAY OF EVIDENCE OF REGISTRATION.
   It is required that all registrants fittingly display their certificates of
registration and that they display their registration cards upon request to the
Electrical Inspector.
§ 6-319 CLASSIFICATION OF REGISTRATION FOR ELECTRICIANS.
   There shall be three classes of electrical registration which shall be known
as follows:
   (A)   Electrical contractor;
   (B)   Journeyman electrician; and
   (C)   Electrical apprentice.
§ 6-320 METHOD OF REGISTRATION; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   To secure a registration as a qualified and competent electrician in
any of the classes set out in this article, an application shall be made in
writing and addressed to the Council. The application shall show the
applicant’s name and address and such other information as may be prescribed by
the Council.
   (B)   In addition to submitting a properly executed application, the
applicant, if of contractual status as specified under classification of
registration, shall file with the application an affidavit setting forth the
name of the person who is the owner of the business, his or her address or the
place of business; if the business is a firm, partnership or corporation, the
names of the officers who own or operate the business, their addresses, the
address of the business and the name and address of the person who shall be
responsible for the conduct and in charge of the business for all work under
this article.
   (C)   If the applicant intends to conduct the business and complete the work
himself or herself of installing, repairing and the maintaining of the
electrical conductors and equipment, he or she shall file with the application
an affidavit setting forth that such applicant is a journeyman electrician and
has a license from the state.
   (D)   Applicants for a certificate of registration as an electrical
contractor shall file with the application an affidavit setting forth that such
applicant is not less than 21 years of age, and has had experience in the
installation, alteration and repair of electrical equipment and conductors, and
also has an electrical contractor’s license from the state.
   (E)   An applicant for registration as an electrical apprentice shall make
in the application affidavit a statement that:
      (1)   The applicant is registered as an electrical apprentice with the
state and under the provisions of this article;
      (2)   The applicant shall perform all installation, alteration and repair
of electrical wiring, fixtures and equipment in accordance with this article;
and
      (3)   The applicant will not independently engage in the business of
contracting such electrical work unless he or she is also a registered
electrical contractor.
§ 6-321 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL WORK.
   (A)   No person shall install or cause to be installed, or to permit any
person to install “electrical wiring” or to make any alterations, additions or
changes within the scope of this Electrical Code, including any new circuits
installed or to be installed from existing or newly installed distribution
points, panels or breakers, or any change of service or meter loops, without
first procuring a permit therefor issued by the Electrical Inspector.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued except to a licensed electrical contractor,
or the building owner of an existing building or buildings, on which such
electrical wiring work is to be performed. Permits are required for maintenance
work or for repair work where wiring is altered or rearranged.
   (C)   Prior to commencement of any electrical wiring installation, the
electrical contractor or the building owner shall call the building inspection
and permits office or he or she or his or her authorized employee shall visit
the office and obtain a permit listing the name of the owner and contractor,
job name and address, building permit number and scope of electrical wiring.
When the permit is issued by telephone, the contractor’s copy shall be mailed
to his or her business address. The permit covers only that work listed
thereon; any additions or changes shall be reported to the inspection and
permits office and addition to the permits taken prior to requesting final
inspection.
   (D)   The Electrical Inspector may, if he or she deems it necessary, require
or demand from the electrical contractor a set of plans and specifications of
any job, in order that the Electrical Inspector may check same to determine if
the plans and specifications comply with this article. All applications for
permits on work involving higher than 600 volts, or services or circuits of
1,000 amperes or over, shall be submitted together with detailed plans and
specifications. The Electrical Inspector must render a decision on such plans
and specifications within three working days after receiving same.
   (E)   When a building or portion of a building containing electric wiring is
moved from its foundation, the owner shall have the electric wiring and
equipment in the building inspected and repaired where necessary, including
proper grounding. The electrical contractor shall obtain a wiring permit and
request inspections.
   (F)   The fee to be charged for an electrical permit shall be as is set from
time to time by the City Council. Currently, the fee is $25. This fee may be
included in the building permit fee for new residential construction (reference
§ 6-106 of this chapter).
(Ord. 2003-06, passed 12-2-2003)
§ 6-322 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
   (A)   Minor repairs, consisting of repairing or replacing outlets or minor
working parts of electrical fixtures;
   (B)   Maintenance work for state and federal institutions;
   (C)   The construction, installation, maintenance, repair and renovation by
a public utility regulated by the corporation commission;
   (D)   Public service corporations, telephone and telegraph companies, rural
electric associations or municipal utilities; or
   (E)   The construction, installation, maintenance, repair and renovation of
telephone equipment or computer systems by a person, firm or corporation
engaged in the telecommunications or information systems industry when such
activities involve work exclusively for communication of data, voice or for
other signaling purposes; except fire alarm systems, security systems and
environmental control systems that are not an integral part of a
telecommunications system.
§ 6-323 PERMITS REFUSED.
   The Electrical Inspector may refuse to issue a permit for the installation
of electric wiring as herein provided, or for any additions or extensions to
any electric wiring in or on any building where, in his or her judgment, the
wiring done or proposed to be done is unsafe or not in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 6-324 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF INSPECTOR OR ELECTRICAL BOARD.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an Inspector or the Board exercising his, her
or their power and authority pursuant to this article must, before instituting
suit, appeal to the City Council.
   (B)   Any such appeal shall be made within ten days after the decision of
the Inspector or the Electrical Board, and shall be in writing, stating the
reason for the appeal. The date and place of all hearings shall be fixed by the
City Council and all interested parties shall be given written notice of the
hearings.
   (C)   The City Council may either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of
the Inspector or Electrical Board and shall issue a written decision within ten
days of the date of the final hearing.
ARTICLE 4. BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
§ 6-401 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code,
2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Building Code of the city for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of
the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 2-5-2013)
§ 6-402 ADDITIONS AND CHANGES TO BUILDING CODE.
   The following sections of the BOCA Basic Building Code are hereby revised.
   (A)   Section 100.1, insert: “City of Lexington.”
   (B)   Section 114.3.1, insert: “The fee schedule shall be as may be set or
amended by ordinance or resolution.”
   (C)   Section 117.4, insert: “Offense, punishable by fine and imprisonment
as provided in the city code of ordinances.”
   (D)   Section 118.2, insert: “fine as provided in the city code of
ordinances.”
   (E)   Section 123.3, insert: “as set by the City Council.”
   (F)   Section 501.2, insert: “the boundaries of the fire limits as provided
in the city code of ordinances.”
   (G)   Sections 1807.2.1 and 1807.22, insert: “a number of feet to be
determined by the City Council,” in both locations.
   (H)   Section 1906.1, insert: “Amount as set by the City Council.”
§ 6-403 VARIANCE FROM BUILDING CODE AND ORDINANCES.
   Under special circumstances, in order to prevent undue hardship on a
property owner or owners, provisions of the Building Code and ordinances may be
varied for a particular building by a majority vote of the City Council. No
variance shall be permitted when it would be detrimental to the public welfare.
§ 6-404 DISTANCE OF DWELLINGS FROM SIDE LINES.
   Dwelling houses shall be of such materials and of such design, arrangement
and appearance as not substantially to detract from the value and enjoyment of
adjoining property, whether such adjoining property is improved or not.
§ 6-405 BUILDING PERMITS.
   The fees to be paid to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of a building
permit are as set forth in §
6-106 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-06, passed 12-2-2003)
ARTICLE 5. MECHANICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
§ 6-501 POLICY OF CITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to protect and promote
the safety and welfare of the citizens of this city by regulating the
construction, installation and maintenance of heat or refrigeration producing
appliances, chimneys, vents and gas piping.
§ 6-502 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code,
2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Mechanical Code of the city for regulating and governing the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the office
of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-08, passed 2-5-2013)
§ 6-503 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   The owner and general contractor or builder of any residential or commercial
building or buildings situated within the limits of the city, the construction
and remodeling of which is subsequent to the enactment of this article, shall
each be responsible for the construction and installation of heat or
refrigeration producing appliances, chimneys and vents and gas piping in the
building or buildings in the manner as required by this article. Further, any
person who installs or constructs a heat or refrigeration producing appliance,
chimney, vent or gas piping within the limits of the city shall, likewise, be
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 6-504 STANDARDS ADOPTED; STANDARD MECHANICAL CODE.
   The standards, specifications and requirements for the installation and/or
construction of heat and refrigeration producing appliances, chimneys and
vents, as provided in the Building Code, the latest edition thereof and any
amendments or revisions thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of
the ordinances of the city.
§ 6-505 UNSAFE APPLIANCES.
   All unsafe heat or refrigeration producing appliances shall be made safe or
removed. All unsafe chimneys, vents and gas piping shall be made safe or taken
down.
§ 6-506 RECORDS.
   The City Clerk shall have available at all times for inspection and copying
a true and correct copy of the latest edition of the Building Code and shall
furnish, upon request, a copy of any portion or all of same upon payment of a
charge determined by the City Clerk sufficient to cover the expense of the
copying.
§ 6-507 ENFORCEMENT, RIGHT TO ENTER.
   (A)   The City Inspector or other officer designated by the Council, along
with the Police Department, shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
article.
   (B)   The City Inspector shall be initially responsible for determining
whether any heat or refrigeration appliance, chimney, vent or gas piping is
unsafe. With respect to all heat and refrigeration producing appliances,
chimneys, vents and gas piping installed or constructed prior to the enactment
of this article, the Fire Chief shall use the requirements of the standards of
the Building Code as much as practicable under the particular circumstances of
each instance. The installation, construction and maintenance of all heat
producing appliances, chimneys, vents and gas piping subsequent to the
enactment of this article shall be governed by the Standard Mechanical Code.
   (C)   In the event the City Inspector or the designee shall have good cause
to believe a violation of this chapter exists as to any building, he or she
shall be entitled to enter the building for the purpose of inspection thereof.
§ 6-508 REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR GAS FITTERS.
   No person shall install, service, alter or repair on consumer premises any
gas equipment, pipes or lines as a master or journeyman in the plumbing or
mechanical trade without being registered under this article.
§ 6-509 MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in mechanical contracting
business as defined in 59 O.S. §§ 1850.1 et seq., in this city unless he or she
is registered with the City Clerk and has a current and valid certificate of
registration issued by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Only persons who have current and valid licenses as mechanical
contractors or as journeyman issued by the State Commissioner of Health may
register as such with the City Clerk. Only persons who have current and valid
certificates of registration as contractor’s apprentices may register as such
with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Upon application to the City Clerk and payment of the required fees,
the City Clerk shall register such applicants and issue to them certificates of
registration. The city certificate shall not be valid after the termination or
expiration of the state licenses or certificates. Registration certificates of
mechanical contractors and journeyman contractors issued by the city shall
expire on June 30 of each year. The city certificates of apprentices shall
expire when their state certificate expires as per the terms of 59 O.S. §
1850.9(B).
   (D)   The annual registration fee shall be as follows.
 
Apprentice            $10
Journeyman            $10
   Renewal         $10
Mechanical contractor $100
   Renewal         $40
 
   (E)   The City Council, upon at least ten days’ notice and adequate
opportunity for a public hearing, may revoke the city registration of any
mechanical contractor or journeyman for violating any provisions of the
ordinances or regulations of the city or for any other cause specified in the
State Mechanical Licensing Act, being 59 O.S. §§ 1850.1 through 1860.
§ 6-510 WORK TO BE LEFT OPEN UNTIL INSPECTION COMPLETED.
   It is unlawful for any person to cover or cause to be covered any part of a
mechanical installation with flooring, lath, wallboard or other material until
the City Inspector shall have approved the installation in part or as a whole.
§ 6-511 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; EXPIRATION.
   A certificate of registration shall not be transferable and shall be issued
to the person examined by the Board and named on the certificate and known as
the holder of the certificate. A certificate of registration shall expire June
30 of each year and new application shall be required for reinstatement if the
required annual renewal fee is not paid within 30 days from the expiration
date.
§ 6-512 REGISTRATION CARD; RENEWAL, REPLACEMENT.
   A registration certificate or card of identification shall be issued to each
mechanical contractor. Each such registration certificate or card shall expire
at 12:00 a.m. on June 30 of each year, and a new card shall be issued each year
upon receipt of the annual renewal fee.
§ 6-513 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR MECHANICAL WORK.
   (A)   No person shall install or cause to be installed, or to permit any
person to construct or install heat or refrigeration producing appliances,
chimneys, vents or gas piping or to make any alterations, additions or changes
within the scope of this Mechanical Code, without first procuring a permit
therefor issued by the City Inspector.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued except to a licensed mechanical contractor,
or the building owner of an existing building or buildings, on which such work
is to be performed. Permits are required for maintenance work or for repair
work where a heat or refrigeration system, chimney, vent or gas piping is
altered or rearranged.
   (C)   Prior to commencement of any mechanical installation, the mechanical
contractor or the building owner shall call the building inspection and permits
office, or he or she or his or her authorized employee shall visit the office
and obtain a permit listing the name of the owner and contractor, job name and
address, building permit number and scope of the work. When the permit is
issued by telephone, the contractor’s copy shall be mailed to his or her
business address. The permit covers only that work listed thereon; any
additions or changes shall be reported to the inspection and permits office and
addition to the permits taken prior to requesting final inspection.
   (D)   The City Inspector may, if he or she deems it necessary, require or
demand from the mechanical contractor a set of plans and specifications of any
job, in order that the Electrical Inspector may check same to determine if the
plans and specifications comply with this article. The City Inspector must
render a decision on such plans and specifications within three working days
after receiving same.
   (E)   The fee to be charged for an electrical permit shall be as is set from
time to time by the City Council. Currently the fee is $25. This fee may be
included in the fee for new residential construction (reference §
6-106 of this chapter).
(Ord. 2003-06, passed 12-2-2003)
§ 6-514 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall install, replace or repair any heat or refrigeration
producing appliance, chimney, vent or gas piping unless such person is
registered under this article or is registered as a plumbing contractor or
journeyman plumber pursuant to this article.
   (B)   The Mechanical Code shall not apply to:
      (1)   A person who is the property owner of record, or his or her
authorized representative, when performing minor repair which shall include,
but not be limited to, cleaning, adjusting, calibrating and repair of
mechanical system parts and the replacement of fuses and room thermostats and
other minor repairs which shall not include any repair which could violate the
safe operation of the equipment;
      (2)   The installation of portable, self-contained, ductless air
conditioners or heaters;
      (3)   The setting or connecting of detached air conditioning units which
utilize flexible ductwork on a manufactured home. The term “manufactured home”
shall have the same definition as such term is defined in 47 O.S. § 1102; or
      (4)   The installation of boilers which are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to the provisions of 40 O.S. §§ 141.1
through 141.18.
   (C)   The registration requirements of the Mechanical Code shall not apply
to public utilities, public service corporations, rural electric associations
or municipal utilities and their subsidiaries during work on their own
facilities or during the performance of energy audits, operational inspections,
minor maintenance or minor repairs for their customers or on their own
equipment.
§ 6-515 PERMITS REFUSED.
   The Electrical Inspector may refuse to issue a permit for the installation
of a heat or refrigeration producing appliance, chimney, vent or gas piping as
herein provided, or for any additions or extensions in or on any building
where, in his or her judgment, the work done or proposed to be done is unsafe
or not in accordance with the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE 6. RESIDENTIAL CODE
§ 6-601 RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code,
2009 edition (2009 IRC), as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the minimum Residential Code of the city for regulating
and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-
family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Residential Code on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-5-2013)
ARTICLE 7. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
§ 6-701 EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building
Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the city for regulating and
governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation
of existing buildings, including historic buildings, in the city; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing
Building Code on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-05, passed 2-5-2013)
ARTICLE 8. FUEL GAS CODE
§ 6-801 FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code,
2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the city for regulating and governing fuel gas
systems and gas fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 2-5-2013)
ARTICLE 9. FIRE CODE
§ 6-901 FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2009
edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the city for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the
City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this article.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 2-5-2013)
ARTICLE 10. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 6-1001 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city for
regulating and governing the condition and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures by providing standards to ensure that structures are
safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use and for condemnation and
demolition within the city as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-7-2017)
CHAPTER 7: BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS
Section
Article 1. Itinerant Occupations, Peddlers and Solicitors
7-101 Definitions
7-102 Permit required
7-103 Exclusions
7-104 Application procedure
7-105 Investigation of application; issuance
7-106 Permit fees
7-107 Application denial
7-108 Revocation of permit
7-109 Hours of solicitation; term of license; expiration and renewal
7-110 Transfer prohibited
7-111 Exhibition of permit
Article 2. General Provisions
7-201 Occupation licenses
7-202 Fortune telling
7-203 Shooting galleries
7-204 Short weights and measures prohibited
7-205 Coin machines
7-206 Garage and yard sales
Article 3. Penalty
7-301 Penalty
Article 4. Marijuana Establishments
7-401 Definitions
7-402 Business license requirements
7-403 Location restrictions on retail marijuana establishments
7-404 Conditions of operation for retail marijuana establishments
7-405 Commercial marijuana growing facilities
7-406 Wholesale marijuana facilities
7-407 Marijuana storage facilities
7-408 Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use
7-409 License inspections and other requirements
Article 5. Short-Term Rentals
7-501 Purpose
7-502 General conditions
7-503 License application requirements
7-504 Issuance of license requirements
7-505 Covenants; deed restrictions; overlay requirements
7-506 Fees
7-507 Information required to be posted and provided to guests
7-508 License renewal
7-509 License denial, suspension or revocation
ARTICLE 1. ITINERANT OCCUPATIONS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 7-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ITINERANT OCCUPATIONS, TRADES, BUSINESSES OR SOLICITATIONS. Occupations,
trades, businesses and solicitations having no permanent warehouse, building,
structure, residence or place of business within the city, at which a permanent
business is carried on throughout the year or usual production season in good
faith, and not for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, and
shall include occupations, trades, businesses and solicitations housed in
temporary stands or quarters or in permanent quarters occupied pursuant to any
temporary arrangement, or carried on by means of house to house solicitation,
or upon the streets and sidewalks of the city; provided, however, that no
occupation, trade or business engaged in by charitable organizations or drives
and solicitations for funds or donations carried on and sponsored by any
permanent civic, charitable, educational or religious organization, association
or club, having a membership duly enrolled in accordance with the rules,
regulations and bylaws of said organization, association or club and majority
of said members being residents of the city or of the county, shall be
considered an itinerant occupation, trade, business or solicitation.
   PEDDLER. Includes the words “hawker” and “huckster.” Any person, who travels
by foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house,
or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or
merchandise of whatsoever nature, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for
sale from any vehicle or conveyance or on any public street or thoroughfare.
   PERSON. Any individual, and shall not extend and be applied to firms,
corporations or any other organizations.
   SOLICITOR or CANVASSER. A person who travels by foot or by any type of
conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for the same of goods, wares, merchandise
or personal property of whatsoever nature for future delivery, or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-102 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any kind of itinerant
business or in the business of peddler, solicitor or canvasser within the
corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor, as is
provided in this chapter, and paying the prescribed fees to cover the
reasonable costs of investigation and processing of the application.
   (B)   The application fee shall be paid to the City Clerk when the
application is filed and shall not be returnable under any circumstances.
   (C)   The City Council, by resolution, may change the fee to amounts not to
exceed the reasonable costs of investigation and enforcement under this
article.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-103 EXCLUSIONS.
   The following persons are hereby excluded from the application of the
provisions of this article:
   (A)   Merchants having regular places of business in the city and their
employees in taking orders at the houses of their customers for goods held in
stock at the places of business, and in delivering the goods so ordered. The
exclusion shall not apply to a person who, for himself or herself, or for
another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, tent, railroad box cars, boat, hotel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any other place within the city, for the purpose of
exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery;
   (B)   Persons selling newspapers or flowers; and
   (C)   Persons selling personally grown direct farm-to-table seasonal
produce.
§ 7-104 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Applicants for a permit hereunder shall file with the City Clerk a
sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall give the following information:
      (1)   Full name, description, birth date and Social Security number of
each individual applicant;
      (2)   Address, both legal and local;
      (3)   Nature of business and kinds of goods to be sold, and if applicant
is a farmer or truck gardener, whether the goods are produced by him or her on
lands he or she owns, cultivates and controls;
      (4)   If employed by another, the name and address of applicant’s
employer, together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact
relationship;
      (5)   Length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   Description and license number or other identification of any
vehicle to be used; and
      (7)   A statement that the applicant will collect and remit state and
local sales taxes to the city, if required by state law and municipal
ordinance.
   (C)   Each individual applicant shall also submit along with his or her
application a name-based background check received from the State Bureau of
Investigation within the last 12 months.
   (D)   An application fee of $10 shall also accompany every application,
including renewals.
§ 7-105 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or license, the City Clerk
shall refer one copy to the Chief of Police who shall note thereon any record
concerning the applicant which may appear from the official records in his or
her charge and return the same promptly to the City Clerk.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause other investigation or inquiry to be made
concerning the applicant as he or she may deem necessary to determine the
character and business responsibility of the applicant and whether his or her
application is in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (C)   If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the
application is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the
City Clerk, upon payment of the prescribed permit fee listed in §
7-106 below, shall issue the permit together with any badge, tag or license
plates properly an accompaniment thereto.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-106 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Permits issued under this article may be for a single day, for three
days, for 30 days or for one year, and the fees prescribed below must be
remitted to the City Clerk prior to issuance of any such permit.
 
Permit Period Fee
One day       $20
Three days    $35
30 days       $100
One year      $500
 
   (B)   The City Council may change the fee schedule in this section by
resolution.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-107 APPLICATION DENIAL.
   (A)   It as a result of the investigation provided for in this section, the
applicant’s character or business responsibility are found to be untrue, then
the Chief of Police or the City Clerk shall endorse on the application his or
her disapproval thereof and the reasons for the same, and the City Clerk shall
then notify the applicant that his or her application has been disapproved and
that no license will be issued.
   (B)   Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the
City Clerk in the denial of a permit or license as provided in division (A)
above shall have the right to appeal therefrom to the City Council. The appeal
shall be filed, in writing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice
of the action complained of has been given to the applicant personally or
mailed, postage prepaid, to his or her last known address. The City Council
shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal and notice of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant at least five days prior to the date
set for hearing. The decision and order of the City Council on the appeal shall
be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-108 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked by the City Clerk after notice has been served on the applicant for
any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his or her itinerant business or business as solicitor or as
canvasser;
      (3)   Any violation of this article;
      (4)   Conviction of any felony involving moral turpitude during the
licensure period; or
      (5)   Conducting the business of an itinerant business or of soliciting
or of canvassing in an unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
   (B)   Notice of the revocation of a license shall be in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place for a
hearing where the decision to revoke may be appealed to the City Council. The
notice shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in §
7-107(B) for notice of hearing on approval of an application for a license or
permit.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-109 HOURS OF SOLICITATION; TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   No solicitations shall be conducted door-to-door, except between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. each day.
   (B)   Permits issued under this article may be for a single day, for three
days, for 30 days, or for one year and the same will automatically expire at
the conclusion of the permitted period unless earlier revoked as provided
above. Upon expiration or revocation, the permit shall be surrendered to the
City Clerk and become the property of the city. The holder of any expiring
permit under this chapter desiring a new license shall file a written
application for renewal with the City Clerk, giving all the information
required by §
7-104 of this article. The fee shall be paid to the City Clerk when the
application is filed and shall not be returnable under any circumstances.
   (C)   The Chief of Police and the City Clerk, in determining whether or not
to renew a license, shall be guided by the provisions relating to issuance as
set forth in §
7-105.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-110 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 7-111 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   All persons operating itinerant businesses, peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers are required to exhibit and display their permit or authorized
evidence thereof at all times whenever they are engaged in the operation of an
itinerant business or in the business of peddling, canvassing or soliciting.
(Ord. 23-010, passed 11-7-2023)
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-201 OCCUPATION LICENSES.
   (A)   Every person, firm, association or corporation who engages in,
exercises or pursues a business, profession, trade, occupation or privilege for
which a license is required, at or from more than one place, or who engages in,
exercises or pursues more than one such business, profession, trade, occupation
or privilege, shall pay the fee and secure a separate license for each such
place and/or for each such business, profession, trade, occupation or
privilege.
   (B)   Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation or privilege shall conspicuously display the
license at all times in some part of his or her place of business or activity
where a person who has entered the place may readily see it; or, if he or she
has no particular place of business or activity, shall carry the license and
shall display it to any person who requests to see it. Provided that, in lieu
of the above manner of such license, when licenses are required for coin-
operated music or amusement devices, vending machines and similar devices and
equipment, the license may be displayed on the device or vending machine.
   (C)   Assignment or transfer of licenses shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Whenever any license to engage in, exercise or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation or privilege, has been lost or destroyed without
any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, the City Clerk, on application
shall issue a duplicate license for the unexpired time. Before the duplicate is
issued, the holder shall make and file with said Clerk an affidavit that the
license has not been transferred, that it has been lost or destroyed without
any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, and that, if believed lost, he or
she has made a diligent search for it and has not been able to find it. The fee
for every duplicate license issued, payable to said Clerk, shall be $1.
   (E)   Any license issued to any person, firm, association or corporation to
engage in, exercise or pursue any business, profession, trade, occupation or
privilege may be revoked by the City Council after adequate opportunity for a
hearing for any one of the following reasons:
      (1)   The licensee is engaging in, exercising or pursuing the business,
profession, trade, occupation or privilege in such a manner that he or she has
created or is creating a public nuisance; or
      (2)   Serious or repeated violation of the law or ordinances. Provided,
that valid licenses may be revoked only when the business, profession, trade,
occupation or privilege is one which the City Council has the power to prohibit
because of its nature or because of the manner in which it is engaged in,
exercised or pursued.
   (F)   (1)   Annual licenses shall expire on June 30 of the year for which
they are issued.
      (2)   When an annual license is issued after June 30 for the remainder of
the year, to a person, firm, association or corporation just beginning to
engage in, exercise or pursue a business, profession, trade, occupation or
privilege, the tax collected shall be a fractional part of the annual tax equal
to the fraction of the year remaining, with $5 being the minimum tax.
§ 7-202 FORTUNE TELLING.
   It is unlawful for any person pretending or professing to tell fortunes by
the use of any subtle craft, means or device whatsoever, either by palmistry,
clairvoyance or otherwise plying his or her trade, art or profession, to make
any charge therefor, either directly or indirectly, or to receive any gift,
donation or subscription by any means whatsoever for the same.
§ 7-203 SHOOTING GALLERIES.
   Every shooting gallery constructed, established, set up or operated
hereafter shall be constructed, established, set up and operated in accordance
with the standards, specifications and requirements of state law, if any. No
shooting gallery shall be operated until a license has been secured therefor in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 7-204 SHORT WEIGHTS AND MEASURES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer for sale
any food, fuel, clothing or any other commodity which does not weigh or measure
fully as much, according to standard weights or measures of the state, as the
weight or measure for which it is offered for sale.
§ 7-205 COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, a COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE
shall mean and include any and all mechanical devices which, upon the payment
of insertion of a coin, token or similar object, causes or permits, or is the
incentive for the propelling or motivating of any ball, marble or gadget that
produces or creates or makes possible the production or creation of a game of
skill, amusement, entertainment or test of strength.
   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation who owns or operates in or on his or
her place of business or other place any coin-operated device shall pay as an
annual license tax to the city the sum of $20 per machine and shall keep a
receipt therefor, prominently posted in the immediate vicinity of said coin-
operated device.
   (C)   The operation of any coin-operated device without the payment of the
license fee as herein provided and/or the displaying of a receipt therefor, as
herein provided, shall constitute an offense, and each day’s continuance
thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Upon the conviction of any person, firm or corporation of a third
offense as defined by this article, the license for the operation of such
device shall be immediately and automatically canceled and revoked, and such
owner or operator thereof may not be eligible or entitled to apply for or
receive a new or other additional license upon that or any other such machine
for a period of three years from the date of such cancellation or revocation.
§ 7-206 GARAGE AND YARD SALES.
   (A)   No sales or trading of merchandise, property, personal property,
belongings or items of any nature shall be made in the city at any time except
as set out below and a permit granted for the same.
   (B)   A garage sale, yard sale or sale inside a house may be held at any one
location or house not more than once per month, and the same shall extend for a
period not in excess of three days.
ARTICLE 3. PENALTY
§ 7-301 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding
the sum set forth in §
3-501 of this code, including costs, and is subject to revocation of his or her
license. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.
ARTICLE 4. MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 7-401 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS. Any retail marijuana establishment licensed
by the state.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-402 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All operators of retail marijuana establishments are required to
obtain a retail marijuana establishment business license from the City Clerk.
   (B)   The retail marijuana establishment license fee shall be $300 per year,
or as periodically modified by Council resolution. The fee shall be used to
offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments. The license
provided for herein shall run from July 1 to June 30, and the same will not be
prorated for any license obtained after July 1 of any year.
   (C)   A retail marijuana establishment license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is located outside a commercially or
industrially zoned area of the corporate city limits, or within a restricted
area as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-403 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS ON RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   A retail marijuana establishment license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet from
any entrance of the proposed permitted location to any entrance of the
following property location, including streets and alleys: a private or public
preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or
university.
   (B)   A retail marijuana establishment license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location abuts:
      (1)   A personal residence or a residentially zoned district;
      (2)   Another medical marijuana or retail marijuana establishment;
      (3)   A library or museum;
      (4)   A public playground;
      (5)   A childcare center;
      (6)   A place of worship or religious assembly;
      (7)   A public park, pool or recreation facility; or
      (8)   A juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center.
   (C)   Locations separated by alleys or city maintained streets shall not be
considered abutting locations.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-404 CONDITIONS OF OPERATION FOR RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off-
premises.
   (B)   The retail establishment must collect the applicable sales tax on all
sales as per state and local regulations and must be in an area that is zoned
for commercial or industrial purposes.
   (C)   The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays as well as
Christmas, Thanksgiving, July 4 and New Year’s Day.
   (D)   Any violation of this section may result in the revocation of the
retail marijuana establishment license for a period of up to two years from the
date of revocation. Determination of violations that result in revocation shall
be made by the City Manager or his or her designee.
   (E)   It is the intent of the city that nothing in the this article be
construed to:
      (1)   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a
public nuisance;
      (2)   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or
      (3)   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-405 COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Commercial marijuana growing facilities are hereby allowed within the
corporate limits of the city, under the following conditions.
      (1)   The facility must acquire a business license from the City Clerk.
The license for a commercial growing facility shall be $750 per year, or other
amount as set periodically by Council resolution. This fee shall be used to
offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection and
enforcement of regulations for commercial marijuana growing facilities. The
license provided for herein shall run from July 1 to June 30 and the same will
not be prorated for any license obtained after July 1 of any year.
      (2)   Location restrictions on commercial marijuana growing facilities
are as follows.
         (a)   A commercial marijuana growing facilities license will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
1,000 feet from any entrance of the proposed permitted location to any entrance
of the following property location, including streets and alleys: a private or
public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or
university.
         (b)   A commercial marijuana growing facilities license will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
350 feet of any of the following locations with said distance computed by
direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the
parcel of land on which the use is located to the nearest property line of the
building or unit in which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be
located, including streets and alleys:
               1.   A library or museum;
               2.   A public playground;
               3.   A childcare center;
               4.   A place of worship or religious assembly;
               5.   A public park, pool or recreation facility; or
               6.   A juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center.
         (c)   A commercial marijuana growing facilities license will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
100 feet of any of the following locations with said distance computed by
direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the
parcel of land on which the use is located to the nearest property line of the
building or unit in which the proposed commercial marijuana growing facility
would be located, including streets and alleys:
               1.   A personal residence or a residentially zoned district; or
               2.   Another medical marijuana or retail marijuana
establishment.
      (3)   The facility must be located in a commercial, industrial or
agricultural zoned area (agricultural zone may not be adjacent to a
residentially zoned area as set forth above) and shall be an enclosed
structure.
      (4)   The facility shall have a chain link security fence at least six
feet in height with three strand barbed wire at the top and with limited
access. The gates to the secure area must be locked at all times.
      (5)   The facility must be constructed in such a manner that the growing
of the marijuana plants cannot be seen by the public from a public right-of-
way.
      (6)   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical
components used shall comply with municipal Building and Fire Codes. The
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or
other related problems.
      (7)   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that
constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if
growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (B)   Any violation of this section may result in the revocation of the
commercial marijuana growing facilities license for a period of up to two years
from the date of revocation. Determination of violations that result in
revocation shall be made by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-406 WHOLESALE MARIJUANA FACILITIES.
   (A)   Wholesale marijuana facilities are allowed in the city but must
acquire a city business license from the City Clerk. The fee shall be $750 per
year, or other amount as set periodically by Council resolution. This fee shall
be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of regulations for wholesale
marijuana facilities. The license provide for herein shall run from July 1 to
June 30, and the same will not be prorated for any license obtained after July
1 of any year.
   (B)   A wholesale marijuana growing facilities license will not be granted
to any applicant where the proposed location is located outside a commercially
or industrially zoned area of the corporate city limits.
   (C)   Location restrictions on wholesale marijuana facilities are as
follows.
      (1)   A wholesale marijuana growing facilities license will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
1,000 feet from any entrance of the proposed permitted location to any entrance
of the following property location, including streets and alleys: a private or
public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or
university.
      (2)   A wholesale marijuana facilities license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be located within 350 feet of any
of the following locations with said distance computed by direct measurement in
a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which
the use is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in
which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be located, including
streets and alleys:
         (a)   A library or museum;
         (b)   A public playground;
         (c)   A childcare center;
         (d)   A place of worship or religious assembly;
         (e)   A public park, pool or recreation facility; or
         (f)   A juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center.
      (3)   A wholesale marijuana growing facilities license will not be
granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within
100 feet of any of the following locations with said distance computed by
direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the
parcel of land on which the use is located to the nearest property line of the
building or unit in which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be
located, including streets and alleys:
         (a)   A personal residence or a residentially zoned district; or
         (b)   Another medical marijuana or retail marijuana establishment.
   (D)   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off-
premises.
   (E)   The wholesale establishment must collect the applicable sales tax on
all sales.
   (F)   Any violation of this section may result in the revocation of the
wholesale marijuana facilities license for a period of up to two years from the
date of revocation. Determination of violations that result in revocation shall
be made by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-407 MARIJUANA STORAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Marijuana storage facilities, other than in a retail outlet and
wholesale facilities and commercial facilities, are hereby allowed within the
corporate limits of the city, and must acquire a business license from the City
Clerk. There shall be a fee of $1,250 per year, or other amount as set
periodically by Council resolution. This fee shall be used to offset municipal
expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and
enforcement of regulations for marijuana storage facilities.
   (B)   A marijuana storage facilities license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location is located outside a commercially or
industrially zoned area of the corporate city limits.
   (C)   Location restrictions on marijuana storage facilities are as follows.
      (1)   A marijuana storage facilities license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet from
any entrance of the proposed permitted location to any entrance of the
following property location, including streets and alleys: a private or public
preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or
university.
      (2)   A marijuana storage facilities license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be located within 350 feet of any
of the following locations with said distance computed by direct measurement in
a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which
the use is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in
which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be located, including
streets and alleys:
         (a)   A library or museum;
         (b)   A public playground;
         (c)   A childcare center;
         (d)   A place of worship or religious assembly;
         (e)   A public park, pool or recreation facility; or
         (f)   A juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or
substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center.
      (3)   A marijuana storage facilities license will not be granted to any
applicant where the proposed location would be located within 100 feet of any
of the following locations with said distance computed by direct measurement in
a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which
the use is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in
which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be located, including
streets and alleys:
         (a)   A residentially zoned district; or
         (b)   Another medical marijuana or retail marijuana establishment.
   (D)   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilator/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off-premises.
   (E)   Storage facilities must remain locked at all times when not in
operation. The facility must have an electronic security system and have an
appropriate chain link security fence that must be at least six feet tall with
three strands of barbed wire at the top around the facility.
   (F)   The storage facility must collect the applicable sales tax on all
sales.
   (G)   Any violation of this section may result in the revocation of the
marijuana storage facilities license for a period of up to two years from the
date of revocation. Determination of violations that result in revocation shall
be made by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-408 MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR PERSONAL MEDICAL USE.
   (A)   All owners of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use
are required to obtain a license from the state and from the City Clerk.
   (B)   Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use license fee
shall be $50 per year, or other amount as set periodically by Council
resolution. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs
related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of marijuana
growing facilities for personal medical use. The fee shall run from July 1 to
June 30, and there shall be no proration of this fee.
   (C)   All marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be
subject to security provisions as stated herein prior to the granting of a
permit. Failure to comply with security provisions as stated herein will result
in revocation of the permit.
   (D)   Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for marijuana
cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key or
equivalent, at all times except when the residential facility is actively being
supervised in person by the permit holder.
   (E)   Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to the
interior of a single private residence.
   (F)   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
   (G)   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical
components used shall comply with municipal Building and Fire Codes. The
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or
other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light. The
use of gas products (CO2, butane and the like) or CO2 and ozone generators in
the growing area is prohibited.
   (H)   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes
a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing
marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   (I)   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is
grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning
cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress
and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation
will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or
sanitation/bathing.
   (J)   If the residence is rented, consent of the property owner shall be
obtained prior to any cultivation commencing. This consent must be evidenced by
a signed and notarized statement from the property owner permitting the growth
of marijuana in the residence.
   (K)   Cultivated marijuana must be used exclusively pursuant to a valid
state issued medical marijuana license. Any other or unapproved usage shall
result in revocation of the license.
   (L)   (1)   Any violations of this section may result in the revocation of
the marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use license for a period
of up to two years from the date of revocation.
      (2)   Determination of violations that result in revocation shall be made
by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
§ 7-409 LICENSE INSPECTIONS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All licenses outlined in this article will be subject to inspection of
the facilities by an authorized Municipal Inspector prior to issuance.
   (B)   The inspection prior to a license decision will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the Municipal Inspector.
   (C)   The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
   (D)   The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of
marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana license
shall be treated as a public nuisance.
   (E)   Smoking or using marijuana shall be prohibited on all city property
including vehicles, buildings, parks or other facilities.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-2-2019)
ARTICLE 5. SHORT-TERM RENTALS
§ 7-501 PURPOSE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental of an existing or otherwise permitted
dwelling structure or any portion thereof, for a period of not more than 30
days, where the owner is engaged in a contract for the rental of that specific
dwelling, or any portion thereof.
   (B)   An annual short-term rental license may be issued to eligible
applicants by the City Clerk. A short-term rental license is a privilege not a
right, and may be denied, suspended, revoked or not renewed. This definition
shall not be interpreted to alter, add to or in any way supersede existing
zoning uses allowed in zoning districts, particularly provisions regarding the
allowance, or not, of accessory dwelling structures.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-502 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall manage or operate a short-term rental without a
license and appropriate fees paid, as provided herein.
   (B)   An applicant may be issued up to four short-term rental licenses.
   (C)   Only one party of guests are permitted per short-term rental and
anyone under the age of 18 is prohibited from renting the short-term rental.
   (D)   Use of the short-term, rental for any commercial or social events is
prohibited.
   (E)   The short-term rental shall outwardly appear as a residential dwelling
and are not permitted outdoors, in an accessory structure (e.g., shed, garage
and the like) or in a recreational vehicle.
   (F)   Short-term rental shall not adversely affect the residential character
of the neighborhood nor shall the use generate noise, vibration, glare, odors
or other effects that unreasonably interfere with any person’s enjoyment of his
or her residence.
   (G)   A licensee or guest of a short-term rental shall not use or allow use
of sound equipment, amplified music and musical instruments.
   (H)   A licensee or guest of a short-term rental shall not violate any
parking ordinances of this code.
   (I)   A licensee of a short-term rental who does not reside within the city
metro area must identify an individual or individuals to serve as a local
contact to respond to emergency conditions.
   (J)   A local contact designated in the license application must be present
within the city metro area and be available to respond within one hour after
being notified of an emergency by a guest of the short-term rental, by a city
employee or by an individual.
   (K)   If there is a change related to a local contact, the licensee must
provide updated or new information to the City Clerk in writing within three
business days.
   (L)   The license holder shall provide the valid license number on any
listing advertising or soliciting the property for use as a short-term rental.
The license holder shall only advertise the short-term rental as allowed by
their short-term rental license. An owner, or a person in control of a
dwelling, may not advertise or promote, or allow another to advertise or
promote, the dwelling as a short-term rental if the dwelling is not licensed by
the city as a short-term rental.
   (M)   If a building permit prohibiting occupancy of the structure is active,
no person may occupy, for sleeping or living purposes, the structure until
final inspections have been passed, the building permit is closed and a
certificate of occupancy granted.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-503 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   To obtain a license, the owner of a short-term rental must submit an
application in a format approved by the City Clerk. The applicant must attest
to the following and furnish any necessary documentation upon request of the
city:
   (A)   The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of the
owner of the short-term rental, which includes the owner’s primary physical
address, a mailing address, cell phone number and email address;
   (B)   The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number, which
includes the primary physical address, a mailing address, cell phone number and
email address, of the local contact available to be reached 24 hours per day
and seven days per week;
   (C)   A certification by the property owner and, if applicable, property
manager, that the property is not subject to outstanding city code or state law
violations;
   (D)   Proof of current, valid property insurance;
   (E)   Proof of payment of transient guest room tax due as of the date of
submission of the application;
   (F)   The number of bedrooms and the proposed occupancy limits;
   (G)   A diagram showing the proposed layout of the property use and any on-
site parking available, including a floor plan indicating fire exits and escape
routes;
   (H)   All required egress windows in bedrooms must be operational;
   (I)   Has operational smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors as
required by the Building Code and fire extinguishers as required by the Fire
Code;
   (J)   The property is in compliance with applicable provisions of the city’s
Minimum Property Maintenance, Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing
Codes;
   (K)   An annual inspection confirming compliance with all requirements
contained herein;
   (L)   Notification of affected property owners. All recorded property owners
immediately adjacent to or directly across the street or alley in any direction
from the subject property shall be notified of an application for a short-term
rental. This notice, as provided by the City Clerk’s office with the
application, shall contain the name, address, telephone number, email of the
property owner and the required local contact person, along with contact
information for city offices, such as code enforcement, the City Police
Department and any other necessary contact information;
   (M)   Any other information requested by the city; and
   (N)   Any fraud, material misrepresentation or false statements contained in
the attestations, required documentation or correlating application material
shall be grounds for immediate revocation of short-term rental license.
Furthermore, all requirements herein, shall be continuously maintained
throughout the duration of the permit.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-504 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   Upon satisfactory submission of the required attestations and requested
documentation, the city may issue an annual short-term rental license. The
license shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Street address of the short-term rental;
   (B)   License holder’s name;
   (C)   License number and rental limitations, including bedroom limit and
guest occupancy limit;
   (D)   Contact information (name, cell phone, email) of local contact able to
respond to on-premises complaints;
   (E)   Proof of payment of transient guest room tax as of the date of
submission of the application;
   (F)   Dates license is valid;
   (G)   The structure has a valid certificate of occupancy or compliance
issued by the city no more than ten years before the date the application is
submitted to the city (or the structure has been determined by the City Code
Official not to pose a hazard to life, health or public safety, based on a
minimum life-safety inspection); and
   (H)   The property is not subject to outstanding city code or state law
violations. A violation of any provision of the city code or other applicable
law is grounds to deny, suspend or revoke a license.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-505 COVENANTS; DEED RESTRICTIONS; OVERLAY REQUIREMENTS.
   This section or any section therein is not intended to be construed in
derogation of or in conflict with any restrictive covenant, deed restriction or
lease agreement that may be applicable. This section or any section therein
shall be subject to any applicable overlay district or provision thereof or any
zoning restriction unique to a particular area or parcel.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-506 FEES.
   The fee for the initial issuance of the short-term rental license shall be
$150 for a one-year period and renewal of the short-term rental license shall
be $50.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-507 INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE POSTED AND PROVIDED TO GUESTS.
   The license holder shall post the following information in a prominent
location in the interior, clearly visible to guests and provide a packet of the
information, summarizing the restrictions applicable to short-term rental use,
including:
   (A)   The license registration, which includes license number;
   (B)   Operator’s name and number and property manager, if applicable, name
and number;
   (C)   Local contact person name and number;
   (D)   The location of any on-site and off-site parking spaces available for
guests;
   (E)   Occupancy limits;
   (F)   Noise restrictions, including prohibition on the use of sound
equipment, amplified music and musical instruments;
   (G)   Parking restrictions;
   (H)   Information on relevant burn bans;
   (I)   Information on relevant water restrictions;
   (J)   Trash and recycling collection rules and dates;
   (K)   Prohibition on the use of the short-term rental for commercial or
social events; and
   (L)   Floor plan with fire exit and escape routes.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-508 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   Except as otherwise provided, a license may be renewed annually if:
   (A)   The licensee pays the renewal fee as established herein;
   (B)   The licensee provides documentation showing the transient guest room
tax has been paid for the licensed unit as required;
   (C)   The licensee provides updates of any changes to the information
required;
   (D)   The property is not the subject of outstanding city code or state law
violations;
   (E)   The city may deny an application to renew a license if the applicant
does not provide all information necessary to determine that the dwelling unit
meets all requirements for the issuance or renewal of a license; and
   (F)   A violation of any provision of the city code or other applicable law
is grounds to deny, suspend or revoke a license.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 7-509 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   If the licensee fails to comply with any conditions of the short-term
rental requirements; the city may deny, suspend or revoke the short-term rental
license.
   (B)   If a property is the subject of violations of this code or state law
during a 24-month period prior to submitting the application, the city may
deny, suspend or revoke an application for a short-term rental license based on
the following:
      (1)   The frequency of any repeated violations;
      (2)   Whether a violation was committed intentionally or knowingly; or
      (3)   Any other information that demonstrates the degree to which the
owner or occupant has endangered public health, safety or welfare.
   (C)   If an application is denied, suspended or revoked, and an applicant
desires to submit a new application, the applicant must comply with § 7-503 and
pay the fee for an initial short-term rental license under § 7-506.
(Ord. 24-008, passed 5-7-2024)
CHAPTER 8: CEMETERIES
   [Reserved]
CHAPTER 9: AIR CONTROL AND CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
Article 1. Air Control
9-101 Citation
9-102 Definitions
9-103 Notice of changes
9-104 Enforcement
9-105 Abatement procedure
9-106 Emergency
9-107 Tests, data sampling
9-108 Variances
9-109 Air Quality Control Variance Board
9-110 Applications for variance
9-111 Public hearings
9-112 Proprietary information
9-113 Notice
9-114 Fees
9-115 Nuisance declared
9-116 Liability
9-117 Air pollution prohibited
9-118 Emission of dense smoke prohibited
9-119 Incinerators
9-120 Process equipment or operations
9-121 Hot mix asphalt plants
9-122 Open burning restricted
9-123 Motor vehicle pollution control devices
9-124 Tables and charts
Article 2. Civil Defense
9-201 Short title
9-202 Definitions
9-203 Office of Civil Defense established
9-204 Director to have control
9-205 Director; powers prior to an emergency
9-206 Director; power in an enemy caused emergency
9-207 Director; powers in natural emergency
9-208 Liability
9-209 Mayor may accept aid
Article 3. Penalty
9-301 Penalty
ARTICLE 1. AIR CONTROL
§ 9-101 CITATION.
   This article shall be known as the “Air Quality Control Ordinance.”
§ 9-102 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CONTAMINANT. Any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinder, dirt, noxious,
obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radioactive
substances, waste particulates, solid, liquid or gaseous matter in the
atmosphere which, when in sufficient quantities, is capable of injuring human,
plant or animal life or depriving the enjoyment thereof.
   AIR POLLUTION. The emission of any air contaminant in such place or manner
which, when by itself or combined with other air contaminants present in the
atmosphere, is detrimental to or endangers the health, comfort or safety of any
person or which may cause injury or damage to property or premises.
   ATMOSPHERE. The air that envelopes or surrounds the earth.
   BOARD. The Air Quality Control Variance Board.
   CHIMNEY or STACK. Chimney, stack, conduit, duct, vent, flue or opening of
any kind whatsoever arranged to conduct any products into the atmosphere.
   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS AND FUELS. Any substance which will readily burn and
shall include those substances which, although generally considered
noncombustible, are or may be included in the mass of the combustible material
burned or to be burned.
   DENSE SMOKE. Smoke of a shade or the equivalent opacity of the shade,
designated as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart or greater.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the City-County Health Department, or his or her
designated employees or representatives.
   EMISSION. The emission of air contaminants into the atmosphere.
   EVAPORATING LOSS CONTROL SYSTEM. A system or device designed and installed
in such a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to the atmosphere of the
vapors of the hydrocarbon fuel contained in the fuel tank, carburetor or fuel
pump of the motor vehicle.
   EXHAUST EMISSION CONTROL SYSTEM. A system, device or engine modification
designed and installed in such a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to
the atmosphere of air pollutant gases, vapors and particulate matter released
from the motor vehicle engine through the exhaust manifold and tailpipe.
   FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT. Any equipment, machinery, device, structure or
contrivance and all appurtenances thereto, including ducts, breaching, fuel
feeding equipment, ash removal equipment, internal combustion engines,
combustion controls, stacks and chimneys, which burn fuel or combustible
material for the purpose of producing heat or energy, but shall not mean
process equipment or operation of incinerators.
   INCINERATOR. Any device, structure or contrivance used to dispose of refuse
or other waste by burning or the processing of salvageable material by burning,
but excluding flares.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled, wheeled vehicle designed for normal use on
public streets and highways.
   MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICE. Any or all of the devices or systems
referred to in this section and designed to control or prevent air pollution
emissions from motor vehicles.
   MULTIPLE CHAMBER INCINERATOR. Any incinerator consisting of two or more
combustion chambers of inline or retort type physically separated by curtained
walls with gas passage ports or ducts and designed for maximum combustion of
the material to be burned.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of combustible material or refuse in such a manner
that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere.
   OPEN PIT INCINERATOR. A device consisting of a pit (into which the material
to be burned is placed), nozzles, pipes and other appurtenances designed and
arranged in a manner to deliver additional air and/or auxiliary fuel to or near
the zone of combustion so that theoretically complete combustion is
accomplished or approached.
   PARTICULATE MATTER. Discreet particles of liquid (except uncombined water)
or solid matter, or both, which may or may not be suspended in air.
   POSITIVE CRANKCASE VENTILATION. A system or device designed and installed in
such a manner as to prevent or reduce the release or emission into the
atmosphere of gases or vapor procured or otherwise present in the crankcase of
the engine of a motor vehicle.
   PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATION. Any equipment, machinery, device or premises
used for the treating, processing or manufacturing of materials, products or
substances, which operation may emit smoke, particulate matter or other air
contaminants.
   PROCESS WEIGHT. The total weight of all materials introduced into any
specific process equipment or operation. Solid fuels shall be considered as
part of the process weight but liquids and gases used solely as fuel shall not.
   PROCESS WEIGHT PER HOUR. The weight derived by dividing the total process
weight by the number of hours in one complete operation from the beginning of
any given process to the completion thereof, excluding any time during which
the equipment is idle.
   PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION. All particulate matter and other air contaminants
emitted as a result of the burning of refuse and combustible materials.
   PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. Any information obtained pursuant to this article
which relates to sales figures or to production processes unique to the owner
or operator or which affects the competitive position of such owner or
operator.
   REFUSE. Garbage, rubbish, trade waste, leaves, salvageable material,
agricultural waste and other wastes.
   RINGELMANN CHART. The chart for grading the appearance, density, shade or
opacity of smoke, as published with instructions for use by the United States
Bureau of Mines, in “Information Circular 7718,” dated August 1955.
   SMOKE. Small baseborn or airborne particles resulting from combustion
operations and consisting of carbon, ash and other matter that is present in
sufficient quantity to be observable.
   SOURCE. Any physical arrangement or structure which may emit air
contaminants. It includes, but is not limited to, stacks, chimneys, building
openings, open fires, vehicles, processes, equipment, structures and premises.
   SOURCE GAS VOLUME. The total amount of gas, including air contaminants,
emitted from any process, equipment or operation into the atmosphere.
§ 9-103 NOTICE OF CHANGES.
   The Council shall not enact or amend any ordinance, rule or regulation
concerning air quality control without first holding a public hearing and
giving not less than ten days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
§ 9-104 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 9-105 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In addition to any penalties, upon determination by the Director that
a violation of this article has occurred and that the person in violation has
not furnished satisfactory proof that corrective measures have been or are
being taken to abate the nuisance, the Director shall give written notice to
the person in violation to abate the nuisance. The notice shall specify the
section which is being violated and a reasonable time not exceeding 20 days
within which to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   If, at the end of the time allowed, the violation has not been
corrected, the Director shall abate the nuisance as provided by law.
§ 9-106 EMERGENCY.
   When a violation of this article creates a hazardous or dangerous condition
capable of immediately harming life or property, the Director shall summarily
abate the nuisance immediately and without notice.
§ 9-107 TESTS, DATA SAMPLING.
   Upon written notice, the Director may require from any person subject to
this article data to establish the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air
contaminants which are or may be discharged by a source under such person’s
control, and may require that such data be certified by a professional engineer
registered in the state. The Director may, at his or her expense, designate an
agent to independently gather data as to the nature, extent, quantity and
degree of any air contaminants which are or may be discharged by the source.
Subject to the confidentiality requirements of this article, an agent so
designated is authorized to inspect any facilities and equipment necessary to
gather the data. The owners of the premises being inspected will make the same
available to inspection and shall permit the Director to install and maintain
sampling and testing apparatus as are reasonable and necessary for measurement
of emissions of air contaminants; provided, that they shall not unduly
interfere with the operations owner. The Director may, in writing, require the
owner to provide and maintain the means of access to locations for sampling and
testing purposes in order to secure data that will disclose the nature, extent,
quantity or degree of air contaminants discharged into the atmosphere.
§ 9-108 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances from the strict provisions of this article may be granted by
the Board pursuant to applications therefor when:
      (1)   Due to conditions beyond the control of the person in violation,
and which are not self-imposed, compliance with this article will result in an
arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or the practical closing and
elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity; and
      (2)   There are not sufficient corresponding benefits or advantages to
the public in the reduction of air pollution.
   (B)   Variances shall be for a specified time but not to exceed one year.
Upon expiration of a variance, additional variances may be granted.
   (C)   A variance granted shall be personal to the applicant and not
transferable.
   (D)   All variances granted are subject to review and revocation by the
Board.
§ 9-109 AIR QUALITY CONTROL VARIANCE BOARD.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created an Air Quality Variance Board which
shall consist of the members of the City Council.
   (B)   Membership. The members shall be residents of the city.
   (C)   Terms of office. The members of the Variance Board shall serve terms
consistent with the terms of office of the City Council.
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The members of the Board shall have the power to subpoena
witnesses, require the production of records, documents and other matter and
administer oaths. Four members shall constitute a quorum; provided, that no
variances shall be granted or revoked without concurrence of at least five
members. The Mayor shall serve as the Chairperson of the Variance Board.
      (2)   The meetings and hearings of the Board shall be called by the
Chairperson.
      (3)   The members shall be given five days’ notice prior to any meeting
or hearing. Emergency meetings or hearings may be held, provided all members
consent to such in writing.
      (4)   The Board shall make other rules and regulations concerning the
procedure in granting or revoking variances as it shall deem necessary.
§ 9-110 APPLICATIONS FOR VARIANCE.
   Any person may make an application for a variance from the terms of this
article by paying the required fee and by filing a written application with the
Director. The application form shall be verified by the applicant and set forth
all information required by the Board, including the full name and address of
the applicant, the nature of the variance and the extent to which such variance
is sought.
§ 9-111 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   No variance shall be granted or revoked without first holding a public
hearing. Not less than ten days’ notice shall be given to all interested
persons as appear in the files and records of the Board. In addition, notice of
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 9-112 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person shall disclose to anyone other than the Director, the Board
or a court of competent jurisdiction any information furnished or obtained
pursuant to this article.
   (B)   Upon request of the interested party, all hearings or trials in which
proprietary information is to be divulged shall be held “in camera” and such
information shall be sealed and access otherwise limited.
§ 9-113 NOTICE.
   All notices required under this article, unless otherwise specified, shall
be in writing and shall be served upon the person being given notice personally
or mailed to his or her last known address, postage prepaid. The date of
mailing shall be considered as the date such notice is given.
§ 9-114 FEES.
   Any applicant for a variance shall pay a fee to the city in the amount of
$50, and shall further pay for all costs of notification and publication. Such
fee shall be paid each time a variance is sought; provided, that the Board may,
in its discretion, review any variance denied within 90 days from the date of
such denial without additional cost to the applicant.
§ 9-115 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   The emission of air contaminants in violation of this article is declared to
be a public nuisance and may be abated by the Director as provided by law.
§ 9-116 LIABILITY.
   Any person owning, operating or controlling a source of air contaminants
which violates this article shall be subject to all penalties and liabilities
for such violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 9-117 AIR POLLUTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit or cause air pollution.
§ 9-118 EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any source
whatever except as specifically permitted.
§ 9-119 INCINERATORS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall install or make any alteration or
modification to an incinerator which affects the emission of air contaminants
without first having obtained a permit from the Director and paying the fee of
$50 and all other required expenses and fees.
   (B)   Application. A person making application for a permit shall furnish
such information concerning the incinerator as the Director may request,
including the plans, specifications, manufacturer’s descriptive literature and
test reports.
   (C)   Specifications.
      (1)   All incinerators installed after the effective date hereof shall be
multiple chambered, gas fired in the primary and secondary chamber and water
scrubbed. All incinerators shall have a capacity of 75 pounds per hour or
greater; provided, that this capacity shall not be applicable to incinerators
designed and used exclusively as pathological incinerators.
      (2)   Any incinerator of different construction may be used when the
Director determines that the incinerator will be equally effective in
controlling the emission of air contaminants and approves its installation.
   (D)   Operation. All incinerators shall be maintained and operated according
to good practices.
   (E)   Emission of particulate matter. Incinerators with a maximum burning
capacity of 200 pounds per hour or more shall not emit particulate matter in
excess of 0.2 grain per dry cubic foot corrected to 12% CO2 of exhaust gas
under standard condition.
   (F)   Existing incinerators, exceptions. Within 12 months after the
effective date hereof, all existing incinerators shall comply with all
provisions of this article, except division (C) above.
   (G)   Dense smoke, exception. Incinerators may emit dense smoke not
exceeding a shade or the equivalent opacity of the shade designated as No. 2 on
the Ringelmann Chart for periods not exceeding five minutes in any 60-minute
period and not exceeding 20 minutes in any 24-hour period.
§ 9-120 PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Particulate matter emission. Process equipment or operations installed
or commenced after the effective date hereof shall not emit from the premises
upon which such equipment or operations is located, particulate matter in
excess of that indicated in §
9-124, Table 1 or 2 of this article. Existing process equipment or operations
shall have 12 months from the effective date hereof to comply with this
division (A).
   (B)   Dust control. The owner or operator of any process equipment or
operation shall maintain dust control of the plant premises and plant owned,
leased or controlled access roads by paving, oil treatment or other suitable
measures. Good operating practices shall be observed in relation to
stockpiling, screen changing and general maintenance to prevent dust generation
and atmospheric entrainment. Good operating practices, including water spraying
or other suitable measures shall be employed to minimize dust generation and
emission when bins are pulled.
§ 9-121 HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANTS.
   (A)   Particulate matter emission. Hot mix asphalt plants installed or
commenced after the effective date hereof shall not emit particulate matter
into the atmosphere in excess of the quantity set out in §
9-124, Table 3 of this article. Existing hot mix asphalt plants shall not emit
particulate matter into the atmosphere in excess of the quantity emitted at
plants exhibiting good operation and economic control. Within one year, all hot
mix asphalt plants shall comply with the emission rate shown in §
9-124, Table 3 of this article or a new rate to be determined by testing and
experience.
   (B)   Dense smoke, exception. No hot mix asphalt plant shall be operated
unless it is equipped with a fugitive dust control system for the hot aggregate
which prevents the emission of particulate matter from any point other than the
chimney.
§ 9-122 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
   No person shall cause or permit an open burning in any public or private
place outside any building; provided, that open burning may be conducted if no
public nuisance is or will be created as follows:
   (A)   Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of firefighting
personnel when authorized by the Fire Chief;
   (B)   Fires set for the elimination of fire hazards or hazardous material
where there is no other practical or lawful method of disposal, and such
burning is authorized by the Director and City Council;
   (C)   Campfires and other fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial
purposes or for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food;
   (D)   Fires purposely set for the management of forest or game in accordance
with practices recommended by the State Department of Agriculture, the United
States Forest Service and which are authorized by the City Council;
   (E)   The burning of refuse and other combustible materials generated in the
operation of a domestic household when no regular garbage service is available;
   (F)   The burning of combustible material in an open pit incinerator which
is designed and operated for the control of smoke and particulate matter;
   (G)   The burning of hydrocarbons by atmospheric flares when no other means
of disposal is practical; and/or
   (H)   The burning of trees, grass and other vegetable matter for the purpose
of clearing land and agricultural crop burning when:
      (1)   The burning is not within 150 feet of an occupied residence or
structure other than those located on property where the burning is conducted;
      (2)   Care is used to minimize the amount of dirt on the material being
burned;
      (3)   Oils, rubber and other similar materials which produce unreasonable
amounts of air contaminants and smoke are not burned;
      (4)   The burning occurs between three hours after sunrise and three
hours before sunset; and
      (5)   No traffic hazard is created.
§ 9-123 MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Scope.
      (1)   This section shall apply to all motor vehicles registered or
subject to registration with the State Tax Commission in which, as new
vehicles, motor pollution control devices have been installed by virtue of
federal laws and regulations, in effect now and hereafter, requiring such
devices to be installed.
      (2)   However, nothing in this article shall supersede or otherwise
modify such federal laws and regulations, nor shall anything in this article be
construed to require the installation of motor vehicle pollution control
devices on motor vehicles not referred to by such federal laws or regulations.
   (B)   Prohibited areas. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
removal, disconnection or disabling of a motor vehicle pollution control device
which is on a vehicle.
   (C)   Use of liquified petroleum gas. Operation of a motor vehicle or its
engine which uses liquefied petroleum gas as a fuel is hereby exempted from
provisions of this article.
§ 9-124 TABLES AND CHARTS.
 
Process Equipment or Operations
Table 1
Allowable Rate of Particulate Matter of Emission Based on Process Weight Rate
Interpolation of the data in this table for processed weight rates up to 60,000
lb./hr. shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 4.10 PO 67, and
interpolation and extrapolation of the data for process weight rates in excess
of 60,000 lb./hr. shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 155.0 PO 11-
40 where E = rate of emission in lb./hr. and P = process weight rate in tons/
hr.
Utilization of this table is accomplished by first determining the process rate
in lb./hr. or in tons/hr. and then reading the allowable rate of emission in
lb./hr. horizontally to the right.
Table 2
Allowable Rate of Particulate Matter of Emission Based on Volume per SCFM
Source Gas Concentration Volume, SCFM GR/SCF
Table 2
Allowable Rate of Particulate Matter of Emission Based on Volume per SCFM
Source Gas Concentration Volume, SCFM GR/SCF
7,000 or less            0.100
8,000                    0.096
9,000                    0.092
10,000                   0.089
20,000                   0.071
30,000                   0.062
40,000                   0.057
50,000                   0.053
60,000                   0.050
80,000                   0.045
100,000                  0.042
120,000                  0.040
140,000                  0.038
160,000                  0.036
180,000                  0.035
200,000                  0.034
300,000                  0.030
400,000                  0.027
500,000                  0.025
600,000                  0.024
800,000                  0.021
1,000,000 or more        0.020
Notes to Table:
Interpolation of the data in this table shall be accomplished by the use of
the equation C = 1.78S-o.325 where S = source gas volume, SCFM and C =
concentration in grains per SCF (GR = Grains).
Utilization of this table is accomplished by first determining the source gas
volume in SCFM and then reading the allowable concentration in GR/SCF
horizontally to the right.
Table 3
Hot Mix Asphalt Plants
Aggregate Process Weight per Hour  Particulate Matter Emission Rate per Hour
(Pounds)                           (Pounds)
Table 3
Hot Mix Asphalt Plants
Aggregate Process Weight per Hour  Particulate Matter Emission Rate per Hour
(Pounds)                           (Pounds)
10,000                             10
20,000                             16
30,000                             22
40,000                             28
50,000                             31
100,000                            33
200,000                            37
300,000                            40
400,000                            43
500,000                            47
600,000                            50
 
ARTICLE 2. CIVIL DEFENSE
§ 9-201 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the “Civil Defense Ordinance of the City of
Lexington.”
§ 9-202 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL DEFENSE. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions other than functions for which primary responsibility is assigned
elsewhere by federal, state or local law or ordinance, to protect the public
peace, health and safety and to preserve lives and property in the city, during
any emergency resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or
from any flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other
catastrophe in or near the city, and involving imminent or actual peril to life
and property in the city. These functions include administration, organization,
planning, recruiting, training, education, information, welfare service, relief
service, policy service, warden service, fire service, rescue service, medical
service, health service, transportation service, communications service,
streets and sewer service, mutual aid, mobile support, evacuation and all other
functions necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of
the foregoing function.
   ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCY. Any state of emergency caused by actual or impending
attack, sabotage or other hostile action, anywhere within the United States and
involving imminent peril to lives and property in the city. Such EMERGENCY
shall be deemed to exist only when the Mayor shall so declare by public
proclamation. Such EMERGENCY shall be deemed to continue to exist until the
Mayor shall declare its termination by public proclamation or until the
governing body declares its termination by resolution.
   NATURAL EMERGENCY. Any state of emergency caused by any actual or impending
flood, drought, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other catastrophe in or near
the city, and involving imminent peril to the lives and property in the city.
Such emergency shall be deemed to exist and to be terminated under the same
conditions as prescribed for an “enemy caused emergency.”
§ 9-203 OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established within the executive branch of the city
government the city’s Office of Civil Defense. This office shall consist of:
   (A)   A Civil Defense Advisory Committee, consisting of the Mayor as
Chairperson and five other members appointed by the Mayor and serving at his or
her pleasure or until the repeal of this article. The Committee shall elect
from among its members a Vice Chairperson and a secretary. Except as otherwise
provided in this article, the Committee shall function in an advisory capacity,
on all matters pertaining to civil defense. It shall hold such meetings as are
directed by the Mayor or the City Council. The Committee shall serve without
compensation and its function shall be to act in an advisory capacity as needed
or requested;
   (B)   A Director of Civil Defense, who shall be appointed by the Mayor,
shall serve at his or her pleasure or until repeal of this article. The
Director shall be the executive head of the Office of Civil Defense and shall
be responsible to the Mayor for carrying out the civil defense program of the
city. He or she shall serve without compensation, but be reimbursed for actual
expenses in the conduct of his or her duties. He or she shall coordinate the
activities of all organizations for civil defense within the city and shall
maintain liaison with and cooperate with civil defense agencies and
organizations of other governmental units both within and without the state,
and of the federal government, and shall have such additional authority, duties
and responsibilities as may be authorized under this article or amendments
thereof; and
   (C)   Such other volunteer Civil Defense Advisory Committees as may be
created by the Director for the evaluation of technical, professional or other
phases of the work of the Office of Civil Defense; and which may provide
advisory assistance on any matters pertaining to the city’s civil defense.
§ 9-204 DIRECTOR TO HAVE CONTROL.
   (A)   The Director shall have general direction and control of the Office of
Civil Defense and shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this
article.
   (B)   In so carrying out the provisions of this article, the Director is
expressly authorized to cooperate, insofar as permitted by other appropriate
legislation, with the federal government, the government of the state and its
subdivisions, with other states and their subdivisions and with private
agencies, in all matters pertaining to civil defense in the city.
§ 9-205 DIRECTOR; POWERS PRIOR TO AN EMERGENCY.
   Prior to an emergency as defined in this article, the Director shall have
the following powers:
   (A)   To make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and regulations
to carry out the provisions of this article within the limits of the authority
conferred upon him or her herein, with due consideration to be given to the
plans and powers of the federal government, the government of the state and
other public and private agencies and organizations empowered to act in either
enemy caused emergencies or natural emergencies, or both;
   (B)   To prepare comprehensive plans for the civil defense of the city in
both enemy caused and natural emergencies, such plans and programs to be
integrated and coordinated with the plans and programs of the federal
government, of the state government and of other public and private agencies
and organizations empowered to act in either enemy caused or natural
emergencies, or both;
   (C)   To establish, within the limits of funds available, a public warning
system, composed of sirens, horns or other acceptable warning devices;
   (D)   To establish and carry out recruitment and training programs as may be
necessary to develop an adequate, qualified civil defense volunteer corps;
   (E)   To conduct drills, exercises and similar programs as may be necessary
to develop a well-trained, alert, fully prepared civil defense organization;
   (F)   To make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and
facilities of this city as he or she deems necessary to ascertain its
capacities for civil defense and the plan for the most efficient emergency use
therefor;
   (G)   On behalf of the city, to enter into mutual aid arrangements with
surrounding communities, in both the states of Oklahoma and Texas, subject to
the approval of the City Council;
   (H)   To delegate any administrative authority vested in him or her under
this article and to provide for the subdelegation of any such authority; and
   (I)   To take any other action proper and lawful under his or her authority
to prepare for either an enemy caused or a natural emergency.
§ 9-206 DIRECTOR; POWER IN AN ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCY.
   In the event of any actual enemy caused emergency, as proclaimed by the
Mayor, the Director of Civil Defense, with the approval of the Mayor, may
exercise during such emergency, the power to enforce all rules and regulations
relating to civil defense and acting under the authority of statutes, when
enacted, or under the authority of the Mayor as an agent of the Governor of
Oklahoma, may take control of all means of transportation and communications,
all stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine and supplies, and all facilities,
including buildings and plants, and exercise all powers necessary to secure the
safety and protection of the civilian population. In exercising such powers, he
or she shall be guided by regulations and orders issued by the federal
government and the Governor relating to civil defense and shall take no action
contrary to orders which may be issued by the Governor under similar emergency
powers.
§ 9-207 DIRECTOR; POWERS IN NATURAL EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In the event of any natural emergency as proclaimed by the Mayor, the
Director of Civil Defense, with the approval of the Mayor and acting under his
or her instructions, shall coordinate in every way proper the activities of the
civil defense organization.
   (B)   (1)   He or she is specifically charged in such emergency with the
collection, evaluation and dissemination of information to all agencies, both
public and private, participating in the city’s civil defense organization or
cooperating with any such emergency.
      (2)   He or she shall, as Director, have the power to recommend
appropriate action but he or she shall not otherwise have control over the
participating agencies.
      (3)   He or she shall also recommend to the Mayor the allocation of any
funds received from the federal or state governments or from any other source
to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions.
§ 9-208 LIABILITY.
   (A)   Neither the city, nor any officer or member of the civil defense
organization provided for in this article, shall be liable for personal injury
or property damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer
civil defense worker or member of any agency engaged in civil defense activity
prior to or during either an enemy caused or a natural emergency.
   (B)   Nor shall the city or any such officer or member be liable for the
death or injury of any persons, or damage to property, resulting from such
civil defense activity prior to or during either an enemy caused or a natural
emergency.
§ 9-209 MAYOR MAY ACCEPT AID.
   Whenever the federal government or the state or any person, firm or
corporation shall offer to the city any services, equipment, supplies,
materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil
defense, the Mayor may accept such offer and may authorize the Director of
Civil Defense to receive same, subject to the terms of the offer and the rules
and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer.
ARTICLE 3. PENALTY
§ 9-301 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article in the city or
who fails to carry out any of the provisions of this article or to comply
therewith, or with any of the orders, rules or regulations made under the
authority hereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding that set forth in § 3-501.
CHAPTER 10: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Article 1. Fire Prevention
10-101 Governed by state law
10-102 Definitions
10-103 Volunteer Fire Department
10-104 Fire Department to enforce regulations
10-105 Rural firefighting assessment
Article 2. Fireworks and Explosives
10-201 Sale or possession of fireworks prohibited
10-202 Explosives
Article 3. Penalty
10-301 Penalty
Article 4. Rural Fire Membership Service
10-401 Establishment
10-402 Advisory Committee
Article 5. Public Storm Shelter
10-501 Availability
10-502 Powers
10-503 Public storm shelter regulations
10-504 Noncompliance
ARTICLE 1. FIRE PREVENTION
§ 10-101 GOVERNED BY STATE LAW.
   The City Fire Department shall be subject to and governed by the provisions
of the State Volunteer Firefighters’ Act, being 11 O.S. §§ 29-201 to 29-205.
§ 10-102 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUNICIPALITY. One who is qualified to participate in the Firefighters’
Relief and Pension Fund.
   PUBLIC STORM SHELTER. The storm shelter located at the city public school
campus or any other storm shelter constructed or wholly owned by the city, if
any, which is intended by the owner to be made available for use by the general
public during an emergency.
   SERVICE ANIMALS. Dogs that are individually trained to do work or perform
tasks for people with disabilities.
   VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT. One which has in its employ not more than two
full-time firefighters.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER. One who is enrolled as a member of the Fire
Department and who serves in said capacity without receiving a regular salary.
(Ord. 2022-004, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 10-103 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The volunteer Fire Department shall consist of not less than 12
and not more than 20 members. Members of the City Fire Department may continue
as members of the volunteer Fire Department established under this code of
ordinances without probation, but shall be subject to the bylaws authorized
under this article.
      (2)   All new members shall be on probation for one year after their
appointment to the Department and shall not become regular members of the
Department upon completion of their probation period until their approval by a
majority of the regular members of the volunteer Fire Department.
   (B)   The volunteer Fire Department shall adopt bylaws, a copy of which
shall be deposited with the City Clerk and shall include the following.
      (1)   All volunteer firefighters are required, when notified, to respond
to alarms of fire and other emergencies.
      (2)   All volunteer firefighters are required to be present at all
regular meetings, call meetings and schools and training classes presented for
the benefit of the firefighters.
      (3)   There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month.
      (4)   Any volunteer firefighter having two unexcused absences in
succession, or three unexcused absences in a period of three months, will be
expelled from the Fire Department rolls.
      (5)   Volunteer firefighters leaving the city for an extended period of
time will be required to notify the Fire Chief.
      (6)   Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes
provided for him or her will be dropped.
      (7)   Any volunteer member of the Fire Department shall be dropped from
the rolls for the following offenses:
         (a)   Conduct unbecoming to a firefighter;
         (b)   Any act of insubordination;
         (c)   Neglect of duty;
         (d)   Any violation of the rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
         (e)   Conviction of a felony.
§ 10-104 FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE REGULATIONS.
   The fire prevention regulations adopted by the City Council shall be
enforced by the Fire Department of the city, under the supervision of the Fire
Chief, who may appoint such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as
shall be necessary.
§ 10-105 RURAL FIREFIGHTING ASSESSMENT.
   There is hereby assessed a charge for each call the Fire Department has to
make outside the city limits, which said charge shall be paid by the owner and/
or occupant of the property on which the fire occurs. The charge shall be as
follows: $200 for the first hour and $50 per hour thereafter, to be determined
from the time of leaving the fire station and the time of return.
ARTICLE 2. FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 10-201 SALE OR POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to
sell or have in his, her or its possession or to discharge, ignite or in any
manner aid, assist or abet in the discharging or igniting of any firecrackers
of any size, type or description, skyrockets, pistols, torpedoes, Roman
candles, flash salutes, flash rockets, balloons or other fireworks or
substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display, also other appliances
using caps containing chlorate or potash mixture within the city limits, unless
previously authorized by the City Council or its designee.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-1-2018)
§ 10-202 EXPLOSIVES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to store, keep, to have on
their premises or in their possession any explosive articles in the nature of
dynamite, blasting powder or other explosive materials of any kind or nature
without first having complied with the laws of the state, for the purpose of
selling, storing or keeping such articles.
ARTICLE 3. PENALTY
§ 10-301 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
including any code adopted by the city, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed the sum set forth in §
3-501 of this code, including costs. Each day upon which a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
ARTICLE 4. RURAL FIRE MEMBERSHIP SERVICE
§ 10-401 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Establishment and direction. There is hereby established the “City
Rural Fire Membership Service,” to be operated by the City Fire Department, but
shall be under the direction of the City Manager and City Council.
   (B)   Operation for rural residents. The rural fire service shall be
operated primarily for the purpose of providing fire protection to rural
residents living outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the area
generally encompassed by the city mailing route or any other area recommended
by the Rural Fire Advisory Board and approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Annual membership fee. The service to be provided is unlimited fire
runs to any member’s property within the area referred to in division (B) above
upon the annual payment of a membership fee, as set by the City Council, by
each property owner or resident residing on another’s property. The initial
membership fee shall be $50.
   (D)   Due date. Payment of the membership fee is due on or before July 1 of
each year.
   (E)   Cost to members who have not paid membership fee by due date. The cost
of a fire run for a member whose dues are not current shall be as set forth in
§
10-105 of this chapter.
   (F)   Use of funds, payment of claims. The monies collected from the members
in payment of their annual dues shall be placed in a separate account in the
General Fund to be used for the purchase and maintenance of fire trucks and
equipment and to otherwise operate the Fire Department, including the payment
of claims and other financial transactions.
   (G)   Limitations of responsibility.
      (1)   In the performance of fire prevention or protection services
outside the corporate limits of the city, the City Fire Department shall not
assume responsibility for damages to structures or other casualty incurred
prior to the arrival of the Department, nor shall the Department assume
responsibility for damages to structures incurred as a result of late
notification of the members of the Department.
      (2)   The Fire Department must always keep the property within the city
limits as its first priority and may not be able to provide assistance if the
equipment and personnel needed to respond are also needed in the city. Weather
conditions may also prohibit the Fire Department from responding.
      (3)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee may decide not to respond or
to leave a scene if, in his or her discretion, lives would be endangered by
responding or remaining.
   (H)   Collection of dues. Unpaid fees, charges or annual memberships may be
subject to collection by the city in any manner normally employed by the city,
including the use of small claims procedures in the district court. A person
will be dropped from the membership roles for nonpayment of dues.
   (I)   Expenses to member’s insurer. The expense to a member’s fire insurance
company shall be based on the same rate as set forth in §
10-105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-6-2006)
§ 10-402 ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a City Rural Fire Committee
for the purpose of advising the City Council concerning the operation of the
rural fire membership service.
   (B)   Composition. The Advisory Board shall consist of a city representative
and four additional members, who shall be appointed by the City Council from
the rural members of the rural fire membership service.
   (C)   Eligibility and terms. All paying members of the rural fire membership
service shall be able to serve on the Advisory Committee. The Committee members
shall serve for three-year staggered terms.
   (D)   Meetings.
      (1)   The Advisory Committee shall normally meet at least once each
quarter of the year, with more meetings as necessary.
      (2)   Their meetings shall comply with the Open Meeting Act, being 25
O.S. §§ 301 et seq., and their minutes comply with the Open Records Act, being
51 O.S. § 24A.1.
      (3)   They shall report to the City Clerk at least once each quarter.
   (E)   Submission of purchases and activities for Committee’s review.
      (1)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for ensuring that proposed fire
protection related purchases and activities are submitted to the Advisory Board
for its recommendation and comment prior to final action by the City Council,
if in excess of $1,000.
      (2)   Failure to submit such proposals to the Advisory Board shall not
invalidate City Council action on any such proposal.
(Ord. 2006-02, passed 6-6-2006)
ARTICLE 5. PUBLIC STORM SHELTER
§ 10-501 AVAILABILITY.
   (A)   Any public storm shelter may only be available for utilization as is
more particularly set forth below upon approval of, and at such times, as the
owner of the public storm shelter may allow. Any public storm shelter owned by
a school district or located on a school campus may only be made available as
set forth below during such dates and times when school is not in session and,
in such case, all rules, laws and regulations pertaining to the school property
and grounds shall apply.
   (B)   In all cases, the provisions of this article shall be construed in
such a way as to ensure the liability exemptions of the Governmental Tort
Claims Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 151 through 200, apply.
(Ord. 2022-004, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 10-502 POWERS.
   (A)   The decision to open or utilize, including the decision to close, any
public storm shelter, as that term is defined in §
10-102, shall be vested solely with the Chief of the Fire Department for the
city, or in his or her absence, the designee of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (B)   (1)   Upon making a determination that a public storm shelter should
be opened to the public and that personnel qualified to such position, pursuant
to the training and/or licensure requirements of the public storm shelter
owner, is/are available, the Chief of the Fire Department shall designate not
less than one member of the City Fire Department to maintain a presence at the
public storm shelter at all times between the time it is opened to the time it
is closed.
      (2)   Such individual shall be referred to as the Shelter Supervisor.
   (C)   (1)   No individual may be selected as Shelter Supervisor who does not
qualify under the required terms of the public storm shelter owner.
      (2)   Furthermore, any individual selected must maintain in good standing
all training and/or licenses required by the owner of the public storm shelter.
   (D)   No public storm shelter shall be opened unless a Shelter Supervisor,
with such qualifications as required by the owner, is appointed and available
to remain present at the public storm shelter at all times between the time it
is opened to the time it is closed.
(Ord. 2022-004, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 10-503 PUBLIC STORM SHELTER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any public storm shelter shall only be opened and closed pursuant to
the direction of the City Fire Chief. When the Fire Chief directs any public
storm shelter to be closed, all individuals must immediately evacuate the
public storm shelter.
   (B)   Only certified service animals may accompany any individual into any
public storm shelter. No emotional support animals or pets of any kind are
permitted entrance into any public storm shelter.
   (C)   Except for law enforcement personnel, firearms are strictly forbidden.
No individual, except for the Shelter Supervisor, or other on-duty member of
law enforcement, possessed with any firearm will be permitted entrance into any
public storm shelter.
   (D)   Smoking, vaping or use of tobacco in any form is prohibited in any
public storm shelter and, in the case of a public storm shelter located on
school grounds, on all school property.
   (E)   Alcohol and drugs (other than those prescribed by a physician) are
prohibited in any public storm shelter and, in the case of a public storm
shelter located on school grounds, on all school property.
   (F)   Radios or music devices are permitted in any public storm shelter only
with individual earphones.
(Ord. 2022-004, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 10-504 NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Any public storm shelter occupants who do not adhere to the public storm
shelter regulations or, in the judgment of the Shelter Supervisor, are
disruptive to the orderly functioning of the public storm shelter will be
referred to security or local law enforcement personnel and may be removed from
the facility.
(Ord. 2022-004, passed 6-7-2022)
CHAPTER 11: GARBAGE AND OTHER REFUSE
Section
Article 1. Garbage and Trash Collection
11-101 Definitions
11-102 Garbage and trash to be collected
11-103 Garbage cans to be provided
11-104 Refuse containers; bundles of trash
11-105 Garbage and trash to be placed in cans
11-106 Tree trimmings and building materials
11-107 Sewage to be drained off
11-108 Garbage, rubbish and trash to be collected by city
11-109 Garbage or trash not to be burned in city
11-110 Fees for collection of garbage
11-111 Collection of fees
Article 2. Penalty
11-201 Penalty
ARTICLE 1. GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION
§ 11-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Includes kitchen and table refuse, offal and every accumulation of
animal and vegetable matter which attends the preparation of, decay of, dealing
in or storage of meats, fruits, vegetables and other provisions for human
sustenance.
   SEWAGE. Includes water, human excrement and liquid refuse that should
properly be disposed of through the sanitary sewers of the city, but shall not
include rainwater, soil drainage or other drainage.
   TRASH and RUBBISH. Includes paper, rags, containers of paper, wood or tin,
tin cans, yard and house sweepings and all other household wastes, except tree
trimmings, building and manufacturing wastes, SEWAGE and GARBAGE as herein
defined, grasses, weeds, leaves and rocks.
§ 11-102 GARBAGE AND TRASH TO BE COLLECTED.
   Every person, firm or corporation using or occupying any building, house or
structure, within the city, shall be required to collect, separate and dispose
of all garbage, trash and sewage as provided in this article. It is unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to collect, separate or dispose of garbage,
trash or sewage in any manner except as provided herein.
§ 11-103 GARBAGE CANS TO BE PROVIDED.
   Every person, firm or corporation using and occupying any building, house or
structure within the city shall maintain a garbage can or cans of sufficient
size to hold the garbage and trash which will ordinarily accumulate between the
times when the garbage is collected.
§ 11-104 REFUSE CONTAINERS; BUNDLES OF TRASH.
   (A)   Refuse cans or containers shall be portable, with handles, and
constructed of watertight plastic or galvanized metal or equivalent in such a
manner as to be strong, not easily corrodible, rodentproof, flyproof and shall
have a tightfitting lid. The cover shall not be removed except when depositing
or removing the contents of the receptacle.
   (B)   Such containers shall have a capacity of not less than 20 gallons and
not more than 30 gallons, and if one container is not sufficient to hold the
quantity of refuse that will accumulate between collections, a sufficient
number of containers shall be provided. Refuse container surfaces shall be kept
free of garbage accumulations by wrapping, in paper, all garbage placed in the
container, by washing the container or by other means.
   (C)   Business establishments may provide a box or other receptacle with a
tight cover for the accumulation of rubbish, and said container shall be of
such construction and design that it can be maintained in a sanitary condition.
Containers shall be located and maintained so as not to create a fire hazard or
provide harborage for rodents or the breeding of insects and shall be placed at
an easily accessible place on the premises.
§ 11-105 GARBAGE AND TRASH TO BE PLACED IN CANS.
   (A)   All garbage, as defined herein, shall be placed in the garbage cans
maintained for that purpose. Before placing garbage in the can, all the liquid
portion of the garbage shall be drained into the sanitary sewer. The lid or
cover must be kept on the can at all times and fastened so that flies and other
insects or animals may not have access to the contents therein and shall be
removed only while depositing additional garbage or trash, or while the city
employees are removing and unloading the contents of the can for disposal.
   (B)   All trash as defined herein, shall be placed in the can with the
garbage, but only to such extent as will permit the cover or lid of the can to
be properly placed on the can. All trash in excess of that placed in the can
with the garbage shall be placed in a separate container or bundle and securely
tied and fastened so that it may be safely carried without coming apart or
spilling.
   (C)   Cans containing other than garbage or trash, as defined herein will
not be collected until such prohibited materials have been removed by the
person responsible for placing them in the can, and the collector shall
promptly report such person to the head of his or her department.
§ 11-106 TREE TRIMMINGS AND BUILDING MATERIALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL. Any business activity or use within the corporate limits of
the city.
      CURBSIDE SERVICE. Collection service provided by the city at the curb or
within the public street right-of-way.
      EXCESSIVE TREE TRIMMINGS. Anything above normal tree trimmings and the
load shall not exceed six feet wide by four feet high, by 12 feet in length,
and limbs shall not exceed ten inches in diameter.
      NORMAL TREE TRIMMINGS. Tree cuttings, debris or trimmings. Trimmings
shall be stacked, not to exceed two feet wide by three feet high, by six feet
in length, limbs shall not exceed three inches in diameter, and all limbs must
be piled in the same direction with the cut ends facing the roadway.
      RESIDENTIAL. Any resident living within the corporate limits of the city
having an active utility account.
   (B)   Free residential collection of normal and excessive tree trimmings.
The city shall conduct free limb and brush collection of normal and excessive
tree trimmings throughout the city during the third week of each month except
for the months of November and December. There will be no brush pick-up in
November and December. Brush and limbs shall not be placed for pickup prior to
the Saturday of the week it is to be picked up. All limbs must be piled in the
same direction with cut ends facing the roadway. The below stated fees shall be
charged for the collection of tree trimmings placed at curb side or alley that
fall outside the free limb and brush collection period set forth above.
   (C)   Additional residential and commercial collection and/or disposal
services of tree trimmings.
      (1)   Residential and commercial customers may request special curb side
collections of normal tree trimmings which fall outside the “free” collection
period set forth herein through the utility billing office. Tree trimmings to
be collected must be arranged so as to not constitute a safety hazard and
remains the resident’s responsibility, until removed by the city. Tree
trimmings to be collected through these additional services shall be placed at
curb side with the same rules and conditions set forth herein. No trimmings
shall be placed in the alley with the exception of those residences or
businesses whose property fronts upon a state or federal highway in which case
the trimmings will be placed in the alley.
      (2)   Any brush, limbs or trimmings piled at curbside or alley longer
than seven days shall be collected by the city at resident’s or businesses’
expense without any further notice. Cost will be assessed on-site.
      (3)   For residential and commercial curbside service for normal tree
trimmings, a fee of $15 per load will be assessed.
      (4)   For residential and commercial curbside service for excessive tree
trimmings, a fee of $50 per load will be assessed.
   (D)   General. Tree trimmings, building and manufacturing wastes, grasses,
leaves, weeds, rocks and other debris shall not be allowed to accumulate upon
any premises in the city so as to create a menace to health, a fire hazard or
an unsightly appearance and shall be removed at the expense of the person
responsible for the accumulation at the rates set forth in division (C) above.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 8-2-2016; Ord. 2020-03, passed 9-1-2020)
§ 11-107 SEWAGE TO BE DRAINED OFF.
   All sewage, as herein defined, shall be drained off and disposed of through
the proper receptacles into the sanitary sewer.
§ 11-108 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND TRASH TO BE COLLECTED BY CITY.
   All garbage, rubbish and trash in the city shall be collected by employees
of the city, and it is unlawful for any other person to collect or dispose of
or to haul or transport the same, or to molest or interfere with the contents
of any receptacle containing garbage, rubbish or trash; provided, however, that
in the event the waste materials are such that the city has no facilities to
properly collect and dispose of the waste matter or the collection or disposal
would create a hardship to the city, the city may license a private service to
dispose of the material. Collections by the city employees shall be made at
regular intervals, to be determined by the Council.
§ 11-109 GARBAGE OR TRASH NOT TO BE BURNED IN CITY.
   It is unlawful for any person or persons to burn garbage, rubbish or trash
within the city limits of the city.
§ 11-110 FEES FOR COLLECTION OF GARBAGE.
   (A)   The following fees shall be charged and collected per month by the
city for the disposition and collection of garbage, rubbish and trash:
      (1)   Residential. For each residence, occupied apartment or mobile home:
$7.50; and
      (2)   Commercial. For each commercial pick-up: $5.92 per each two-yard
dumpster per pick-up, plus 10%. Commercial customers not using dumpsters shall
be billed at the rate of one 1-yard dumpster per once a week pick-up, or $2.96
per pick-up, plus 10%.
   (B)   Following is a schedule indicating the monthly charges for various
kinds of commercial garbage service.
 
Number of Two-Yard Dumpsters Percent of Administration Pick Ups per Week Charge
                             Monthly Fee
Trash cans instead of        10%                       1                 $14.08
dumpsters
 
§ 11-111 COLLECTION OF FEES.
   (A)   The items mentioned in §
11-110 are charges for garbage service and shall be chargeable to the person or
persons, owner, occupant or lessee of all premises, and shall be collected by
and through the Water Department monthly in the same manner as charges for
water service are collected.
   (B)   A statement of the same shall be rendered on the water bill statement
and shall be due and payable at the same time as such bills for water service
and, in the event of the failure to pay the same, the garbage service shall be
discontinued, together with the water service, until such charges have been
paid, and the city shall have the right to discontinue the service or to file a
complaint against the occupant in the Municipal Court for his or her failure to
pay for such service and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum
not to exceed $20, together with costs, and each day shall be considered as a
separate offense for nonpayment as long as payment is not made.
ARTICLE 2. PENALTY
§ 11-201 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article, either by doing that
which is prohibited or by failing or refusing to do that which is commanded,
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine in any amount not exceeding the sum set forth in §
3-501, including costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense.
CHAPTER 12: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Article 1. Contagious Diseases
12-101 Introducing diseases
12-102 Report of contagious diseases
12-103 Quarantine
12-104 Police duties
Article 2. Toilet Facilities
12-201 Sanitary toilet facilities required
12-202 Proper disposal required
12-203 Septic tanks
12-204 Cost to be borne by owner
12-205 Council to cause officer to make inspections
12-206 Toilet facilities to be kept clean; use
12-207 Toilet facilities; nuisance
12-208 “Human excreta” defined
12-209 “Sanitary water closet” defined
12-210 “Sanitary pit privy” defined
12-211 “Health Officer” and “Chief of Police” defined
Article 3. Cafés and Restaurants
12-301 Sanitation
12-302 Health certificate
Article 4. Miscellaneous Provisions
12-401 Abandoned iceboxes
12-402 Removal of dead animals
12-403 Stagnant water
12-404 Wells
12-405 Spitting
Article 5. Ambulance Service
12-501 City may provide service
Article 6. Housing Code
12-601 Application of article
12-602 Definitions
12-603 Electricity
12-604 Heating
12-605 Light, ventilation
12-606 Maintenance
12-607 Sanitation
12-608 Space and location
12-609 Vermin
12-610 Water
12-611 Care of premises
12-612 Certificate of occupancy, when required
12-613 Mobile homes/travel trailers minimum requirements
Article 7. Noise Control
12-701 Declaration of policy
12-702 Definitions and standards
12-703 Use district noise levels
12-704 Motor vehicle noise
12-705 Sound level measurement
12-706 Noises prohibited
12-707 Exemptions
12-708 Permit
12-709 Enforcement responsibility
12-710 Terminology; definitions
12-711 Violations
12-712 Additional remedies
Article 8. Tobacco Products and Vapor Products
12-801 Purpose
12-802 Definitions
12-803 Prohibited conduct
12-804 Required signs
12-805 Penalties and enforcement
12-806 Findings
Article 9. Penalty
12-901 Penalty
ARTICLE 1. CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
§ 12-101 INTRODUCING DISEASES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person infected with or exposed to any
contagious or infectious disease to appear upon the street or in any public
place in the city so as to expose other persons to such disease.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having charge
of any child or children to allow, permit or suffer such child or children to
attend any classes, school or any gathering of people, or to appear upon the
street or in any public place in the city, while infected with or exposed to
any contagious or infectious disease, or in any manner so as to expose other
persons to such disease.
   (C)   No person suffering from, or infected with, a communicable form of a
venereal disease, shall engage in any occupation involving intimate contact
with children or in the occupation of nurse, domestic servant, barber,
hairdresser, chiropodist, manicurist, bath attendant, masseur or food handler.
§ 12-102 REPORT OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASES.
   (A)   Every practicing physician in the city shall report to the Public
Health Official within six hours after the diagnosis of any of the following
diseases:
      (1)   Diphtheria (including membranous croup);
      (2)   Scarlet fever;
      (3)   Smallpox;
      (4)   Yellow fever;
      (5)   Typhoid fever;
      (6)   Typhus fever;
      (7)   Asiatic cholera;
      (8)   Chickenpox;
      (9)   Tuberculosis;
      (10)   Undulant fever;
      (11)   Acute anterior poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis);
      (12)   Epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis;
      (13)   Whooping cough and mumps; and
      (14)   Any other pestilential, infectious or contagious disease.
   (B)   Syphilis, gonococcus infection and chancroid are hereby and
hereinafter recognized and declared to be contagious and infectious,
communicable and dangerous to the public health. For the purpose of this
article, the term VENEREAL DISEASE shall include all such diseases.
   (C)   The laws of the state governing the diseases stated hereinabove shall
apply to cases of this nature after said report is made.
§ 12-103 QUARANTINE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or go upon any ground or
premises under quarantine without first having obtained permission of the
Public Health Official to do so.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person whom the Public Health Official of
the city shall have ordered to be detained in quarantine to neglect or refuse
to be so detained, or willfully violate any quarantine regulation thereof;
every day of such neglect or refusal shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove, deface,
mutilate or destroy any order, notice or flag that may be posted or displayed
by the Public Health Official of the city.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully violate or refuse to
comply with the lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the
Public Health Official or any officer charged with enforcement of such order,
direction, prohibition, rule or regulation.
§ 12-104 POLICE DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the City Police Chief and all peace officers to
apprehend all persons coming within the provisions of this article and to aid
and assist, in every way possible, the local, county and state health officials
in enforcing each and every provision in this article.
ARTICLE 2. TOILET FACILITIES
§ 12-201 SANITARY TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every residence and building equipped with toilet facilities, in which
humans reside or are employed or congregate, shall be required to have a
sanitary method for the disposal of human excreta, namely, a sanitary water
closet or closets or sanitary pit privy or privies. The sanitary toilets
required by this article shall be the sanitary water closet type when the
property is served by the sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   All privies not adjacent to a sanitary sewer line shall be of the
sanitary pit type as approved by the State Health Department or sanitary water
closets.
§ 12-202 PROPER DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying
property within the city, to permit the disposal of human excreta on any
property owned or occupied by such person, firm or corporation, except in a
flush-type sanitary water closet or closets if the property is served by the
sanitary sewer system of the city; or in a sanitary pit privy or privies if the
property is not served by the sanitary sewer system of the city.
§ 12-203 SEPTIC TANKS.
   No septic tank, liquefying closet or chemical closet shall be constructed
within the corporate limits of the city, without a permit from the City Health
Officer, and same must comply with the requirements of the State Health
Department.
§ 12-204 COST TO BE BORNE BY OWNER.
   The cost of providing for a sanitary method of disposal of human excreta
shall be borne by the owner of the property upon which the sanitary pit privy
or privies are located in the city.
§ 12-205 COUNCIL TO CAUSE OFFICER TO MAKE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Council to cause the Health Officer or
other duly authorized representative to make an inspection of the methods of
disposal of sewage within the city, within five days after the effective date
hereof and as frequently thereafter as is necessary to secure compliance with
this article.
   (B)   (1)   Written notification of any violation of this article shall be
given by the Health Officer or their duly authorized representative to the
owner and occupant of the property upon which the violation occurs.
      (2)   If the provisions of this article have not been complied with
within the period of five days following date of notice of violation, the owner
or owners of the property shall be prosecuted in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
§ 12-206 TOILET FACILITIES TO BE KEPT CLEAN; USE.
   (A)   All privies shall be kept clean at all times and the seat of the
privies shall be kept closed at all times when the privies are not being used.
   (B)   (1)   No wash water, kitchen slop or anything other than human excreta
and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy.
      (2)   No excreta from any person suffering with typhoid fever, dysentery
or other serious bowel diseases shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or
sanitary water closet until the same shall be disinfected in such manner as may
be prescribed by the City Health Officer.
§ 12-207 TOILET FACILITIES; NUISANCE.
   All privies on any premises within the city, not constructed and maintained
in conformity with the provisions of this article and the Housing Code are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to public health.
§ 12-208 “HUMAN EXCRETA” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, HUMAN EXCRETA shall be construed to mean
the bowel and kidney discharges of human beings.
§ 12-209 “SANITARY WATER CLOSET” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, SANITARY WATER CLOSET shall be construed to
mean the flush-type toilet which is connected with a sewer line of sufficient
capacity and so constructed as to carry away the contents at all times.
§ 12-210 “SANITARY PIT PRIVY” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, SANITARY PIT PRIVY shall be construed to
mean a privy which is built or constructed so as to conform to the
specifications approved by the State Health Department.
§ 12-211 “HEALTH OFFICER” AND “CHIEF OF POLICE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this article, HEALTH OFFICER and CHIEF OF POLICE shall be
construed to mean the persons appointed to said positions or the person or
persons authorized to act as their agents.
ARTICLE 3. CAFÉS AND RESTAURANTS
§ 12-301 SANITATION.
   All persons, firms or corporations operating a restaurant, café, drive-in
and/or beer parlor shall comply with the State Department of Health sanitation
requirements.
§ 12-302 HEALTH CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   All persons who handle food shall have a certificate of health or a
letter stating that such person is not a carrier of a communicable disease, and
such certificate shall be obtained each six months and signed by a doctor of
medicine or a doctor of osteopathy.
   (B)   The person shall comply with all state and health requirements.
ARTICLE 4. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 12-401 ABANDONED ICEBOXES.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or permit to
retain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any
unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his or her
or its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or
lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the
inside, without first removing the snaplock or other locking device from the
icebox, refrigerator or container.
§ 12-402 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   No person shall permit any dead animal to remain on his or her premises for
a longer period than 24 hours. It shall be his or her duty, immediately upon
information that a dead animal is on his or her premises, to have the same
removed. He or she shall remove the same and make disposition of it as required
by the regulations of the State Health Department. No dead animals shall be
buried within the city.
§ 12-403 STAGNANT WATER.
   It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or occupant of any premises
in the city, to permit any stagnant water to stand or remain on any of his or
her premises so situated. All such places shall be drained, filled to a natural
level and kept in such condition that the water will flow away and not stand or
stagnate.
§ 12-404 WELLS.
   No person shall deposit any excrement, foul or decaying matter or other
deleterious substance in any public fountain, trough, watering place, well or
spring situated on any private or public property within the city or within
five miles of the corporate limits thereof.
§ 12-405 SPITTING.
   It is unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk, floors of any church, public hall, theater, school, depot, railroad
or bus station or other public place of assembly, or waiting room or other
place of congregation.
ARTICLE 5. AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 12-501 CITY MAY PROVIDE SERVICE.
   The city may provide ambulance service to the city and may, in its
discretion, discontinue ambulance service at any time. If the city provides
ambulance service, the cost shall be charged directly to the citizens as
follows.
   (A)   All residential users of either water, garbage, sewer or electricity
residing within the limits of the city shall be assessed a monthly fee of $4
per household or business. The fee may be changed by the Council by motion. The
fee shall be assessed for each rental unit or mobile home served through a
common meter. It shall also be assessed for each bed in a nursing home. The
landlord or lot owner or nursing home shall be liable for payment of the fee,
which shall inure to the benefit of the tenant occupying the home or rental
unit or bed for the period during which the fee is assessed. All persons who
are charged the fee shall receive the services provided for the residents of
the city by the city’s contract with Wadley Ambulance Service, a copy of which
is on file with the City Clerk for public inspection.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to collect for all charges by any means
available to the city.
ARTICLE 6. HOUSING CODE
§ 12-601 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or permit a member of his or her
family to occupy, or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit
which does not comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 12-602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Authorized by the Health Officer, who, in addition to the City
Council, shall be authorized to determine whether or not a dwelling or dwelling
unit complies with this article.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground but having less
than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
   CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having one-half or more than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   DWELLING. Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. Mobile temporary
housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a DWELLING.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   EXTERMINATION. The control or elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by elimination of their harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible
material that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or blocking their access to a dwelling; or by any other recognized and
legal pest elimination methods approved by the Health Officer.
   HABITABLE FLOOR AREA. The square footage in a habitable room, which shall be
used in computing maximum permissible occupancy. At least one-half of the
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA shall have a height of at least seven feet, and the floor
area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet
shall not be considered in computing HABITABLE FLOOR AREA.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, communicating corridors,
closets and storage spaces.
   HABITATION. A dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, mobile
home and premises, or any part thereof.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Official or his or her authorized
representative.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling or anywhere on the
premises, of insects, rodents or other pests, in such numbers as to constitute
a hazard to health.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living, sleeping, cooking, eating in or having
possession or use of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. For the purpose of this
definition, a person under one year of age shall not be counted as an OCCUPANT.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part
thereof in which dwelling units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who, along or jointly or severally with others:
      (1)   Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit with
or without actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as
owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person
thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions
of this article, and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
the same extent as if he or she were the owner.
   PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes,
gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents
and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections for
water, sewer or gas lines.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Space within a residential building for public use, such as
lobbies, lounges, reception halls, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms, and
dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
   REFUSE. All waste substances other than garbage, including, but not limited
to, the following trash or waste material: paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, plastics, ceramic material and dust.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or part thereof in which a rooming unit is let
by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not related to the
owner or operator by blood or marriage; or any dwelling or part thereof
containing two or more rooming units.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms in a rooming house or dwelling
forming a single habitable unit used or intended for use for living or sleeping
but not for cooking or storing food for eating purposes.
   SUBSTANTIAL REPAIR OR REMODEL. Any repair or remodel work exceeding in cost
the sum of $500 involving any installation of electrical, plumbing, heat and
air conditioning equipment or appliances.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, arranged for or furnished or provided by or under
control of the owner or operator.
§ 12-603 ELECTRICITY.
   Dwellings shall be supplied with electricity and shall meet the following
requirements.
   (A)   Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate wall type
electric convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling type light fixture.
   (B)   Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or public hall
shall contain at least one ceiling or wall type electrical light fixture.
   (C)   Every public hall or stairway in or leading into every multiple
dwelling shall have a minimum of one foot-candle of illumination measurable
with a standard light meter at floor level in halls and at tread level on
stairways when the structure is occupied.
§ 12-604 HEATING.
   Every dwelling unit shall have properly installed heating facilities which
are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely
and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments therein to a temperature of 70°F at a distance three feet above
floor level at an outside temperature of 0°F. The heating equipment shall be
operated as is reasonably necessary to maintain a temperature in all habitable
rooms at not less than 70°F.
§ 12-605 LIGHT, VENTILATION.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between
stops, shall be 10% of the habitable floor area of such room. If the only
window in the room is a skylight type window in the top of the room, the total
window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15% of the habitable floor
area of the room it serves.
   (A)   In every habitable room, at least 40% of the window or skylight
required shall be easily opened unless one of the following methods of
ventilating the room is approved.
      (1)   For inside habitable rooms, a wall area equivalent to 20% of the
floor area must open into a room with adequate light and ventilation. In such
cases, the window area shall be at least 8% of the total floor area to be
served by such windows.
      (2)   Kitchens may be equipped with a ventilation system capable of
continuous operation.
   (B)   Bathrooms and waste closet compartments may be equipped with a
ventilation system which is capable of continuous operation.
   (C)   Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any
room and such light obstructing structures are located less than three feet
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
the window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not
be included as contribution to the total required window area.
§ 12-606 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.
   (B)   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
watertight, weathertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in good repair.
   (C)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load that the normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept
in sound condition and good repair.
   (D)   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks and obstructions.
   (E)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious
to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (F)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required by this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
   (G)   No owner, operator or occupant shall furnish or use any cooking
equipment which does not comply with the following minimum standards.
      (1)   Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in sound working condition.
      (2)   Portable cooking equipment employing flame and cooking equipment
using gasoline or kerosene as fuel for cooking are prohibited.
   (H)   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this article to be removed from or
shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him
or her, except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies
when discontinuance of service is approved by the Health Officer.
   (I)   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean and in a sanitary condition.
§ 12-607 SANITATION.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain the following facilities:
      (1)   A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to
hot and cold water lines and a sewage disposal system;
      (2)   A flush water closet, located within the building and in a room
affording privacy, and which is properly connected to a water line and sewage
disposal system;
      (3)   A bathtub or shower, located within the building and in a room
affording privacy, and which is properly connected to a water line and sewage
disposal system; and
      (4)   A lavatory which shall be supplied by both hot and cold water lines
and connected to a sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Upon application and after hearing, the Council may grant its approval
and permission for the occupants of not more than two dwelling units occupying
the same building to share a flush water closet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub
or shower. In no event shall a total of more than six persons occupy the
dwelling units sharing such sanitary facilities.
   (C)   Where both city water supply and sanitary sewer are available, no
septic tank shall be installed. When a sanitary sewer is not available, a
septic tank may be installed which is in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the State Health Department and the provisions of this code.
   (D)   Every dwelling shall have the proper garbage and refuse containers.
   (E)   Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units
shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and the premises thereof.
   (F)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which he or she occupies and controls.
   (G)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her
garbage and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in garbage
disposal facilities or in proper containers. It is the responsibility of the
owner to supply such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a
dwelling containing four or more dwelling units and for all dwelling units
located on premises which four or more dwelling units share. In all other
cases, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such
facilities or container.
§ 12-608 SPACE AND LOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
habitable floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100
additional square feet of habitable floor space for every additional occupant.
A dwelling unit, exclusive of mobile homes, shall contain at least one
habitable room having a minimum horizontal dimension of ten feet. The amount of
area allowed as habitable floor area for the purpose of complying with these
regulations shall not be in excess of 80% of the gross floor area.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (A), GROSS FLOOR AREA includes all
of the area encompassed by measuring from the outside face of the exterior
walls.
   (B)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by the occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space; and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant, including buildings operated as clubs, shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangement be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room, a bathroom or water closet compartment.
   (D)   No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
      (2)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in this article; and
      (3)   The total area of window which can be opened in each room is equal
to at least the minimum required in this article, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate approved ventilation.
   (E)   No temporary housing shall be used without the written permission of
the Health Officer.
§ 12-609 VERMIN.
   The owner and occupant are responsible for extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
§ 12-610 WATER.
   Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating and storage facilities
which are properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition,
and properly connected to furnish hot water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub or
shower required therein.
   (A)   Water heating facilities shall be capable of delivering at every
required outlet at a temperature of not less than 120°F.
   (B)   Hot water storage facilities shall be provided and shall be able to
store amounts at least equal to or greater than the amounts given in the
following schedule:
      (1)   Minimum per dwelling unit: 20 gallons; and
      (2)   Minimum per occupant: four gallons.
§ 12-611 CARE OF PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential
building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such residential
property for the open storage of any derelict motor vehicle, icebox,
refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish and similar
items.
   (B)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or
occupant to keep the premises of such residential property clean and to remove
from the premises all such items as listed above, including, but not limited
to, weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage and the like upon notice from the Housing
Official.
§ 12-612 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   A certificate of occupancy is required of all residential buildings or
structures when such buildings or structures:
      (1)   Are newly constructed;
      (2)   Are structurally altered;
      (3)   Are enlarged through addition; and
      (4)   Are substantially repaired or remodeled.
   (B)   Inspections shall be made by the City Building Inspector or any
official designated by the City Council. Inspections shall seek to ascertain
compliance with this article and the building code. Upon approval, a
certificate will be issued by the City Clerk.
§ 12-613 MOBILE HOMES/TRAVEL TRAILERS MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, every mobile home shall meet the
provisions of this article and comply with all zoning laws.
   (B)   The provisions of this article, pertaining to floor area, flush
toilet, bath or shower, and ceiling height shall not apply to travel trailers.
   (C)   Every mobile home shall contain the following minimum gross floor area
of habitable space:
      (1)   One hundred fifty square feet for one or two occupants;
      (2)   One hundred additional square feet for three occupants; and
      (3)   Seventy-five square feet additional for each additional occupant
thereafter.
   (D)   Habitable space in a mobile home shall have a minimum ceiling height
of seven feet over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling
height is less than five feet shall not be considered in computing minimum
gross floor area.
   (E)   A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an
emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
   (F)   Rooms occupied for sleeping purposes must contain at least 60 square
feet of floor space, if used by more than one person, and at least 40 square
feet, if used by one person.
   (G)   Dependent mobile homes shall not be required to have a flush toilet or
a bath or shower.
ARTICLE 7. NOISE CONTROL
§ 12-701 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud
noises within the limits of the city, is a condition which has existed for some
time and the extent and magnitude of such noises is increasing.
   (B)   The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary or
unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual or unreasonable in their
time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort,
convenience, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (C)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of
public policy, and the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and
enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of
the inhabitants of the city.
§ 12-702 DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS.
   Terminology used in this article may be found in this article and, if not
defined therein, shall conform with applicable “American Standards National
Institute Publication.”
§ 12-703 USE DISTRICT NOISE LEVELS.
   (A)   Maximum permissible sound levels.
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to operate
or permit to be operated any stationary source or sound which either:
         (a)   Creates a sound level greater than 15 dBA above the ambient
sound level (L90) within any land use district during any measurement period;
or
         (b)   Creates a ninetieth percentile sound level (L90), a tenth
percentile sound level (L10) or a first percentile sound level (L1) for any
measurement period which exceeds the limits set forth for the following
receiving land use districts when measured at the boundary or at any point
within the property affected by the noise.
 
            L90                 L10                     L1
Use         9:00 p.m. 7:00 a.m. 9:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. -
District    -         -         7:00 a.m.   9:00 p.m.   7:00 a.m.   9:00 p.m.
            7:00 a.m. 9:00 p.m.
Commercial  55 dBA    60 dBA    65 dBA      70 dBA      70 dBA      75 dBA
Industrial  65 dBA    70 dBA    75 dBA      80 dBA      80 dBA      85 dBA
Residential 50 dBA    55 dBA    60 dBA      65 dBA      65 dBA      70 dBA
 
      (2)   When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in
more than one land use category, the limits of the most restrictive use shall
apply at the boundaries between different land use categories. For the purpose
of enforcing these provisions, a measurement period shall not be less than five
minutes nor more than 15 minutes.
   (B)   Correction of character of sound.
      (1)   For any stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone,
cyclically varying sound or repetitive impulsive sound, the limits set forth in
division (A) above shall be reduced by five dBA.
      (2)   Notwithstanding compliance with division (B)(1) above, it shall be
a violation of this article for any person to operate or permit to be operated
any stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone, cyclically varying or
repetitive impulsive sound which creates a noise disturbance.
§ 12-704 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at any time in such
a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor
vehicle shown below. The standard measurement height shall be five feet (1.5 m)
and the measurement distance no less than 25 feet (7.5 m). The distance shall
be measured from the near side of the nearest monitored traffic lane to the
microphone.
 
Sound Level, dBA
Motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or
gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or any     88
combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle
Motorcycle                                                                  78
Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor   78
vehicle
 
   (B)   This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding
the enforcement of any other provisions of this title relating to motor vehicle
mufflers for noise control.
   (C)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle
unless the exhaust system of such vehicle is:
      (1)   Free from defects which affect sound reduction;
      (2)   Equipped with a muffler or other noise reduction device;
      (3)   Not equipped with any cutout, bypass or similar device; and
      (4)   Not modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise
emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler of the
type originally installed on the vehicle.
§ 12-705 SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.
   Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter.
§ 12-706 NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   General prohibitions. In addition to the specific prohibitions
outlined in division (B) below and other sections outlined in this article, it
shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any noise disturbance within the limits of the city.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts are declared to be in
violation of this article:
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices. Sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle or other vehicle
on any street or public place therein except as a danger warning signal as
provided in the State Vehicle Code, or the sounding of any such signaling
device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
      (2)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
         (a)   Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, except as
provided for in herein, in such a manner as to violate this article or cause a
noise disturbance.
         (b)   The operating of any such device between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
the property boundary of the source or plainly audible at 50 feet (15 m) from
such device when operated in or on a vehicle on a public right-of-way or public
space, or in a boat on public waters.
      (3)   Public loudspeakers. Using or operating a loudspeaker or sound
amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound
vehicle in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property
for the purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions,
talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages
of persons in such a manner as to violate previous sections of this article, or
cause a noise disturbance unless a permit as provided by earlier sections of
this article is obtained.
      (4)   Hawkers and peddlers. Selling anything by outcry (vocal, electrical
or mechanical amplification) within any area of the city therein zoned
primarily for residential uses in such a manner as to violate sections of this
article, or cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this section shall not
be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and
beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other
similar licensed public entertainment events.
      (5)   Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal which,
by frequent or habitual noisemaking, violates sections of this article or
causes a noise disturbance. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
private and public facilities, including any animal pounds, which hold or treat
animals.
      (6)   Loading operation. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to
violate sections of this article or cause a noise disturbance.
      (7)   Construction work. Operating, or causing to be used or operated,
any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto:
         (a)   In residential or commercial land use districts between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and
         (b)   In any land use district where such operation exceeds the sound
level limits for an industrial land use as set forth in sections of this
article.
      (8)   Domestic power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated
any power equipment used for home or building repair or grounds maintenance,
including, but not limited to, power saw, sander, lawn mower or garden
equipment, in residential or commercial zones:
         (a)   Outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day; and
         (b)   Any such power equipment which emits a sound level in excess of
74 dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet (15 m).
      (9)   Commercial power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated,
any power equipment, except construction equipment used for construction
activities, including, but not limited to, chain saws, pavement breakers, log
chippers, powered hand tools:
         (a)   In residential or commercial land use districts between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; and
         (b)   In any land use district if such equipment emits a sound
pressure level in excess of 82 dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet (15 m).
      (10)   Enclosed place of public entertainment. Operating or permitting to
be operated in any place of public entertainment any loudspeaker or other
source of sound which produces, at a point that is normally occupied by a
customer, maximum sound levels of 90 dBA or greater as read with the slow
response on a sound level meter, unless a conspicuous and legible sign at least
225 square inches in area is posted near each public entrance stating:
“Warning: Sound Levels Within May Cause Hearing Impairment.” This provision
shall not be construed to allow the operation of any loudspeaker or other
source in such a manner as to violate sections of this article.
      (11)   Fireworks or explosives. The use of explosives or fireworks, or
the firing of guns or other explosive devices so as to be audible across a
property boundary or on a public space or right-of-way, without first obtaining
a permit as provided by sections in this article. This provision shall not be
construed to permit conduct prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or
regulations governing such activity.
      (12)   Racing events. Permitting any motor vehicle racing event at any
place in such a manner as to violate sections of this article or cause a noise
disturbance, without first obtaining a permit as provided in this article.
      (13)   Powered model mechanical devices. The flying of a model aircraft
powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing
or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices,
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day or in such a
manner as to violate sections of this article or cause a noise disturbance.
      (14)   Dynamic engine braking devices (commonly referred to as Jacobs
Brake). Operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic engine braking device
engaged except for the aversion of imminent danger.
      (15)   Defect in vehicle. Operating or permitting to be operated or used
any truck, automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle which, by virtue of
disrepair or manner of operation, violates sections of this article or causes a
noise disturbance.
      (16)   Refuse compacting vehicles. The operating or causing or permitting
to be operated or used any refuse compacting vehicle which creates a sound
pressure level in excess of 74 dBA at 50 feet (15 m) from the vehicle.
      (17)   Garbage collection. The collection of garbage, waste or refuse
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day:
         (a)   In any area zoned residential, or within 300 feet of an area
zoned residential; and
         (b)   In any land use district so as to cause a noise disturbance.
      (18)   Standing motor vehicles. The operating or causing or permitting to
be operated any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto in
such a manner as to violate sections of this article or cause a noise
disturbance for a consecutive period longer than 15 minutes during which such
vehicle is stationary in a residential zone.
      (19)   Quiet zones. Creating noise in excess of the residential standard
as defined in sections of this article within the vicinity of any school,
hospital, nursing home, institution of learning, court or other designated
area, while the same is in use, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the
streets indicating that the same is a quiet zone.
      (20)   Bells and chimes. Sounding, operating or permitting to sound or
operate an electronically amplified signal from any bell, chime or clock,
including, but not limited to, bells, chimes or clocks in schools, houses of
religious worship or governmental buildings, which fails to meet the sound
level standards set forth in sections of this article for more than five
minutes in any hour.
      (21)   Fixed sirens, whistles and horns. The sounding or causing the
sounding of any whistle, horn or siren as a signal for commencing or suspending
work, or for any other purpose except as a sound signal of imminent danger or
the testing of such equipment, in such a manner as to violate sections of this
article or cause a noise disturbance.
      (22)   Vehicle, recreational vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing.
Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any vehicle, recreational vehicle,
motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across
a residential real property boundary or within a quiet zone.
      (23)   Groups or gatherings of people. Talking, laughing, yelling,
singing or otherwise making noise by two or more people between the hours of 9:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to violate sections
of this article or cause a noise disturbance.
      (24)   Emergency type alarms. The sounding, operating or permitting to
sound or operate an electronically amplified signal from an alarm which fails
to meet the sound level standards set forth in sections of this article for
more than 15 minutes in any hour; or the testing of such emergency alarm which
fails to meet the sound level standards set forth in sections of this article
for more than five minutes in any 24-hour period. Testing of any emergency type
alarm shall be prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 12-707 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of any emergency; or
   (B)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
§ 12-708 PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions in
this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the Mayor and City
Council. Any permit granted by the Mayor and City Council or their authorized
representative shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been
granted, including, but not limited to, the effective dates, time of day,
location, sound pressure level or equipment limitation. The relief requested
may be granted upon good and sufficient showing:
      (1)   Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify
his or her activity or operation to comply with this article;
      (2)   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this article;
and/or
      (3)   No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
   (B)   The Mayor or City Council may prescribe any reasonable conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon a community or
the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 12-709 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Police Department will have enforcement responsibility for this article
as it relates to stationary sources and joint enforcement responsibility with
any other appropriate law enforcement agencies as it relates to vehicular
sources.
§ 12-710 TERMINOLOGY; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound level as measured with a sound level meter
using the A-weighing network. The standard notation is dB(A) or dBA.
   AMBIENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level of the all
encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of
sounds from many sources. It is also the A-weighted sound pressure level
exceeded 90% of the time based on a measurement period of not less than ten
minutes nor more than 30 minutes.
   CONTINUOUS SOUND. Any sound which exists, essentially without interruption,
for a period of ten minutes or more.
   CYCLICALLY VARYING NOISE. Any sound which varies in sound level such that
the same level is obtained repetitively at reasonably uniform intervals of
time.
   DECIBEL. Logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing
the amplitude of sound. DECIBEL is denoted as dB.
   DEVICE. Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually
produces, noise when operated or handled.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE. Commonly referred to as Jacobs Brake, a device used
primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal
combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the
use of wheel brakes.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or
to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property or a public utility
to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect
persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. A noise containing excursions, usually less than one
second, of sound levels of 20 dBA or more over the ambient sound level using
the fast meter characteristic.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power,
including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semitrailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, mopeds and racing
vehicles.
   MUFFLER. An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating
from such apparatus.
   NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs reasonable persons
with normal sensitivities, or which injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, hearing, peace or safety of other persons.
   PERCENTILE SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.
      (1)   TENTH PERCENTILE NOISE LEVEL. The A-weighted sound pressure level
that is exceeded 10% of the time in any measurement period (such as the level
that is exceeded for one minute in a ten-minute period). It is denoted L10.
      (2)   NINETIETH PERCENTILE NOISE LEVEL. The A-weighted sound pressure
level that is exceeded 90% of the time in any measurement period (such as the
level that is exceeded for nine minutes in a ten-minute period). It is denoted
L90.
   PERSON. Any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user,
owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or
employees.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE. Any noise for which the information content of that
noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as, but not limited
to, understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised
or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at
the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person or such
imaginary line which separates individual living units in a multiple-family
dwelling.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway or alley or
similar place which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity.
   PURE TONE. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a
set of single pitches. For the purposes of measurement, a PURE TONE shall exist
if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band when the tone
exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two
contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz
and above, by eight dB, for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz, and by
15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
   REPETITIVE IMPULSIVE NOISE. Any noise which is composed of impulsive noises
that are repeated at sufficiently slow rate such that a sound level meter set
at “fast” meter characteristic will show changes in sound pressure level
greater than ten dBA.
   SOUND. Mechanical energy transmitted by a cyclic series of compressions and
rarefaction of molecules of the material or materials through which it passes.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector and integrator or time average, output meter and/or visual display and
weighing networks, used to measure sound levels. The SOUND LEVEL METER shall
conform as a minimum to the requirements of ANSI S1.4, 1971, Type 2 or its
successor publication; and be set to an A-weighted response. An acoustical
calibrator accurate to within plus or minus one decibel shall be used to verify
the before and after calibration of the SOUND LEVEL METER on each day noise
measurements are taken.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base-10 of the ratio
of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals. The
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL is denoted Lp or SPL.
   STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE. Any device, fixed or movable including motor
vehicles, which is located or used on property other than a public right-of-
way.
   STEADY NOISE. A sound pressure level which remains essentially constant
during the period of observation, i.e., does not vary more than six dBA when
measured with the “slow” meter characteristic of a sound level meter.
   USE DISTRICT. Those districts established by the city zoning ordinances.
§ 12-711 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this article may be punished by
a fine of not more than the fine and costs set forth in §
3-501.
   (B)   Each time such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 12-712 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   Violations of sections of this article are deemed and declared to be a
nuisance, and such may be subject to summary abatement by means of a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
ARTICLE 8. TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
§ 12-801 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the Mayor and Council, in enacting this article, to
provide for the public health, safety and welfare by discouraging the
inherently dangerous behavior of tobacco product and vapor product use around
non-users, especially children; by protecting the public from exposure to
secondhand smoke where people work, play and learn; by reducing the potential
for children to wrongly associate tobacco product and vapor product use with a
healthy lifestyle; and by affirming and promoting a healthy environment in the
city.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 12-802 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDOOR AREA. Any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public,
at all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. INDOOR AREA
includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees,
as well as all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or
totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or
closed windows, stairways or the like.
   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY. All buildings, indoor areas and outdoor areas,
including, but not limited to, recreational areas, and other property, or
portions thereof, owned or operated by the city, including, but not limited to,
vehicles and equipment owned by the municipality.
   OUTDOOR AREA. Any area that is not an indoor area, and includes outdoor
recreational areas.
   SMOKING. The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted smoking device.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product.
   VAPOR PRODUCT.
      (1)   Any noncombustible product that may or may not contain nicotine
that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit or other
mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in
a solution or other form.
      (2)   VAPOR PRODUCT shall include any vapor cartridge or other container
with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be used with an
electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe
or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of a
solution, that may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used
with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or
electronic device.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 12-803 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   Smoking tobacco products is prohibited in all places in which smoking
tobacco products is prohibited by state law.
   (B)   Using tobacco products and vapor products is prohibited on all
municipal property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and recreational areas.
   (C)   Nothing in this article prohibits any person or entity from
prohibiting the use of tobacco products or vapor products on their property,
even if the use of tobacco products or vapor products is not otherwise
prohibited in that area.
   (D)   No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco products
or vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity
and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by
law.
   (E)   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles,
such as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person
or entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of
ash receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco
products or vapor products in violation of any provision of this article.
   (F)   No person shall dispose of tobacco product or vapor product waste
within an area in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is
prohibited.
   (G)   No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten or otherwise retaliate
against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this
article.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 12-804 REQUIRED SIGNS.
   (A)   The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in
which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this
chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous sign at each point of
entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area.
   (B)   For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products in
indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least four inches by two inches in
size and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that
a tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on the use of tobacco
products or vapor products in outdoor areas, signs:
      (1)   Whereas, 21.1% of adults in Oklahoma smoke;
      (2)   Whereas, tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of death,
killing more than 7,500 Oklahomans every year;
      (3)   Whereas, tobacco use can cause disease in nearly all organ systems,
and is responsible for 87% of lung cancer deaths, 79% of all chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease deaths and 32% of coronary heart disease deaths;
      (4)   Whereas, studies show separate smoking areas or rooms, air filters
and ventilation systems are insufficient to protect nonsmokers from secondhand
smoke indoors;
      (5)   Whereas, according to the United States Surgeon General, there is
no risk-free level of exposure to secondhand smoke;
      (6)   Whereas, nearly 50,000 nonsmokers die each year in the United
States as a result of exposure to secondhand smoke;
      (7)   Whereas, using vapor products or smokeless tobacco products is not
safe;
      (8)   Whereas, research has found that aerosol from vapor products
contains chemicals known to cause cancer, birth defects or other reproductive
harm and vapor products may involuntarily expose children, youth, pregnant
women and other bystanders to aerosolized nicotine;
      (9)   Whereas, smokeless tobacco use increases people’s risk of heart
disease, stroke and cancer, specifically oral, esophageal and pancreatic
cancers, as well as stillbirth and preterm delivery;
      (10)   Whereas, community policies that fail to prohibit the use of
tobacco products normalize tobacco use and make it more likely that people will
use tobacco products because they see others using tobacco;
      (11)   Whereas, tobacco use and exposure to secondhand smoke impose an
enormous economic burden upon the government, taxpayers, business owners and
individuals through health care costs and lost productivity, as evidenced by
the $1.62 billion the state spends on smoking-related medical care and $2.1
billion in lost productivity;
      (12)   Whereas, laws restricting the use of tobacco products have
demonstrated a high return on investment; and
      (13)   Whereas, 81.7% of Oklahomans agree that all workplaces in cities
and towns should have smoke free policies; and shall be weather-resistant, at
least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of at least one inch, and
shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a
tobacco-free environment is provided.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his or her designee
shall be responsible for the posting of signs on municipal property, both
indoor and outdoor.
   (D)   Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall
not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor products
in violation of any other provision of this article.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 12-805 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city.
In addition, any peace officer or Code Enforcement Official may enforce this
chapter.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly violates this article shall be punished by a
citation and fine of not less than $25 and not more than $100 in accordance
with this code.
   (C)   The possession of a lighted tobacco product in violation of this
article is a nuisance.
   (D)   Each instance of tobacco product or vapor product use in violation of
this article shall constitute a separate violation.
   (E)   The use of a vapor product in violation of this article is a nuisance.
   (F)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any
provision of this article regarding tobacco product or vapor product use shall
also constitute a violation of this article.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 12-806 FINDINGS.
   The Mayor and City Council hereby finds and declares as follows:
   (A)   Whereas, state law prohibits smoking in most indoor workplaces; and
   (B)   Whereas, state law expressly permits municipalities to impose
additional regulations on smoking tobacco products on property owned or
operated by local governments; and
   (C)   Whereas, state law does not preempt local governments from regulating
the use of smokeless tobacco products and vapor products.
(Ord. 20-01, passed 2-4-2020)
ARTICLE 9. PENALTY
§ 12-901 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any ordinance,
code or standard adopted by reference by this chapter, or maintains or permits
to continue any public nuisance as defined by this chapter, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not to
exceed the amount set forth in § 3-501, including costs. Every day upon which a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
CHAPTER 13: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
Article 1. Application of Chapter; Jurisdiction of Court
13-101 Application of chapter
13-102 Jurisdiction of court
Article 2. Definitions
13-201 Definitions
Article 3. Organization and Procedure
13-301 Judge; alternate judge; acting judge
13-302 Compensation of judges
13-303 No change of venue; disqualification of judge
13-304 Chief of Police
13-305 Clerk of the court
13-306 Attorney
13-307 Contempt
13-308 Traffic violations
13-309 Style of prosecutions
13-310 Warrant of arrest
13-311 Bail; temporary cash bond
13-312 Arraignment
13-313 Postponement of trial
13-314 Defendant to be present at trial
13-315 Trial procedure
13-316 Judgment
13-317 Costs upon judgment of conviction
13-318 Enforcement of payment of fines or costs by imprisonment; persons unable
to pay
13-319 Suspension of sentence
13-320 Witness fees
13-321 Failure to obey promise to appear
Article 4. Penalty
13-401 Penalty
13-402 Law Enforcement Officers Training Fund
13-403 Technology fee
ARTICLE 1. APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; JURISDICTION OF COURT
§ 13-101 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the
Municipal Court of the city.
   (B)   To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-102 JURISDICTION OF COURT.
   The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any provision of this code or of any other
ordinance of the city is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred
to the court in accordance with applicable laws.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
§ 13-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The City Marshal or the police officer in charge of the
police force of the city.
   CLERK. The City Clerk, including the deputy or member of the office staff of
the City Clerk performing duties of the Clerk’s office.
   COURT. The Municipal Court of the City of Lexington.
   JUDGE. The Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Lexington, including
the acting judge or alternate judge thereof, as provided for by state statutes
and this chapter.
   JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The district court judicial district of the state wherein
the government of the city is situated.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 3. ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE
§ 13-301 JUDGE; ALTERNATE JUDGE; ACTING JUDGE.
   See §
1-306 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-302 COMPENSATION OF JUDGES.
   The compensation of the Judge of the Municipal Court of the city shall be
determined from time to time by the City Council and may be increased or
decreased by said Council by motion or resolution.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-303 NO CHANGE OF VENUE; DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE.
   (A)   In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed,
but the Judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her
disqualification or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms,
conditions and procedures provided by law for courts of record.
   (B)   If the Judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an
alternate or acting judge, appointed as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-304 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   All writs of process of the court shall be directed, in his or her official
title, to the Chief of Police of the city, who shall be the principal officer
of the court.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-305 CLERK OF THE COURT.
   (A)   The City Clerk, or a deputy designated by him or her, shall be the
clerk of the court. Duties of the clerk shall include the following.
      (1)   He or she shall assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of
the court and in preparing writs, processes and other papers.
      (2)   He or she shall administer oaths required in proceedings before the
court.
      (3)   He or she shall enter all pleading, processes and proceedings in
the dockets of the court.
      (4)   He or she shall perform such other clerical duties relating to the
proceedings of the court as the Judge shall direct.
      (5)   He or she shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits
and sums of money payable to the court.
      (6)   He or she shall pay to the Treasurer of the municipality, on the
first and fifteenth days of each month, all monies so received by him or her,
except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by
him or her for special purposes. All monies paid to the Treasurer shall be
placed in the General Fund of the municipality, or in such other fund as the
governing body may direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the
municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the
fund in which it is placed.
   (B)   The clerk of the court shall give bond to the city, in the form
prescribed by state law, in the sum of $1,000. When executed, the bond shall be
submitted to the City Council for approval, and when approved, it shall be
filed with the City Clerk and retained in the municipal archives.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-306 ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney, or his or her duly designated assistant, shall be the
prosecuting officer of the court. He or she shall prosecute all alleged
violations of the ordinances of the city and shall be authorized, at his or her
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals and proceedings in error and review
from the court to any other courts of the state, and to represent the city in
all proceedings arising out of matters of the court.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-307 CONTEMPT.
   Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the Judge or by the
court may be enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt
committed as to him or her while holding court, or committed against process
issued by him or her, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district
court of this state.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-308 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   If a police officer observes facts which he or she believes constitute
a violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, committed by a resident
thereof, in lieu of arresting such person, he or she may take his or her name,
address, operator’s license number, the registered license number of the motor
vehicle involved and any other pertinent and necessary information, and may
issue to him or her in writing in form prescribed by the Mayor or his or her
duly designated delegate, a traffic citation embracing the above information
and further stating the traffic violation alleged to have occurred, and
notifying him or her to answer to the charge against him or her in the court at
a time, not later than five days thereafter or the next court date, specified
in the citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator, endorsed on the citation, to answer as specified, shall release said
person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer
as prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed, and the case shall
be prosecuted as otherwise provided in this article.
   (B)   (1)   If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a resident of
the city, and the police officer chooses not to follow the procedure outlined
in division (A) above, or if the alleged traffic violation is committed by a
nonresident of the city, the police officer shall take him or her into custody
under arrest.
      (2)   The arrested person shall either: be taken immediately before the
Judge for further proceedings according to law; or have bail fixed for his or
her release in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Upon providing the bail as fixed and upon giving his or her written
promise to appear upon a day certain as provided in division (A) above, he or
she shall be released from custody.
   (C)   If the alleged offense be a violation of an ordinance restricting or
regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such
an ordinance, and the operator be not present, the police officer shall place
on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the
operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in division
(A) above, with such variation as the circumstances require. The operator of
the vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the violation as
if it had been issued to him or her personally under division (A) above.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-309 STYLE OF PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   All prosecutions for violation of this code or other ordinances of the
city shall be styled “The City of Lexington, Plaintiff, vs. (naming defendant
or defendants).”
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided with respect to traffic violations,
prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing of a written complaint,
subscribed and verified by the person making complaint and setting forth
concisely the offense charged.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-310 WARRANT OF ARREST.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, upon the filing of a
complaint, approved by endorsement by the City Attorney or by the Judge, there
shall be issued a warrant of arrest in substantially the following form.
 
   The City of Lexington, Oklahoma, to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Lexington, Oklahoma:
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by                 that the offense of                 has
been committed and accusing                       thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to
arrest the above named (Defendant or Defendants) and bring (him, her or them) before me at Lexington,
Oklahoma, City Courtroom.
 
   WITNESS my hand this        day of             , 20        .
 
         Judge of the Municipal Court
         of the City of Lexington
 
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, personally or through a
duly constituted member of the police force of this city or through any other
persons lawfully authorized to act, to execute such warrant as promptly as
possible.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-311 BAIL; TEMPORARY CASH BOND.
   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any other time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by the Judge, who shall
prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-312 ARRAIGNMENT.
   (A)   Upon making his or her appearance before the court, the defendant
shall be arraigned. The Judge or the City Attorney shall read the complaint to
the defendant, inform him or her of his or her legal rights and the
consequences of conviction and ask him or her whether he or she pleads guilty
or not guilty.
   (B)   If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and
sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.
   (C)   If the plea is “not guilty,” the court may proceed to try the case or
may set it for hearing at a later date.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-313 POSTPONEMENT OF TRIAL.
   Before a trial commences in the Municipal Court, either party, upon good
cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-314 DEFENDANT TO BE PRESENT AT TRIAL.
   The defendant must be present in person at the trial of his or her case in
the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-315 TRIAL PROCEDURE.
   In all trials in the Municipal Court, as to matters not covered in this
chapter, by the statutes relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules
duly promulgated by the State Supreme Court, the procedure applicable in trials
of misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can
be made effective.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-316 JUDGMENT.
   (A)   At the close of a trial in the Municipal Court, judgment shall be
rendered immediately by the Judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his or
her docket.
   (B)   If judgment of the Municipal Court is of acquittal, and the defendant
is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he or she must be discharged
at once.
   (C)   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the court
must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed
by this code or other applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-317 COSTS UPON JUDGMENT OF CONVICTION.
   If judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of the court shall tax the
costs to the defendant in a sum not exceeding $10, including the fees and
mileage of witnesses.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-318 ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT OF FINES OR COSTS BY IMPRISONMENT; PERSONS
UNABLE TO PAY.
   (A)   If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a
fine or costs or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same
shall be satisfied at the rate of $2 per day.
   (B)   If the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the
Municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court
minutes and to be certified to the district court of the county wherein the
government is situated, where it shall be entered upon the district court
judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court
judgment. Thereupon, the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement
of said judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-319 SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   After conviction and sentence of a defendant in the Municipal Court, the
Judge may suspend the judgment or costs or both and allow the person so
convicted to be released upon his or her own recognizance. Any person so
released shall be required to report at such times and to such person or
officer as the Judge shall direct. The Judge may cause a warrant to be issued
for any person so released if it shall be made to appear to the Judge that such
person:
   (A)   Has been guilty of the violation of any law after his or her release;
   (B)   If habitually associating with lewd or vicious persons; or
   (C)   Is indulging in vicious habits.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-320 WITNESS FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police
officers or peace officers, shall be entitled to $1 for each day of attendance
upon filing claim, plus $0.08 for each mile actually and necessarily traveled
in going to and returning from the place of attendance, if their residence is
more than one mile outside the limits of the city.
      (2)   No witness shall receive fees for mileage in more than one case for
the same period of time or the same travel.
   (B)   (1)   A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit, with the
clerk of the court, a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of
attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be
required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
         (a)   The names of no more than three witnesses;
         (b)   The defendant, by reason of his or her poverty, is unable to
provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
         (c)   The testimony of such witness is material; and
         (d)   Their attendance at the trial is necessary for his or her proper
defense.
      (2)   The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-321 FAILURE TO OBEY PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   (A)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his or her
written promise to appear given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic
citation or city complaint regardless of the disposition of the charge for
which the citation was originally issued.
   (B)   A person who violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of $200.
(Ord. 2003-05, passed 11-4-2003)
ARTICLE 4. PENALTY
§ 13-401 PENALTY.
   (A)   If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the city is a licensed
attorney, the court may impose a fine not to exceed $100 and costs.
   (B)   If the Judge is not a licensed attorney, the court may impose a fine
not to exceed $40 and costs.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-402 LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TRAINING FUND.
   (A)   Beginning October 1, 1983, a Law Enforcement Officers Training Fund is
created for the purpose of reimbursing the State Law Enforcement Officers
Training Fund for certain training received by the city’s law enforcement
officials.
   (B)   Beginning October 1, 1983, for every fine of $10 or more collected by
the Municipal Court of the city, $2, shall be set aside for the Law Enforcement
Officers Training Fund.
   (C)   The City Clerk, beginning January 1, 1984, and every quarter
thereafter, shall deposit the money set aside from the previous quarter into
the State Law Enforcement Officers Training Fund.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 13-403 TECHNOLOGY FEE.
   A Municipal Court technology fee shall be and is hereby established in the
amount of $10. The fee shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any
and all costs, fees, fines or penalties otherwise provided for by law and shall
be assessed on every citation disposed of in the Municipal Court except those
that are voided, declined for prosecution, dismissed without costs, or the
defendant is acquitted. The revenues generated by this fee shall be used solely
and exclusively for the acquisition, operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of data processing equipment and software related to the
administration of the municipal criminal justice system and the costs of
prosecution.
(Ord. 2016-04, passed 8-2-2016)
CHAPTER 14: NUISANCES
Section
Article 1. General
14-101 Nuisance unlawful
14-102 City may define nuisance
14-103 “Nuisance” defined
14-104 Public nuisances; remedies
14-105 Private nuisance; remedies
14-106 Person liable
14-107 Procedures cumulative
Article 2. Abatement of Nuisances
14-201 Summary abatement of nuisances
14-202 Abatement of public health nuisance
14-203 Abatement by suit in district court
14-204 Elimination of detrimental or hazardous accumulations of weeds and trash
14-205 Agreement to abate nuisances
Article 3. Penalty
14-301 Penalty
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
§ 14-101 NUISANCE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person (owner, lessee or other) to create or maintain
a nuisance within the city or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under
his or her control within the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-102 CITY MAY DEFINE NUISANCE.
   The city has the power to determine what is and what shall constitute a
nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of the public
health, public parks and the public water supply, outside its corporate limits.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-103 “NUISANCE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Consists in unlawfully doing an act or omitting to perform a duty,
or is any thing or condition which:
      (1)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others;
      (2)   Offends public decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous for passage any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin or any public park, square, street or other public property; and/or
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-104 PUBLIC NUISANCES; REMEDIES.
   (A)    A public nuisance is one which affects, at the same time, an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be
unequal.
   (B)    The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      (1)   Prosecution on complaint before the Municipal Court;
      (2)   Prosecution of information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      (3)   Civil action; and
      (4)   Abatement:
         (a)   By person injured; or
         (b)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
   (C)    No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an
actual obstruction of public right.
   (D)    In addition to other public nuisances which may be determined to be
nuisances under the laws of the state, the following are hereby expressly
declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink, or
the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made;
      (2)   The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in
violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or furnished in violation
of the state law or ordinances of the city;
      (3)   The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures,
books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects, or the keeping of a
place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed;
      (4)   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punchboards or otherwise;
      (5)   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced;
      (6)   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law
or ordinances are practiced or carried on;
      (7)   The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the
ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held;
      (8)   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
      (9)   The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons
of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
      (10)   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially and unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others;
      (11)   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which
causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be
authorized by law or ordinance;
      (12)   Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall or ice or snow to
fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk;
      (13)   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (14)   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or
other things which are or are likely to be breeding places of flies,
mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs;
      (15)   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay or other condition;
      (16)   Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed,
conditioned and/or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (17)   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
      (18)   Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace,
health, safety, morals or welfare;
      (19)   Discharge into the open air of the sound laden exhaust from, or
escape of excessive sound from, working parts of the transmission; or
conveyance of fluids through piping, conduit or by way of other mechanical
transport, stationary, portable or mobile engine or engines or motorized
vehicle or vehicles, such as to produce a noise disturbance. The use of jake
brakes to slow a semitruck is specifically included in this prohibition; and
      (20)   The riding of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) within 1,500 feet of any
residence within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-2-2018)
§ 14-105 PRIVATE NUISANCE; REMEDIES.
   (A)    Every nuisance not included in §
14-104 is a private nuisance.
   (B)    The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      (1)   Civil action; and
      (2)   Abatement:
         (a)   By person injured; or
         (b)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-106 PERSON LIABLE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon or in the use of such property created by a former owner is
liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-107 PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE.
   The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and
by other provisions of law and ordinances shall be cumulative one to the other;
the city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating
any particular nuisance.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 2. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
§ 14-201 SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)    Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has power summarily to
abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him or
her to be heard, if this can be done.
   (B)    Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more
persons of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be
such as to justify and even to require the Mayor, or other appropriate officer
or agency of the city government, to take immediate and proper action summarily
to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more
deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
   (C)    The Chief of the Fire Department, the City Marshal, the City Attorney
or any other officer subordinate to the City Council may submit to the City
Council a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the
ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be
abated. The Health Officer, any City Council member or any resident or
residents of the city may submit such a statement and request or recommendation
to the City Council.
   (D)    The City Council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance
is a nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject,
the Council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers
and other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or to have it
abated, the Council shall give notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to
the owner of any property concerned and to any other person alleged or deemed
responsible for or to be causing the nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to
be heard, if such notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such
notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by
mail or by service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known;
if the names and addresses are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals
or welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation within the city.
   (E)    If the Council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner and/or the person responsible for or causing the nuisance to
abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or
welfare of the person, persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly
jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety, morals or
welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay or if the owner or
other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within
the specified time, the Council shall direct the Mayor to abate the nuisance or
to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical. The City Clerk shall send
a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner and/or other
persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the
circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost
shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts of the city may
be collected.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-202 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.
   (A)    The Health Officer shall have authority to order the owner or
occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at
his or her own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition
conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the
transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public
health, within 24 hours or within such other time as may be reasonable; a
failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing
and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or
authorized agent thereof, by the Health Officer or by a police officer, or a
copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner,
occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises is unoccupied
and the residence of the owner, occupant or agent is unknown or is without the
state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by
publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation
in the city.
   (B)    If the order is not complied with, the Health Officer may cause the
order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified
to the City Clerk; the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added
to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if he or
she is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility
service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it
is added, and shall become due and payable and be subject to the same
regulations relating to the delinquency in payment as the utility service. Such
costs, after certification to the City Clerk, may be collected in any manner in
which any other debt due the city may be collected.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-203 ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT.
   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the
city may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is
located.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-204 ELIMINATION OF DETRIMENTAL OR HAZARDOUS ACCUMULATIONS OF WEEDS AND
TRASH.
   (A)    As used in this chapter, the word “trash” extends to the widest sense
of that term, and includes, but without limitation upon any other meaning,
refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, offal,
rubbish, waste and useless, unused or uncared for matter of all kinds, whether
solid or liquid in form.
   (B)    It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or person in charge of a
lot, tract or parcel of land, whether vacant or not, to permit an accumulation
of weeds, grass or other vegetation or trash thereon.
   (C)    Upon receiving a report from any officer or employee of the city who
discovers an accumulation of trash or weeds upon any premises within the limits
of the city which appears to him or her to be a public nuisance, or upon
receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source, the Mayor shall
place upon the agenda of the City Council for hearing and consideration at an
appropriate date of meeting thereof, such as will permit giving notices
prescribed by statutory law, the question whether such premises, by reason of
the conditions specified, are detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of
the public and community, or a hazard to traffic, or fire hazard to the danger
of property.
   (D)    At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the City Marshal shall give
written notice of such hearing by posting upon the premises and by forwarding a
copy thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to the owner of
such property at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the
office of the Treasurer of the county in which such property is located.
   (E)    Upon the date specified in such notice, the City Council shall hear
the matter and shall receive information thereon, including anything which may
be presented by the owner of the premises, personally or by agent or attorney.
If it determines that the conditions specified hereinabove exist upon such
premises, it shall order the property to be cleaned of trash or the weeds and
grass cut or mowed or both cleaning and cutting and mowing if necessary to
abate the conditions found to exist.
   (F)    The work ordered to be performed hereinabove may be done by the
employees of the city under supervision of the Mayor, or it may be let by
contract to the lowest and best bidder, after appropriate notice, in the manner
for letting other contracts by public bid.
   (G)   Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed hereinabove,
the Mayor shall report the cost thereof to the City Council. Such report shall
be itemized, as to each tract, as follows: labor, machinery rental or
depreciation, fuel and supplies, cost of notice and other costs. The City
Council shall examine the report, and, after receiving appropriate information,
shall determine the total actual costs of the work, and shall direct the City
Clerk to forward a statement and demand payment thereof by certified mail with
return receipt requested to the owner of the property at the address shown by
the current tax rolls in the office of the Treasurer of the county in which the
property lies.
   (H)   The service of all notices prescribed by this article shall be
evidenced by the return of the officer making such service, certified in his or
her official capacity and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
   (I)   If the costs of the work performed under this article are not paid
within six months from the date of mailing the notice prescribed hereinabove,
the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of such costs
to the Treasurer of the county in which the property upon which the work was
done is located, to be levied upon the property and to be collected by the
County Treasurer in the manner prescribed by the laws of the state.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 14-205 AGREEMENT TO ABATE NUISANCES.
   The City Manager is authorized to enter into agreements with property owners
and other appropriate persons to effectuate the abatement of nuisances without
prior or post approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 3. PENALTY
§ 14-301 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by doing any act
prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to be a nuisance, an
offense or misdemeanor thereby or who fails to do any act required by any such
provision, or who fails to do any act when such provision declares such failure
to be unlawful or to be an offense or misdemeanor, or who violates any legal
order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, or who maintains any
nuisance as defined in this chapter, is guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100, plus costs.
Each day upon which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
CHAPTER 15: OFFENSES
Section
Article 1. Offenses in General
15-101 “Offense” defined
15-102 Attempt to commit an offense
15-103 Aiding in an offense
Article 2. Offenses Against Public Decency, Morality and Policy
15-201 Gambling prohibited
15-202 Loitering
15-203 Vagrancy
15-204 Offenses relating to narcotics
15-205 False or bogus checks
15-206 Harmful deception
15-207 Shows, exhibitions and entertainments
15-208 Lewd or indecent conduct
15-209 Prostitution, illicit sexual relations
15-210 Conduct and acts prohibited on or near school grounds
15-211 Alcoholic or intoxicating beverages
15-212 Nonintoxicating beverages
15-213 Drunkenness and drinking in public place
15-214 Begging prohibited
15-215 Nude dancing
Article 3. Offenses Against the Peace
15-301 Carrying concealed weapons
15-302 Discharging firearms
15-303 Unlawful assembly
15-304 Disturbing lawful assemblies
15-305 Disturbing the peace
15-306 Loud noise or music prohibited
15-307 Entering on certain posted public property
15-308 Smoking at ballpark prohibited
15-309 Discharge of bows, crossbows, compound bows and recurve bows within city
Article 4. Offenses Against Persons
15-401 Assault and battery
Article 5. Offenses Against Property
15-501 Petty larceny
15-502 Receiving stolen property
15-503 Damaging, destroying property
15-504 Unlawful entry
15-505 Unlawful intrusion upon land
15-506 Posting advertising matter on property of another
15-507 Unlawful throwing or shooting of stones or other objects
15-508 Littering
15-509 Discharge or deposit of certain substances within sewer system
prohibited
Article 6. Offenses Against Public Authority
15-601 Refusing to assist city officer
15-602 Resisting or obstructing an officer
15-603 Impersonating city officer or employee
15-604 False representations to city officers or employees
15-605 Escape of prisoners
15-606 Assisting prisoners to escape
15-607 Removal of barricades
15-608 False fire alarms
15-609 Tampering with or damaging public utilities
Article 7. Penalty
15-701 Penalty
Article 8. Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco and Vapor Products
15-801 Definitions
15-802 Selling tobacco or vapor products to minors
15-803 Youth may not possess tobacco or vapor products
15-804 Neither tobacco nor vapor products may be distributed to youth
15-805 Tobacco products must be sold in original, sealed packaging
15-806 Restrictions on publicly accessible display or sale of tobacco or vapor
products
15-807 Enforcement and reporting
Article 9. Curfew Hours for Minors
15-901 Definitions
15-902 Offenses
15-903 Defenses
15-904 Enforcement; jurisdiction
15-905 Enforcement; penalty
Article 10. Offenses Related to Smoking
15-1001 Possession of lighted tobacco
15-1002 Permitted smoking
15-1003 Posting smoking signs or decals
15-1004 Penalty for smoking offenses
15-1005 City owned or operated indoor and outdoor facilities
ARTICLE 1. OFFENSES IN GENERAL
§ 15-101 “OFFENSE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFENSE. The doing of any act or thing which, by this chapter or any
ordinance of the city, is prohibited, forbidden or declared to be unlawful; or
the failure or refusal to do any act or to perform any duty which, by any
provision of this chapter or by any ordinance of the city, is commenced or
required to be done.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-102 ATTEMPT TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does not act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the offense
itself.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-103 AIDING IN AN OFFENSE.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense and
punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 2. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY, MORALITY AND POLICY
§ 15-201 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation, or agent or employee thereof, shall play,
open or cause to be opened, operate, carry on or conduct, any game of faro,
monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or other game played
with dice, cards or any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other
things of value; or shall set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot
machine or other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any
other things of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result
in a gain or loss to the party playing; or shall gamble knowingly in any other
manner; or knowingly shall permit his, her or its premises, houses, lot or
other property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful
in this section.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-202 LOITERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and the following sunrise, to loiter or wander
aimlessly within the city, on the streets, in other public places or on
property of other persons; or during such time to sleep upon any street, in any
other public place or on any property of another person without the express or
tacit consent of the owner in charge of such place.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or about any public
building, in or about the station or depot of a public carrier or on or about
the premises of a public or private school.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
remain idle, wander, stroll, play, loaf or loiter in any public place, either
on foot or in a vehicle, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person having
custody or control of such person, or unless the person is on an emergency
errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such
person, or where the presence of such person is connected with or required by
some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation.
      (2)   It shall also be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of such person to permit such person to
remain idle, loaf, loiter and the like, in a public place at such times as are
specified hereinabove, except for those reasons listed herein.
   (D)   No person shall loiter in the immediate vicinity where a person or
persons are gambling by the use of any means or device.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle, either alone or in consort with others, in a public place in such
a manner as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering, impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
or
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, highway, sidewalk or any other
public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or
interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business
lawfully conducted by anyone in, upon, facing or fronting on any such public
street, highway, sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which
prevents the free or uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon
and thereto.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-203 VAGRANCY.
   (A)   The following persons are vagrants within the meaning of this section:
      (1)   Any idle person who lives without any means, or who has no visible
means of support and makes no exertion to obtain a livelihood by honest
employment;
      (2)   Any person who strolls or loiters idly about the streets of the
city, having no local habitation and no honest business or employment;
      (3)   Any person who strolls about to tell fortunes or to exhibit tricks
not licensed in accordance with law or ordinance;
      (4)   Any common prostitute, any owner or controller of a house of
prostitution or ill fame, or anyone employed therein as a barkeeper, caller of
figures for dances or habitual frequenter thereof;
      (5)   Any professional gambler or gambler commonly known as a tinhorn
gambler, card player or card shark;
      (6)   Any habitual drunkard; or
      (7)   Any person who abandons or neglects or refuses to support his or
her family.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be a vagrant in the city, and
any person who is a vagrant in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-204 OFFENSES RELATING TO NARCOTICS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of any narcotic to
appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or other public
place within the city, or for any person to use any narcotic upon or in any
street, alley, place of business or other public place within the city; or for
any person to use any narcotic in any place within the city except as legally
prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state; or for any person
to loiter about a place where any narcotic is sold or furnished illegally; or
for any person to sell or furnish illegally to any person any narcotic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-205 FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud,
to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person any money, property or valuable
thing of the value of $20 or less, by means of any false or bogus check or by
any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK shall
include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on
account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay the same, as against the
maker or drawer thereof.
   (C)   The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order,
payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of
intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with,
such bank or other depository; provided, that such maker or drawer shall not
have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees,
within five days from the date the same is presented for payment; and provided
further, that such check or order is presented for payment within 30 days after
same is delivered and accepted.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-206 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-207 SHOWS, EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENTS.
   It is unlawful to write, compose, stereotype, print, photograph, design,
copy, draw, engrave, paint, mold, cut or otherwise prepare, publish, sell,
distribute, keep for sale or exhibit any obscene or indecent writing, paper,
book, picture, photograph, motion picture, figure or form of any description;
and to further make, prepare, cut, sell, give, loan, distribute or wax, wire or
tape recording, or any other kind of sound recording of any obscene or indecent
language, poetry, song or speak any words by means of a telephone to any person
which would be offensive to decency or is calculated to excite vicious or lewd
thoughts or acts, or other communicable words, such as is offensive to decency
or is adapted to excite vicious or lewd thoughts or acts.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-208 LEWD OR INDECENT CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in a lewd
or indecent manner in any public place within the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-209 PROSTITUTION, ILLICIT SEXUAL RELATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, ILLICIT SEXUAL RELATIONS shall mean
sexual relations with any person other than one’s lawful husband or wife.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer, submit or give himself
or herself to a lewd or immoral use, such as illicit sexual relations, or to
engage in any lewd or immoral act for money or any other thing of value.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in illicit sexual
relations or any other immoral act, or to knowingly consort with a prostitute
or other person of immoral vocation, or to consort with another for an immoral
purpose in a public place in the city or to loiter about a house or place of
prostitution or a house or place devoted to lewd or immoral acts.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, or any agent or employee thereof,
to keep or assist in keeping a house of prostitution or a house or place in the
city where persons meet or assemble for illicit sexual relations or for any
other lewd or immoral purpose; or knowingly to permit a prostitute or other
person of an immoral vocation to become or remain a guest in a hotel or rooming
house.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be an inmate or resident of a
house of prostitution or of a house or place devoted to lewd or immoral acts.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a pimp or procurer for
any house or place of prostitution or for any prostitute or other person
engaged in an immoral vocation or to procure assistance in procuring or
attempting to procure any person for another for illicit sexual relations or
for any other immoral purpose.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-210 CONDUCT AND ACTS PROHIBITED ON OR NEAR SCHOOL GROUNDS.
   No person shall engage in any conduct or commit any of the acts enumerated
herein around or on the grounds of any school in the city, or in any street or
alley adjacent to a school:
   (A)   Loitering by any person not having lawful business in connection with
the school or an employee thereof or student therein;
   (B)   Any conduct that disturbs the orderly conduct of the school;
   (C)   Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school;
   (D)   Lewd or wanton conduct; or
   (E)   Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school or in any
street or alley adjacent thereto in such a manner as to annoy or molest any
student or employee of the school.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-211 ALCOHOLIC OR INTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to have in
his or her possession any intoxicating liquor or any alcoholic beverages within
the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to open a retail container or
consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail package store.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in any vehicle upon
any street, alley or public way within the city any alcoholic beverage except
in the original container, which shall not have been opened and the seal of
which shall not have been broken, and from which the original cap or cork shall
not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the trunk or any
closed compartment or other container out of public view and out of reach of
the driver or any occupant of the vehicle.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy any
alcoholic beverages, either at retail or wholesale, from any person other than
a dealer licensed under the laws of the state, or to receive, possess, sell,
barter, give away, manufacture or use any alcoholic beverages in violation of
the Constitution and statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-212 NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
loiter or loaf or to be or remain in or around a place of business where
nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase, receive or procure any nonintoxicating beverage.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to work
in a place where nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises, except an eating place where the service of such beverages is
incidental to the main business of serving food.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether under the age of 21 or
otherwise, to be in possession of, or to drink any nonintoxicating beverage
while such person is upon any public street, alley or other public highway, or
in any public building or other public place within the city; provided, that
this shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking such beverage in a
place licensed to sell it for consumption on the premises.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any
moving vehicle upon any public highway, street, alley or roadway within the
corporate limits of the city, or in or upon any property owned by the city
outside of its corporate limits any nonintoxicating beverage, except in the
original container which shall not have been opened and from which the original
cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container is in the
rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment
in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not
accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in
motion.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-213 DRUNKENNESS AND DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   It is unlawful for any person drunk, or in a state of intoxication, to
appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or other public
place; or for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or beverage upon or in
any street, alley or other public place within the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-214 BEGGING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to beg alms from any person, organization or
agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-215 NUDE DANCING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to lewdly expose his or her
person, private parts thereof, in any public place or in any place where there
are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; or to procure,
counsel or assist any person to lewdly expose himself or herself, or to make
any other exhibition of himself or herself to public view, or to the view of
any number of persons, such as is offensive to decency, or is adapted to excite
vicious or lewd thoughts or acts.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any lewd or
indecent or obscene conduct, including nude dancing, calculated to appeal to
prurient interests. It shall further be unlawful for any person to participate,
or assist or procure any person to participate in nude dancing in violation of
the following.
      (1)   Dancing shall be restricted to a stage elevated or separated by a
barrier from the main floor of any establishment.
      (2)   No person under the age of 21 years, including the dancers, shall
be allowed in the establishment.
      (3)   No male and female dancers shall be allowed on the stage at the
same time.
      (4)   No nude dancer shall be present on the main floor of the
establishment or otherwise commingle with the patrons or have physical contact.
      (5)   No patrons of the establishment shall be present on the stage or
dance area.
      (6)   The dancer shall be shielded from all possible public view through
any open door, window or other opening in the building.
      (7)   A notice shall be placed on the premises advising the public that
nude dancing will be conducted.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 3. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE
§ 15-301 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his or
her person any pistol, revolver, knife, dirk, dagger, metal knuckle or other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument, except when doing so in the line of
duty or as may be permitted by law.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-302 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city,
except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in the defense
of oneself or another person or property, or when otherwise authorized by law
or ordinance. It shall be unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun in the
city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-303 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together to act in
concert to do any unlawful act against the peace, or to the terror of others,
or to make any movement thereto or any preparation therefor, or otherwise to
assemble together unlawfully or riotously.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-304 DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful gathering,
including any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious
worship, by making noise, by rude or indecent or improper behavior, by profane,
improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of
assembly or within hearing distance thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-305 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace of another or
others by violent, obstreperous or improper conduct or carriage, by loud or
unusual noise, or by unseemly, obscene, offensive or abusive language; or to
insult another or others by such conduct or language; or to conduct himself or
herself in a disorderly manner.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-306 LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part
of the city by operating, having operated or permitting to be operated any
contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in such a
manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. However, this shall not prohibit
religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other religious
music.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-307 ENTERING ON CERTAIN POSTED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person, other than persons exempted in division (B) below, shall
enter or remain on any public property, on which signs have been posted
prohibiting the possession of any weapons on said public property, who has
possession of any firearm.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to commissioned police
officers or duly CLEET licensed armed security personnel who are under contract
with the posting entity which owns, controls, leases or operates the posted
premises.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $100 plus costs.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-308 SMOKING AT BALLPARK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall smoke or carry any lighted smoking instrument at the Cal
Hobson Softball/Baseball Complex, except in permitted smoking areas.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-2-2010)
§ 15-309 DISCHARGE OF BOWS, CROSSBOWS, COMPOUND BOWS AND RECURVE BOWS WITHIN
CITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a bow, crossbow, compound
bow and recurve bow in the city corporate limits, except in those areas
specifically designated by the City Council by resolution and except when doing
so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in the defense of oneself or
another person or property, or when otherwise authorized by law or ordinance.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 12-2-2014)
ARTICLE 4. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
§ 15-401 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSAULT. Any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence
to do a corporal hurt to another.
      BATTERY. Any willful and unlawful touching with force or violence upon
the person of another.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery
within the city, and any person committing an assault and battery within the
city shall be guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 5. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
§ 15-501 PETTY LARCENY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, PETTY LARCENY is the taking of
personal property, of value not to exceed $20, accomplished by fraud or stealth
and with intent to deprive another thereof, when the property is not taken from
the person of another.
   (B)   Petty larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits petty larceny
shall be guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-502 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or bring into the city
any property which he or she knows has been stolen.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-503 DAMAGING, DESTROYING PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear or
molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence or any other property, real
or personal, public or private, belonging to another including automobiles or
other vehicles, or to use any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the
owner or other person entitled to its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the
use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-504 UNLAWFUL ENTRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another or
into an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or
structure is public or private) when such entrance is plainly forbidden by
signs or otherwise, or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except
when such entrance is in the line of duty, or with the expressed or tacit
consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or
ordinances.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-505 UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND.
   Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land within the
city, without license or authority from the owner thereof, or who erects or
occupies thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure whatever without
such license is guilty of an offense.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-506 POSTING ADVERTISING MATTER ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post,
paint, mark, write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement,
advertisement, bill, placard, device or inscription upon any public or private
building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or
other property of another without the consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-507 UNLAWFUL THROWING OR SHOOTING OF STONES OR OTHER OBJECTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or
other object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he or
she is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to
throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle,
structure, electric light or other property of another, whether public or
private, except in the case where such is done in defense of oneself, of
another person or property.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-508 LITTERING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, LITTER is defined to be any garbage,
refuse, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles,
paper, wrappings, cigarette butts, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves,
wood, grass, bedding or crockery and similar materials commonly referred to as
rubbish.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in and upon any open or vacant
property within the city, irrespective of the ownership of such property.
   (C)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles or
in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-509 DISCHARGE OR DEPOSIT OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES WITHIN SEWER SYSTEM
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discharge, deposit
or otherwise allow to be thrown, discharged or deposited, into any portion of
the sewer system owned, operated by or located within the city corporate
limits, any clothing, bedding material or live or dead animal, including, but
not limited to, fish.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $100, in addition to costs, per occurrence.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the provisions of
§
19-305.
(Ord. 23-004, passed 6-6-2023)
ARTICLE 6. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
§ 15-601 REFUSING TO ASSIST CITY OFFICER.
   An officer of the city, making or about to make an arrest, or executing or
about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the ordinances
of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to suppress a
riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon any person to assist him or
her in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such a riot,
affray or unlawful assembly. It shall be unlawful for any person lawfully
called upon thus to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-602 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING AN OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to resist, oppose or
obstruct the City Marshal, any other police officer, the Municipal Judge or any
other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his or her official
duties; or by threats or otherwise, to intimidate or attempt to intimidate any
such officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official duties; or
to assault or beat or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or
indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-603 IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee
of the city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or
powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to
do so.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-604 FALSE REPRESENTATIONS TO CITY OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee or agency of the city government in any official application to or
official dealing or negotiation with such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-605 ESCAPE OF PRISONERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place
of confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places
of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison or custody.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-606 ASSISTING PRISONERS TO ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any unlawful manner, to set at
liberty, rescue or attempt to set at liberty or rescue any prisoner from any
officer or employee of the city, having legal custody of such prisoner, or from
the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such
prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody, or give such
prisoner any weapon or object which might be used as a weapon or instrument to
assist him or her in escape, or to give such prisoner any alcoholic beverage or
narcotics.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-607 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   No person, unless authorized by proper authority, shall remove any barricade
or obstruction placed by the authority of the city, to keep traffic off any
pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-608 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   No person shall turn in a false fire alarm, or in any manner shall deceive
or attempt to deceive the Fire Department or any officer or employee with
reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, or knowingly cause the Fire
Department or its officers or employees to make a useless run.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-609 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or
other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas,
water or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly or
privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him or her to consume or use
the gas, water or electricity without it passing through the meter or in any
other way so as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person
to damage, molest, tamper with or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter or any
other part of any public utility, including telegraph and telephone systems.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 7. PENALTY
§ 15-701 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $200,
plus costs. Each day’s continuation of any such violation shall be a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 8. PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
§ 15-801 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, state-issued identification card, license
for identification only, or other generally accepted means of identification
that describes the individual as 21 years of age or older and contains a
photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be
valid.
   SAMPLE. A tobacco or vapor product distributed to members of the public at
no cost for the purpose of promoting this product.
   SAMPLING. The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
   VAPOR PRODUCT.
      (1)   Noncombustible products, that may or may not contain nicotine, that
employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit or other
mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in
a solution or other form. VAPOR PRODUCTS shall include any vapor cartridge or
other container with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be
used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other
container of a solution, that may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo or electronic device.
      (2)   VAPOR PRODUCTS do not include any products regulated by the United
States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, being 21 U.S.C. §§ 351 through 360FFF-7.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2022-002, passed 6-7-2022)
§ 15-802 SELLING TOBACCO OR VAPOR PRODUCTS TO MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any
tobacco or vapor product to another person who is under 21 years of age, or to
purchase in any manner a tobacco or vapor product on behalf of such person;
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for an employee under the age
of 21 years to handle such products when required in the performance of the
employee’s duties.
   (B)   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco or vapor
products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if
an ordinary person would conclude on a basis of appearance that the prospective
purchaser may be under 21 years or age.
   (C)   Every person who violates divisions (A) or (B) above shall complete an
education or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court.
   (D)   If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which
tobacco and/or vapor products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty
of the violation and shall complete an education or tobacco use cessation
program approved by the court.
   (E)   For the purpose of determining the liability of the person controlling
franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violations of
division (A) or (B) above, each individual franchise or business location shall
be deemed a separate entity.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 23-005, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 15-803 YOUTH MAY NOT POSSESS TOBACCO OR VAPOR PRODUCTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to purchase,
receive or have in his or her possession a tobacco product, nicotine product or
vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age
which is false or fraudulent, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any
tobacco product nicotine product or vapor product. It shall not be unlawful for
an employee under 21 years of age to handle tobacco products, nicotine products
or vapor products when required in the performance of the employee’s duties.
   (B)   Every person who violates division (A) above shall complete an
education or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court.
(Ord. 23-005, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 15-804 NEITHER TOBACCO NOR VAPOR PRODUCTS MAY BE DISTRIBUTED TO YOUTH.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any tobacco or vapor
produce samples to any person under 21 years of age.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, no person shall distribute tobacco
or vapor product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk or park that is
within 300 feet of any playground, school or other facility when the facility
is being used primarily by persons under the age of 21.
   (C)   Every person who violates division (A) above complete an education or
tobacco use cessation program approved by the court.
§ 15-805 TOBACCO PRODUCTS MUST BE SOLD IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the
original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating division (A) above shall complete an
education or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court.
(Ord. 23-005, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 15-806 RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE DISPLAY OR SALE OF TOBACCO OR
VAPOR PRODUCTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or retail store to display or
offer for sale tobacco products or vapor products in any manner that allows
public access to the tobacco products or vapor products without assistance from
the person displaying the tobacco products or vapor products or an employee or
the owner of the store. The provisions of this division (A) shall not apply to
retail stores which do not admit into the store persons under 21 years of age.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating division (A) above shall complete an
education or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court.
(Ord. 23-005, passed 9-5-2023)
§ 15-807 ENFORCEMENT AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Any conviction under this article shall, within 30 days, be reported
by the City Clerk. Such reports shall be in writing in a manner acceptable by
the court.
   (B)   Persons under 21 years of age who violate this section shall complete
an education or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court.
   (C)   The ABLE Commission shall establish rules to provide for notification
to a parent or guardian of any minor cited for a violation of this section.
   (D)   If the violator fails to complete the tobacco use cessation program
ordered by the court, a fine may be imposed that shall not exceed $50 for a
first offense or $100 for subsequent offenses. The violator may also be
required to complete a community service program or other appropriate programs
or services as ordered by the court. The court shall have jurisdiction over the
violator for 12 months following sentencing to ensure all programs and orders
of the court are followed.
   (E)   Cities and towns may enact and municipal police officers may enforce
ordinances prohibiting and penalizing conduct in violation of this section.
(Ord. 23-005, passed 9-5-2023)
ARTICLE 9. CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
§ 15-901 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS.
      (1)   One minute after 11:00 (11:01) p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday until 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and
      (2)   On Friday night, the curfew hours shall be from one minute after
12:00 (12:01) a.m. Saturday morning until 5:00 a.m.; and on Saturday night, the
curfew hours shall be from one minute after 12:00 (12:01) a.m. Sunday morning
until 5:00 a.m.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to: a
fire, a natural disaster or automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT. A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person;
or
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN. To linger or stay; or to fail to leave premises when requested to do
so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-902 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
   (C)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-903 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 15-902 of this article that the
minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor, if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to,
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 15-902(C) that the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-904 ENFORCEMENT; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in
the public place.
      (2)   The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and
that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in § 15-903 of
this article is present.
   (B)   Absent an interlocal agreement with the district court, for the
Municipal Court to exercise jurisdiction over minors over 18 years of age under
provisions of this chapter, pursuant to 10A O.S. § 2-2-102, as amended by House
Bill 2640 of the 1994 regular session of the state legislature, the Municipal
Court must refer all alleged juvenile violations to the Juvenile Bureau of the
District Attorney’s office.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 15-905 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of
a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.
      (2)   Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   The Municipal Court’s jurisdiction over a minor who violates the
provisions of this article shall be expressly subject to 10 O.S., as amended by
House Bill 640 of the 1994 regular session of the state legislature.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 10. OFFENSES RELATED TO SMOKING
§ 15-1001 POSSESSION OF LIGHTED TOBACCO.
   (A)   The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is in
any indoor place used by individuals other than employees who are invited or
permitted, in any indoor workplace, within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air
intake of any such places, or in any vehicle providing public transportation,
except where specifically allowed by law.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, INDOOR WORKPLACE means any indoor
place of employment or employment type service for or at the request of another
individual or individuals, or any public or private entity, whether part-time
or full-time and whether for consumption or not. Such services shall include,
without limitation, any service performed by an owner, employee, independent
contractor, agent, partner, proprietor, manager, officer, director, apprentice,
trainee, associate, servant or volunteer. An INDOOR WORKPLACE includes work
areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee
cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees and all
space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by
walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows,
stairways or the like. The provisions of this section shall apply to such
indoor workplace at any given time, whether or not work is being performed.
   (C)   An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so may elect to
provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for cleaning and
maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking, provided each
smoking room is fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air
from the smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, under negative air
pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a
door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened, and the air from the smoking
space is not exhausted within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake.
(Ord. 04-1, passed 2-3-2004)
§ 15-1002 PERMITTED SMOKING.
   Smoking is permitted in the following space if: the smoking space occupies
the entire building; or if the smoking space shares space in the building with
any indoor public places or indoor workplaces in which smoking is prohibited,
is fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air from the
smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area within the building and under
negative air pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking
area within the building when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened,
and the air from the smoking space is to be exhausted within 15 feet of any
entrance, exit or air intake:
   (A)   The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being
operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games;
   (B)   Up to 25% of the guestrooms at a hotel or other lodging establishment;
   (C)   Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption
on the premises;
   (D)   Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the
immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace,
and the workplace has only incidental public access. For the purpose of this
division (D), INCIDENTAL PUBLIC ACCESS means that a place of business has only
an occasional person, who is not an employee, present at the business to
transact business or make a delivery. It does not include businesses that
depend on walk-in customers for any part of their business;
   (E)   Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access;
   (F)   Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers;
   (G)   Workplaces within private residences, except that smoking shall not be
allowed inside any private residence that is used as a licensed childcare
facility during hours of operation;
   (H)   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment;
   (I)   A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the armed forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to I.R.C. § 501(c)(19), 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(19), when such facility is
utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the conduct of
post or organization nonprofit operations, except during an event or activity
which is open to the public;
   (J)   Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, that smoking shall
not be allowed within 15 feet of any exterior public doorway or any air intake
of the restaurant;
   (K)   A standalone bar, standalone tavern or cigar bar that:
      (1)   Derives more than 60% of its gross receipts, subject to
verification by competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and
low-point beer;
      (2)   Admits no person under 21 years of age, except for members of a
musical band employed or hired as provided in state law; and
      (3)   Is not located within, and does not share any common entryway or
common indoor area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a
restaurant.
   (L)   Until March 1, 2006, restaurants (any eating establishment regardless
of seating capacity) may have designated smoking areas or may be designated as
being a totally nonsmoking area. Beginning March 1, 2006, restaurants shall be
totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking areas and designated smoking
rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such designated smoking rooms, which
shall be in a location that is fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the
outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape when a door is
opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. No
exhaust from such room shall be located within 25 feet of any entrance, exit or
air intake. Such room shall be subject to verification for compliance with the
provisions of this division (L) by the State Department of Health.
(Ord. 04-1, passed 2-3-2004)
§ 15-1003 POSTING SMOKING SIGNS OR DECALS.
   (A)   The person who owns or operates a place where smoking or tobacco use
is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at least
four inches by two inches in size, at each entrance to the building indicating
that the place is smoke-free or tobacco-free.
   (B)   Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows:
      (1)   In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is
in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible;
      (2)   In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility involved shall be responsible; and
      (3)   In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility shall be responsible.
(Ord. 04-1, passed 2-3-2004)
§ 15-1004 PENALTY FOR SMOKING OFFENSES.
   Any person who knowingly violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10
nor more than $100.
(Ord. 04-1, passed 2-3-2004)
§ 15-1005 CITY OWNED OR OPERATED INDOOR AND OUTDOOR FACILITIES.
   (A)   All buildings and other properties, including indoor and outdoor
areas, owned or operated by the city, shall be entirely tobacco-free to include
all forms of tobacco products, including electronic smoking devices.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic and/or battery-operated device,
the use of which may resemble smoking that can be used to deliver an inhaled
dose of nicotine or other substances. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any
such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an
electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an
electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor.
      OUTDOOR AREA. Any covered area, partially covered area or area open to
the sky that is on a property owned by the city.
      RECREATIONAL AREA. Any area that is owned, controlled or used by the city
and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee
or age requirement. The term RECREATIONAL AREA includes, but is not limited to,
parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths,
gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller and
ice skating rinks, beaches surrounding lakes and skateboard parks.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis or any other preparation of
tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically
active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale or
otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be
introduced into the human body. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include any cessation
product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.
   (C)   All indoor and outdoor recreational areas owned or operated by the
city shall be entirely tobacco-free to include all forms of tobacco products
including electronic smoking devices.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-4-2014)
CHAPTER 16: OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Section
Article 1. General
16-101 Definitions
Article 2. Drilling Restrictions
16-201 Drilling restrictions
16-202 Location of wells
16-203 Number of wells per block
16-204 Additional wells
16-205 Attachment of adjacent or contiguous tracts
16-206 Application for permit; appeal to City Council sitting as Board of
Adjustment; notice of hearing; appeals to district court; permit fee
16-207 Filing of indemnity bond or insurance policy
Article 3. Resumption of Drilling
16-301 Resumption of drilling in abandoned wells
Article 4. Miscellaneous Provisions
16-401 Purpose, conformance with ordinances
16-402 Pipelines, excavations; permits
16-403 Pipeline; connections; fixtures; safety
16-404 Slush pits
16-405 Disposal of byproducts
16-406 Oil savers
16-407 Guards at wells
16-408 Fencing
16-409 Non-fireproof buildings
16-410 Minimum requirements
16-411 Enforcement
16-412 Violations
16-413 Pooling of city lots or blocks
16-414 Right to refuse drilling permit
16-415 Suspension of licenses
Article 5. Penalty
16-501 Penalty
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
§ 16-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. One contiguous tract, as nearly rectangular as practicable and not
longer than twice its width, of platted and/or unplatted land of ten acres,
more or less, inclusive of streets, alleys, avenues, parks and railroad rights-
of-way. All measurements as to area shall extend to the center of streets and
avenues. A tract shall be deemed to be one contiguous tract or contiguous to
another street even though there be an intervening alley, street, avenue,
government lot line, section, half section or quarter section line or railroad
right-of-way.
   WELL. The hole which is drilled or put down for the purpose of mining for
producing oil and/or gas; all distances required by the terms of this chapter
shall be measured from the center of each hole.
ARTICLE 2. DRILLING RESTRICTIONS
§ 16-201 DRILLING RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to
drill or put down any petroleum or gas well within the corporate limits of the
city, unless permit therefor shall have been first obtained as hereinafter
provided.
§ 16-202 LOCATION OF WELLS.
   (A)   No well or wells for the production of oil, gas or petroleum products
shall be drilled nearer than 40 feet to the front or street property line of
the particular tract on which such well is situated, nor nearer than 50 feet
from the exterior line of the drilling “block,” as defined in §
16-101.
   (B)   The City Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustment, for good cause
shown, may, by resolution, and in sparsely populated districts of the city,
shorten the distance from the front or street property line of the particular
tract on which such well is located or situated.
   (C)   Said Board of Adjustment may also shorten the distance in which a well
may be drilled from the exterior boundary line of the drilling “block,” as
herein defined, for the purpose of preventing drainage of offset wells drilled
outside of such drilling block.
§ 16-203 NUMBER OF WELLS PER BLOCK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation to drill or put down more than one petroleum or gas well to each
producing horizon upon any one block.
   (B)   The City Council may, by enactment of proper ordinance, reduce the
area of the “block,” as herein defined, to such area as said Council may at a
later date determine.
   (C)   (1)   In the event of the reduction of the area of the “block” by the
City Council, as herein provided for, any person, firm or corporation having at
the time of the enactment of any ordinance or ordinances reducing such area, a
valid permit upon any “block,” as defined herein, shall be entitled, upon
application therefor pursuant to the then existing ordinance and upon payment
of all fees and performance of other conditions precedent to the then existing
ordinances, to an additional permit to drill an oil and gas well upon any
“block,” as defined under the then existing ordinances, upon which an oil and/
or gas well has not been drilled, contained within the “block” as herein
defined, upon which a permit has been issued hereunder.
      (2)   Provided and conditioned that the total number of permits issued
within any “block,” as herein defined and created hereunder, shall in no event
exceed the quotient resulting from dividing the actual area of the “block”
which may be created under this chapter, by the area of the “block,” as defined
in any subsequent ordinance or ordinances; provided and conditioned further,
that regardless of the number of wells which may be drilled within any “block,”
as defined herein and created hereunder, the rights of all parties as to
participation in the production from such additional well or wells shall be
governed by the provisions provided for under the original permit and order
secured upon the “block,” as herein defined.
§ 16-204 ADDITIONAL WELLS.
   (A)   If any block shall be more than ten acres in area, one such well to
each producing horizon may be drilled upon each contiguous ten acre unit within
said block, and one additional well may be drilled upon a fractional part
thereof remaining after deduction of each ten-acre tract or tracts aforesaid.
   (B)   However, each fractional part shall be of an area of not less than
five acres, except as otherwise provided.
   (C)   No part of any territory included within any ten-acre unit upon which
a permit is granted shall be used or included in any manner with any other
territory or area for the purpose of obtaining any other or additional permit
for the drilling of any oil or gas well.
   (D)   If any well drilled upon any such unit be a nonproducer or cease to be
a commercial producer, upon abandonment thereof, such unit may thereafter be
considered for all purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article
as though the same had never been embraced within any drilling unit.
   (E)   This article does not prohibit the drilling for oil or gas in the
different horizons or the different lands or structures in which oil and/or gas
may be produced in paying quantities.
§ 16-205 ATTACHMENT OF ADJACENT OR CONTIGUOUS TRACTS.
   (A)   Before a permit shall be granted upon any “block” which is adjoining
or contiguous to any tract of land or lands within the corporate limits of the
city, from which land or lands, because of area, shape, particular location or
other restrictions, a “block,” as herein defined, cannot be formed, the City
Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustment, shall, upon application of any
owner, lessee or other interested party, firm or corporation in said adjoining
or contiguous tract of land or lands, upon giving notice for holding a hearing
(in the same manner as provided for appeals from the City Clerk), attach such
contiguous or adjoining tract of land or lands in whole or in part to such
block upon which a permit is sought, to form thereby one drilling “block.”
   (B)   Such drilling “block,” as herein provided for, shall not exceed
substantially a total area of ten acres, except insofar as may be necessary to
do equity to the owners of adjoining or adjacent areas which could not be
included in another drilling block because of the limitations imposed by this
chapter as to the size, shape and area of drilling blocks, as herein defined.
   (C)   The City Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustment, shall provide the
pro rata or ratable basis on which said attached area shall participate in any
well or wells drilled in such block, and in addition thereto, shall make any
equitable order in relation thereto which may be proper, in order that
substantial justice may be done.
   (D)   Any interested party affected by said order may appeal to the district
court as provided by law and by the ordinances of the city.
§ 16-206 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL SITTING AS BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT; NOTICE OF HEARING; APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT; PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   Before any permit for the drilling or putting down of any petroleum or
gas well is issued, a written application signed by the applicant or some
person in his, her or its behalf duly authorized, shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
   (B)   Said application shall state the block and the exact lot and location
thereon, where the proposed well will be drilled and the proposed producing
horizon to which the proposed well will be drilled; there shall be attached
thereto either certified or photostatic copies of all leases or contracts with
the owners of the property in such block or blocks which are controlled or
owned by the applicant, and in addition, a certificate from a bonded abstracter
certifying the name of the last record owner of said property and the character
or instrument of conveyance upon which the ownership rests, together with a
statement showing the number of lots in said block or tract which the applicant
holds under lease or contract from such owner.
   (C)   There shall also be attached to said application, a map or plat
showing all correct dimensions and the exact location of said proposed well or
wells, together with tanks, pits, pipelines, embankments, fences and other
details of the proposed use of such property, necessary or incident to the
drilling of said well, together with the correct measurements of said locations
from the outside boundaries of said block.
   (D)   There shall also be attached to said application a certificate showing
the exact and correct acreage within said block or tract upon which any
proposed well is to be drilled, and the total acreage owned or controlled by
the applicant in said block, which shall be duly certified to by a competent
engineer.
   (E)   Said application with certificate aforesaid attached thereto shall be
duly certified before an officer authorized to administer oaths within this
state. If said application, together with the exhibits attached thereto, shows
that the applicant is the owner or has under control or lease all of the
property within such block or tract, the City Clerk, upon authorization of the
Council by resolution, shall grant a permit therefor; provided, that the
application shows that it complies with all the requirements of the city in
relation to drilling.
   (F)   If said application shows that the application does not have the
entire block or tract under lease but controls, owns or has under lease not
less than 51% of all the property within such block or tract, the City Council,
sitting as a Board of Adjustment, after giving notice and conducting a hearing
as hereinafter provided, shall have authority to determine the equities and
grant a proper permit for drilling a well to such producing horizon upon such
tract or block.
      (1)   Before granting said permit, the City Council, acting as a Board of
Adjustment, shall cause notice of said hearing to be given by posting said
notice not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before said hearing, in
three public places within the corporate limits of said city (one of which
shall be at the office of the City Clerk), and by publication of said notice
not less than one time, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before
said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in said city. Proof of such
posting and publication must be filed before the hearing of said application.
Said notice to be dated and signed by the Chairperson of the City Council
sitting as a Board of Adjustment, and shall state the time, place and purpose
of said hearing, together with the description of the property upon which the
permit is sought.
      (2)   The City Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustment, shall have
authority to continue said hearing to a day certain without further notice, and
upon such hearing, the City Council, sitting as a Board of Adjustment, shall
examine all witnesses under oath and keep a record of its proceedings and shall
have authority to and shall make any requirements, regulations or orders which
may be necessary, proper or equitable for all persons interested therein, and
shall protect and safeguard the rights of all parties affected by said order.
      (3)   Any party affected by said order may appeal as provided by law and
the ordinances of the city to the county district court.
   (G)   (1)   No permit shall be granted for drilling, putting down or
deepening, from one pay zone to another, any oil or gas well within the
corporate limits of the city, until the applicant shall have paid to said city,
by paying to the City Clerk the sum of $3,500, which shall be the fee for each
permit granted for a period of one year from the issuance thereof, and
thereafter an annual fee of $1,000, payable in advance, for the duration of the
drilling or deepening of such well and thereafter, a permit fee of $200 each
year, payable in advance, for as long as the well is produced or operated.
      (2)   Additionally, applicant will enter into an agreement with the city
for the use and maintenance of city roads and streets.
   (H)   When any permit expires by failure to renew bond or to substitute a
policy of insurance as provided in this chapter, or if the well ceases to
produce, the permittee shall plug such well and remove all property from the
premises and restore the surface thereof to normal condition within 90 days
from date of the nonproduction of said well; provided, however, that the permit
fee herein provided for shall accrue and the amount thereof, as herein
provided, shall become due and payable for the full period of time until such
well shall be plugged and the adjacent premises restored to normal conditions.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 16-207 FILING OF INDEMNITY BOND OR INSURANCE POLICY.
   (A)   No permit for the drilling, putting down or deepening from one pay
zone to another of any oil or gas well within the corporate limits of the city,
shall be granted until the applicant shall have filed with the City Clerk an
indemnity bond or a policy of insurance, whichever is required by the Council
of said city in an amount to be fixed by said Council, not less than $20,000,
or more than $200,000, and approved by said Council.
   (B)   The condition of such bond or insurance policy shall be such as to
provide for the prompt payment of any and all liabilities imposed by law, and
by the ordinances of said city, and all damages on account of injury to
property, either public or private, and bodily injury, including death,
received or suffered by any person, firm or corporation, and resulting from the
drilling, operation and maintenance of any such well and any structures,
machinery, equipment or tanks connected therewith.
   (C)   At the expiration of the period required for the drilling, putting
down or deepening of such well and after such well is being operated as by the
producer of oil or gas, the permittee, upon application to, and approval by,
the City Council, may substitute a policy of insurance for any indemnity bond
that shall have been previously filed in compliance herewith, in an amount to
be fixed by said Council, not less than $10,000, or more than $50,000, issued
by an insurance company authorized to transact business in the state,
conditioned for the prompt payment of all damages on account of injury to
property, either public or private, bodily injury, incorporation, resulting
from the operation and maintenance of any such well and any structures,
machinery, equipment or tanks connected therewith.
ARTICLE 3. RESUMPTION OF DRILLING
§ 16-301 RESUMPTION OF DRILLING IN ABANDONED WELLS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm or corporation to
recondition, perforate the casing of, equip for the production of oil and/or
gas, produce or otherwise operate any oil and/or gas well drilled, cased and
heretofore operated and produced under the terms and provisions of the
ordinances of the city, but which well has been subsequently abandoned, and the
casing still remains intact in said well, without first obtaining the consent
of 51% of the lot owners of that “block” (as defined herein) in which said well
is located and the consent of the City Council for the renewal and
reinstatement of the original permit given by resolution, duly adopted at a
regular or special meeting of said Council, pursuant to notice.
   (B)   The lot owners of the “block” (as defined herein) in which said well
is located, shall share pro rata the rents and royalties arising from said
well, according to the number of lots owned by each.
   (C)   The Council shall not give its consent to the reconditioning,
equipping, production and operation of such oil and/or gas well until the owner
of the lot upon which such well is located shall agree that the rents and
royalties arising from such well shall be prorated among the lot owners of said
“block” (as defined herein).
   (D)   The consent of the Council to the reconditioning, equipping,
production and operation of such oil and/or gas well shall renew, reinstate and
make fully effective the permit granted for the drilling, production and
operation of such well in the first instance, subject to the terms, conditions
and requirements of the ordinances of the city.
   (E)   Before any permit granted under the ordinances of the city is renewed
and reinstated, a written application therefor, signed by the applicant or some
duly authorized person in his, her or its behalf, shall be filed with the City
Clerk. Said application shall state the block and the lot upon which such well
is located and the date upon which the permit therefor was issued by the City
Council, and there shall be attached thereto a list of the persons, firms or
corporations owning or having any interest in any of the lots on said block,
together with such bond for producing and operating such well as is required by
the ordinances of said city, and further stating that such well has been
abandoned since the issuance of said permit and that the casing still remains
intact within said well and further stating from what horizon or horizons the
applicant expects to produce oil and/or gas from said well.
   (F)   Notice of hearing for said application shall be posted in three public
places in the city, at least ten days before the hearing. Said notice shall
contain a description of the lot and block upon which such well is located, the
date of the permit for the drilling of such well and a description of the
horizon or horizons from which the applicant expects to produce oil and/or gas.
   (G)   When the consent of the Council is obtained to the reconditioning,
equipping, production and operation of such abandoned oil and/or gas well in
said city, the City Clerk shall cause his or her records to show that the
permit granted for the drilling, production and operation of said well in the
first instance has been renewed, reinstated and is fully effective upon the
delivery of a receipt from the City Treasurer, showing the payment of the
annual police regulation and inspection fee as required by the ordinances of
said city.
ARTICLE 4. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 16-401 PURPOSE, CONFORMANCE WITH ORDINANCES.
   For the protection of the citizens of the city, and the public generally,
and the protection of property from the danger of fire, explosion, gas, public
nuisances and other hazards dangerous to public peace, health and safety as the
result of drilling for and the production of petroleum and natural gas within
the city, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation or any individual, either for himself or herself or acting as
agent, employee or servant of any other person, firm or corporation, to engage
in any work or erect any structures, tanks, machinery, pipeline or other
appurtenances incident to the drilling of or production of petroleum or natural
gas or to operate, maintain or permit to exist any equipment, structure or
appurtenances incident to such production, or to use or maintain any property
or premises in violation of any of the ordinances of the city, the laws of the
state or in violation of the rules, regulations or orders of the State
Corporation Commission.
§ 16-402 PIPELINES, EXCAVATIONS; PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or
corporation, either as principal or agent, to make any excavation in any part
of the streets, alleys, highways, parking, sidewalk areas or other public
property or in any public utility reserve for the purpose of laying or
installing, or to lay, install or maintain any pipeline in or upon such
property without first having obtained a permit from the City Clerk to do so.
   (B)   The applicants for such permits shall file a plan with the City Clerk
showing in detail the size of such pipelines, the exact location of such
excavation or pipeline, the depth and width thereof, and the location thereof,
with particular reference to all structures or lines of the city or any public
utility, and the sidewalks, pavements or other public improvements. Each
applicant hereinafter shall pay a fee to the city for the use of any state or
public property as prescribed by the City Council.
§ 16-403 PIPELINE; CONNECTIONS; FIXTURES; SAFETY.
   (A)   All pipelines, connections and fixtures thereof installed or used for
the purpose of transportation of natural gas shall be equivalent to the
specifications of the Natural Gas Safety Code adopted and approved by the
United States Department of Commerce and now in force as to thickness, width,
size, strength and general character of material, workmanship and manner of
installation. Pressure in any such lines shall not exceed those permitted by
the rules, regulations or orders of the State Corporation Commission now in
force. All such lines shall, on city streets and alleys, be buried to a minimum
depth as directed by the City Council.
   (B)   In the event it shall become necessary to change or remove any of such
pipelines, said change or removal shall be made at the entire expense of owners
thereof, upon approval and inspection of the City Council or its agents. Said
removal or change shall be made within five days after notice is served by the
City Council or its agents.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the
output of the well, of both oil and gas, to spray oil through the separators or
other vent lines, openings or casings. No gas shall be produced, wasted or
allowed to escape through a manifold into a vent, the minimum of such shall be
60 feet above the normal ground surface and of sufficient diameter to properly
care for said oil or gas.
§ 16-404 SLUSH PITS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after any oil and/or gas wells within the limits of the
city shall be completed for production of oil and/or gas, or within 30 days
after the same is abandoned for the reason that a dry hole is found, the slush
pit shall be filled with dirt and leveled off in a good and careful manner, and
the premises so used for drilling purposes be placed in a sanitary condition;
all excavations, ditches and abrasions of the ground shall be filled with dirt.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation
to place machinery and drill or operate for the drilling and/or production of
petroleum and/or gas, unless the premises so used by said person, firm,
association or corporation shall be well fenced by woven wire fence or plank
wall, not less than five feet in height.
§ 16-405 DISPOSAL OF BYPRODUCTS.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to
dispose, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street, alley,
drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or
lagoon, any oil or liquid with substantial petroleum contents of harmful
character, any oil substance, mud, rotary mud, sand or saltwater of harmful
nature, or in any manner to permit seepage, overflow or otherwise any other
substance to escape from any property owned, leased or under control of such
person, firm or corporation, or to flow or be carried into or upon any such
public highway, street, alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter,
paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon within the corporate limits of the city,
except in such cases where such mud, water or slush is carried in pipelines
pursuant to permit. The City Council may permit the disposing, placing or
discharging of mud, water or slush in such places as may be approved by said
Council when such mud or slush is carried in pipelines.
§ 16-406 OIL SAVERS.
   No well shall be swabbed before a device normally known as a lubricator has
been placed on full casing, above all outlets or flow lines of such well; said
lubricator shall have been approved by the State Corporation Commission.
§ 16-407 GUARDS AT WELLS.
   Any person operating or maintaining any well flowing oil naturally or
producing oil by means of gas lift in excess of 25 barrels per hour within the
corporate limits of the city shall at all times during which said well is
naturally flowing or producing by any means of gas lift, have at least one
person stationed at such well; provided, however, that nothing in this section
shall apply to wells producing solely by means other than natural flow or gas
lift.
§ 16-408 FENCING.
   After the effective date hereof, each well drilled and the derrick, boiler
and equipment, operating or maintained in connection with each such well shall
be enclosed in a fence not less than five feet high and constructed of
noncombustible material.
§ 16-409 NON-FIREPROOF BUILDINGS.
   No building constructed of combustible material shall be located or be
permitted to remain within 50 feet of any well drilled after the effective date
hereof.
§ 16-410 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements
for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety, and compliance
with all terms thereof shall not be deemed to relieve any person or firm of any
duty imposed by law to use all necessary care and take all necessary
precautions for the safeguard of the public peace, health and safety and the
rights of any individual or group of individuals. It shall be the duty of any
person drilling, operating or maintaining any well to use all necessary care
and take all necessary precautions of whatever nature which shall be reasonably
necessary under the circumstances to protect the public or the rights of any
part thereof.
§ 16-411 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Full police authority for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter are hereby given the Chief of the Fire Department, the Mayor, the
City Marshal or any of their authorized representatives.
   (B)   Accurate information shall be furnished by the person in charge of the
lease to the Fire Chief, Mayor, City Marshal or any of their authorized
representatives concerning all drilling operations, depths of wells, character
of equipment or any other information which may be required for the proper
inspection or regulation of all wells, equipment or appurtenances thereto.
§ 16-412 VIOLATIONS.
   When the Fire Chief or any other agent employed or directed by the City
Council shall find that any person, firm or corporation is carrying on any
activity in violation of this chapter, he or she shall order said activity to
cease until the provisions of such chapter are complied with; it shall be
unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to renew such
activity when so ordered to stop, until such sections have been complied with
and the Fire Chief, City Marshal or other agent employed by the City Council
has so found and given permission for such renewed activity.
§ 16-413 POOLING OF CITY LOTS OR BLOCKS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or be construed to prevent the pooling
of city lots or blocks of the city with land adjacent to and outside the
corporate limits of said city for an oil well drilled, maintained or operated
on any of such city lots or blocks so pooled without compliance with this
chapter.
§ 16-414 RIGHT TO REFUSE DRILLING PERMIT.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the City Council, in its
discretion, may refuse to grant to any person a permit to drill, maintain or
operate an oil well within the city limits and may refuse to grant a renewal of
any permit by them granted; provided, however, that the applicant for such
permit or renewal thereof has not obtained a vested property right in reliance
upon his or her right to obtain such permit or renewal prior to the effective
date hereof.
§ 16-415 SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Mayor, is hereby granted the authority to suspend the license of
any person, firm or corporation covering the operation of any well where any of
the provisions of this chapter are violated; said suspension of any such
license shall be effective until such time as said person shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Before suspending any such license, the Mayor shall cause written
notice to be served upon the licensee advising such time and place fixed in
said notice to determine whether the license held by such licensee shall be
suspended. Five days’ notice of the time of the hearing shall be given. It
shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate any well during any
period in which the license governing the operation of such well is so
suspended. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or interfere
with the enforcement of the penalties for such violation as elsewhere provided
in this code of ordinances, but shall be cumulative and in addition to such
penalties.
ARTICLE 5. PENALTY
§ 16-501 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation acting either for himself or herself or as
agent, servant or employee who shall violate any provision of this chapter or
who shall engage in any work or the erection of any structure which shall be in
violation of any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
deemed guilty of an offense and fined in any sum not to exceed $100, plus
costs. Each day such violation is continued or any structure is maintained or
permitted to exist in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate
offense.
CHAPTER 17: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Article 1. City Park Advisory Board
17-101 Establishment of Board
17-102 Jurisdiction
17-103 Rules and regulations
17-104 Employees; expenditures
17-105 Duties and powers
ARTICLE 1. CITY PARK ADVISORY BOARD
§ 17-101 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established the City Park Advisory Board also to be
known as the City Park Committee. Said Advisory Board shall consist of not less
than five citizens, all of whom shall reside or own real property in the city.
   (B)   All members shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council. The term of office shall be for three years; provided, however, that
in the first instance one-third shall be for three years, one-third shall be
for two years and one-third shall be for one year. The members of said City
Park Advisory Board, having already been nominated and confirmed, shall serve
their abbreviated terms in accordance herewith.
   (C)   The members of the City Council shall be ex officio members of the
City Park Advisory Board.
   (D)   The members of the City Park Advisory Board shall serve without
salary.
   (E)   Members of the City Park Advisory Board may be removed by the City
Council only for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malefaction in office;
vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a term shall be
filled only for the unexpired term by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council.
   (F)   Within five days of the appointment and qualification of the members
of the City Park Advisory Board, the Board shall meet and elect one of their
number as Chairperson, one as Vice Chairperson and one as secretary; in
addition, the Board may create and fill such other offices as it may deem
necessary. The term of all such offices shall be one year, with eligibility for
reelection.
   (G)   The City Park Advisory Board shall have the powers and duties as
prescribed for such a body by the statutes of the state.
§ 17-102 JURISDICTION.
   The City Park Advisory Board shall have jurisdiction over any land inside
the corporate limits of the city.
§ 17-103 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The City Park Advisory Board shall prescribe rules and regulations
governing and controlling the transaction of business before it and shall keep
a public record of its regulations, transactions and findings.
   (B)   The City Park Advisory Board shall hold regular monthly meetings.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson of the
City Park Advisory Board.
§ 17-104 EMPLOYEES; EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The City Park Advisory Board shall not have the power to hire any
employees or make any expenditures on its own but shall make all
recommendations concerning such expenditures to the City Council for its
approval or rejection.
   (B)   The City Park Advisory Board may make request of the City Board for
any necessary expenses for the purposes of carrying out the responsibilities of
the City Park Advisory Board.
§ 17-105 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The City Park Advisory Board shall have the following duties and powers:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the Council for a comprehensive plan for
the physical development of the parks in the city. For the purpose of this
division (A), PARK includes any and all land and property owned by the city
upon which the public is invited to enter or view;
   (B)   To make continual investigations and recommendations concerning the
city’s growth, improvement and beautification;
   (C)   To investigate all matters relating to the location and development of
parks, recreation areas and to make report of their findings on any proposed
project relative to any of the above matters to the City Council;
   (D)   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the Council city park
projects, and expenditures therefor, and to recommend expenditures from the
City Park Fund and to investigate, prepare and recommend actions for
contributions to said fund; and
   (E)   The powers of the City Park Advisory Board are advisory only, and said
Board cannot spend any money on behalf of the city or obligate the city on any
debt without the approval of the Council.
CHAPTER 18: PLANNING AND LAND USE CONTROLS
Section
Article 1. Planning Commission
18-101 City Planning Commission created
18-102 Jurisdiction
18-103 Rules and regulations
18-104 Employees; expenditures
18-105 Procedures
18-106 Duties and powers
Article 2. Regulation of Land Subdivision
18-201 Planning Commission to review plats and replats
18-202 City Council approval required
Article 3. Subdivision Regulations
18-301 Incorporation of Subdivision Code
Article 4. Zoning
18-401 Zoning
18-402 Dwellings, lot width
18-403 Fee for zoning applications
18-404 Incorporation of amendments
Article 5. Flood Damage Prevention
18-501 Statutory authorization
18-502 Findings of fact
18-503 Statement of purpose
18-504 Methods of reducing flood losses
18-505 Definitions
18-506 Lands to which article applies
18-507 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
18-508 Establishment of development permit
18-509 Compliance
18-510 Abrogation and greater restrictions
18-511 Interpretation
18-512 Warning and disclaimer of liability
18-513 Designation of Floodplain Administrator
18-514 Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
18-515 Permit procedures
18-516 Variance procedures
18-517 General standards for flood hazard reduction
18-518 Specific standards for flood hazard reduction
18-519 Standards for subdivision proposals
18-520 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)
18-521 Floodways
18-522 Penalties for noncompliance
Article 6. Control of Surface Water
18-601 Purpose and scope
18-602 Definitions
18-603 Responsibility of developer/owner for storm drainage improvements
18-604 Requirements relating to developments
18-605 Title ownership and maintenance
18-606 Administration
Article 7. Validity and Penalty
18-701 Validity
18-702 Penalty
Article 8. Historic Preservation
18-801 Title
18-802 Statement of purpose
18-803 Definitions
18-804 Jurisdiction of Historic Preservation Zoning Ordinance
18-805 Historic Preservation Commission
18-806 Terms of members
18-807 Meetings and rules
18-808 Historic Preservation Commission powers and duties
18-809 Historic Preservation Zoning District
18-810 District identification
18-811 District regulations
18-812 Ordinary maintenance or repair
18-813 Maintenance of landmarks and historic sites; Building Code
18-814 Uses adjacent to Historical Preservation District
18-815 Historical District Zoning designation process
18-816 Interim control
18-817 District designation criteria
18-818 Certificate of appropriateness
18-819 Certificate of economic hardship
18-820 Demolition
18-821 Procedure and postponement orders
18-822 Criteria for review of demolition
18-823 Minimum maintenance
18-824 Historical Preservation Commission review
18-825 Appeals
18-826 Taxes
18-827 Property owned by public agencies
18-828 Separability
18-829 Penalty
Article 9. Commercial Communications Towers
18-901 Commercial communication towers
18-902 Height
18-903 Definition
18-904 Severability
ARTICLE 1. PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 18-101 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED.
   See §
1-314 of this code.
§ 18-102 JURISDICTION.
   The City Planning Commission shall have jurisdiction over any land inside
the corporate limits of the city.
§ 18-103 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall prescribe rules and regulations
governing and controlling the transaction of business before it and shall keep
a public record of its regulations, transactions and findings.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold regular monthly meetings.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission.
§ 18-104 EMPLOYEES; EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and authority to employ
planners, engineers, attorneys, clerks and other help deemed necessary, within
the limits of the appropriation fixed by the City Council.
   (B)   The salary and compensation for such services shall be fixed by the
City Council and shall be paid out of the City Treasury.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may incur necessary expenses within the limits
of its appropriation to carry out its purposes and responsibilities.
§ 18-105 PROCEDURES.
   All projects or matters that fall within the purview of the duties of the
Planning Commission, as herein specified, that may come before the City
Council, shall be referred to said Planning Commission for investigation and
report before any final action shall be taken thereon; provided, however, that
if said Planning Commission shall fail to make an investigation and report on
any matter or subject referred to it for a period of 60 days, the City Council
may thereupon act upon such proposal, plan or project as though such matter had
not been referred to said Planning Commission.
§ 18-106 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following duties and powers:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council for adoption a
comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city;
   (B)   To make continual investigations and recommendations concerning the
city’s growth, improvement and beautification;
   (C)   To investigate all matters relating to the location and development of
parks, recreation areas, streets, public grounds and public structures, and to
make report of their findings on any proposed project relative to any of the
above matters to the City Council;
   (D)   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the City Council, for
adoption, rules and standards for use in regulating the subdivision of land
within the Planning Commission’s jurisdictional area and to assist the City
Council in controlling said subdivision of land;
   (E)   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the City Council any suitable
amendments to the zoning ordinances for the city; and to assist the City
Council in administering said zoning ordinance; and
   (F)   To investigate, prepare and recommend to the City Council, for
adoption, such other rules, regulations or standards as may be necessary to
implement the city’s comprehensive plan.
ARTICLE 2. REGULATION OF LAND SUBDIVISION
§ 18-201 PLANNING COMMISSION TO REVIEW PLATS AND REPLATS.
   (A)   All subdivision plats or replats of land laid out in plats or lots and
the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
public or private use, within the jurisdictional area of the Planning
Commission, shall first be submitted to said Planning Commission for its
approval or rejection.
   (B)   In reviewing such plats or replats, the Planning Commission shall
utilize the standards and rules adopted by the City Council in the subdivision
ordinance for the city.
§ 18-202 CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Final approval for all subdivision plats or replats shall be obtained from
the City Council, in accordance with the provisions of the adopted subdivision
regulations for the city.
ARTICLE 3. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 18-301 INCORPORATION OF SUBDIVISION CODE.
   The “Standards and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land in Lexington,
Oklahoma” prepared by the Oklahoma Center For Urban and Regional Studies at the
University of Oklahoma, November 1972, and Planning Management Systems of
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, June 1978, is hereby incorporated and made a part
hereof as if fully set forth herein. Said publication shall be referred to as
the Subdivision Code for the city. Said Subdivision Code is set forth in
Chapter 27 of this code.
ARTICLE 4. ZONING
§ 18-401 ZONING.
   The zoning ordinance and code proposed by the “Oklahoma City of Urban and
Regional Structures,” the University of Oklahoma, in February 1973, consisting
of 43 pages, plus a table of contents, as accepted by the City Council on July
16, 1973, is hereby enacted as a part of this code. Said publication shall be
referred to as the Zoning Code for the city and is set forth in
Chapter 26 of this code.
§ 18-402 DWELLINGS, LOT WIDTH.
   For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front
building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less
than 35 feet.
§ 18-403 FEE FOR ZONING APPLICATIONS.
   Any person desiring to zone any property within the city shall pay to the
City Clerk a fee of $50 concurrent with the filing of any application for
zoning.
§ 18-404 INCORPORATION OF AMENDMENTS.
   The Zoning Code for the city is to include the zoning changes made by the
City Council since July 16, 1973, as set forth in
Chapter 26 of this code.
ARTICLE 5. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 18-501 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has in 82 O.S. §§ 1601 through 1618, as
amended, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-502 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-503 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood-
prone area.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-504 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-505 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Structures which are on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds).
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of flooding
to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO or A1-99.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or 1% chance flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BOARD. The State Water Resources Board.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building
in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the
case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevations
of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean
velocities.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. The physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. A person accredited by the Board and designated by
a Floodplain Board, to administer and implement laws and regulations relating
to the management of the floodplains.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOOD or FLOODING).
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures such as closure and drainage devices which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A VARIANCE,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this article. (For full requirements, see § 60.6 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10) or (d)
(3) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in
VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-506 LANDS TO WHICH ARTICLE APPLIES.
   This floodplain management article shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-507 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood
Insurance Study for Cleveland County, Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas,” dated
September 26, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. However,
the current existing flood damage prevention ordinance for the city, shall
remain in effect until September 26, 2008.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-508 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this floodplain management article.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-509 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-510 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and any
other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-511 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-512 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-513 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Manager is designated the Floodplain Administrator to administer
and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of
44 C.F.R. (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-514 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this article;
   (B)   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this article;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334) from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, the State Water Resources Board, prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   Shall obtain certified base flood elevation data from the applicant/
developer to administer this article effectively and reduce flood damage within
the community;
   (I)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community;
   (J)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot; provided, that
the community first complies with 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12;
   (K)   Become accredited by the Board in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601
through 1618, as amended; and
   (L)   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in
the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and
manufactured homes located in the SFHA have been substantially damaged and
enforce the substantial improvement requirement.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-515 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (3)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
18-514(A).
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-516 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
article.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this article.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
article, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of §
18-503 of this article.
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (J)   Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances.
      (3)   No variance shall be granted for a structure to be constructed
below the base flood elevation.
   (K)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided, that:
      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (J) above are met;
and
      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
   (L)   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the
Floodplain Board, accompanied by a filing fee of $25.
   (M)   A copy of any variance issued shall be sent to the OWRB within 15 days
of issuance.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-517 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-518 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A) as
proposed in §
18-515(A)(1) is satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of one
foot above the base flood level.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria.
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces. A licensed installer shall install the home and
comply with state law.
      (2)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites:
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home
park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated at a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Also, the home shall be
installed by a licensed installer and comply with state law.
      (3)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this division (D)(3) be elevated so that the bottom of the I-beam of the
manufactured home is at a minimum one foot above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement, to support the manufactured home
chassis and also be installed by a licensed installer that complies with state
law.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM, either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
18-515(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in division (D) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
   (F)   Accessory structure.
      (1)   Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment;
      (2)   Structure shall be small and not exceed 600 square feet in size;
      (3)   Structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
      (4)   Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage;
      (5)   Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work,
sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
      (6)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated at a minimum of one foot above the BFE;
      (7)   Structure is constructed and placed on a building site so as to
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (8)   Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e.,
constructed with flood resistance materials;
      (9)   Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement;
      (10)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
      (11)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE;
      (12)   Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent
and nearby structures; and
      (13)   Structure shall have the lowest floor elevated at a minimum of one
foot above the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-519 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with §§
18-502,
18-503 and
18-504.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements of §§
18-508 and
18-515 of this article and the provisions of §§
18-517 through
18-522.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
18-507 or
18-514(H).
   (D)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such
as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-520 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
18-507 of this article, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flows may be evident.
   (B)   Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore,
the following provisions apply.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of
one foot above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified).
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a
minimum of one foot above the highest adjacent grade and at least as high as
the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet
if no depth number is specified).
      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
18-515(A)(1), are satisfied.
      (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-521 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
18-507 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply.
   (A)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§
18-517 through
18-522.
   (C)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National
Flood Insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations; provided, that the community complies with all of 44 C.F.R. Chapter
1, § 65.12.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
§ 18-522 PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and
other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no
less than $50 and not more than $250 per day or imprisoned for not more than
one year, or both, for each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
Council or the City Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2008-02, passed 8-25-2008)
ARTICLE 6. CONTROL OF SURFACE WATER
§ 18-601 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   It is the intent of this article to protect the general health, safety and
welfare of the public from the dangers arising from improper drainage, unwise
diversion, use and obstruction of drainage channels, protect natural scenic
areas and to provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the area.
All subdivisions of land and all developments or improvements on a tract of two
acres or more which affect drainage in any portion of the city shall be subject
to the provisions of these regulations. These provisions shall also apply to
and be binding upon every person, firm or corporation and every city, county,
state or federal governmental entity seeking such development or improvement.
§ 18-602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   The following activities shall constitute DEVELOPMENT. Any human-
made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to:
         (a)   Buildings or other structures; and
         (b)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
      (2)   The following activities shall not constitute DEVELOPMENT:
         (a)   Lawn and yard care;
         (b)   Gardening;
         (c)   Tree care and maintenance; and
         (d)   Removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HISTORIC. Redevelopment or existing condition at time of development for all
storm frequencies.
§ 18-603 RESPONSIBILITY OF DEVELOPER/OWNER FOR STORM DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the goal of the owner/developer to limit the storm runoff
leaving his or her property to the so-called historic value (before
development). To achieve this, the developer/owner shall provide storage for
the increased stormwater runoff resulting from his or her development.
   (B)   Where a developer/owner proposes development or use of only a portion
of the property, provision for storm runoff control shall be required for the
portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use.
§ 18-604 REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   In any development or improvement of property, the developer/owner may
be required to provide at his or her own expense a preliminary drainage study
for the total area to be ultimately developed. It shall be the responsibility
of the City Planning Commission to determine whether the need exists for a
preliminary drainage study, and, if required, the study shall be submitted to
an engineer retained by the city for review prior to acceptance of any
preliminary plat or construction plans for the development or any increment
thereof.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to require improvements, the provision of
drainage easements and the provision of agreements beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision to facilitate flow of water through the addition, to avoid
probability of lawsuits based on damage from changed runoff in the subdivision,
and to provide continuous improvement of the overall storm drainage system. The
following kinds of improvements may be required:
      (1)   Enlargement or replacement of undersized drainage structures to
provide free flow;
      (2)   Removal of obstructions;
      (3)   Straightening of channel;
      (4)   Widening or deepening of the channel;
      (5)   Construction of erosion control structures;
      (6)   Back sloping sodding or riprapping of bank; or
      (7)   Construction of closed or open, paved storm sewers for the purposes
of closing gaps or continuation of the overall storm sewer system.
   (C)   Property owner agreements, where required shall be designed to protect
the city from probable lawsuits for damage caused by changed runoff conditions.
   (D)   (1)   When subdivision development will result in increased runoff
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision which cannot be accommodated through
channel improvements without causing downstream flooding. The Planning
Commission, which may consult with city staff and/or an engineer engaged by the
city, may require the construction of one or more retention reservoirs on the
subdivision which will temporarily impound and discharge water from the
subdivision site at the rate and volume equivalent to the discharge from the
undeveloped subdivision site.
      (2)   The design shall be for a 100-year frequency flood. Plans shall be
approved by the City Engineer. The construction and maintenance of retention
reservoirs shall be the responsibility of the developer.
   (E)   No excavating and/or grading and/or leveling and/or land filling of
any lot or tract of record for single-family residential developments, multi-
family or nonresidential/commercial development shall be commenced prior to the
approval of the preliminary grading plan or building permit in addition to any
required plans related to the flow of water runoff.
(Ord. 24-002, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 18-605 TITLE OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.
   Storage and other drainage facilities herein provided for shall be dedicated
to the public and maintained by the public unless such facilities are an
integral usable part of the development, in which case the ownership and
maintenance of said facilities may remain with the private sector.
§ 18-606 ADMINISTRATION.
   Prior to approval of any plat, an engineer retained by the city shall review
and approve stream flow and runoff calculations as he or she may require of a
developer under the terms of this article.
ARTICLE 7. VALIDITY AND PENALTY
§ 18-701 VALIDITY.
   The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter hereby adopted
shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.
§ 18-702 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in any amount not exceeding $100, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
ARTICLE 8. HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 18-801 TITLE.
   This article is entitled “Historic Preservation Zoning.”
§ 18-802 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   This article is designed to allow for designation of, and to subsequently
protect, properties which have been determined architecturally,
archaeologically, culturally or historically significant to the city, and to
allow interested parties the opportunity to arrange for the preservation of
such properties. The city hereby declares that the historical, architectural,
cultural and aesthetic features of the city represent some of the finest and
most valuable resources of the city, and such resources are the embodiment of
the heritage of the people of the city. Therefore, it is hereby declared that
the purpose of this article, to be known as the “Historic Preservation
Ordinance,” shall be as follows:
   (A)   To promote the designation of historic properties and landmarks and
the creation of historic districts for the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the public;
   (B)   To strengthen the city’s economic base by the revitalization,
preservation, protection and enhancement of those structures and districts
which reflect outstanding elements of the city’s cultural, artistic, social,
economic, political, architectural, historic or other heritage; and
   (C)   To promote the city’s outstanding historical or architectural
structures or districts by promoting civic pride in the history and
accomplishments of the past.
§ 18-803 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING MATERIAL. The physical concurrents and the manner of the
utilization which create aesthetics and structural appearance of the resource,
including, but not limited to, a consideration of the texture, nature and style
of the components and the combination such as bricks, stones, shingle, wood,
concrete or stucco.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The official document issued by the
Historical Preservation Commission of the city approving any application for
permission to construct, erect, demolish, move, reconstruct, rehabilitate,
restore, stabilize or alter any structure within a historical district.
   CERTIFICATION AGREEMENT. The executed document between a certified local
government (CLG) and the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) for
participation in said CLG program.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG). A local government that has been certified
to carry out the purposes of the National Historic Preservation Act, as
amended, in accordance with the procedures and guidelines set forth in the
certified local government program for the state as approved by the Secretary
of Interior.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUNDS. The portion of the State Historic
Preservation Office’s annual allocation from the Historic Preservation Fund set
aside for certified local governments.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAM AGREEMENT. The contract between the
certified local government and the State Historic Preservation Officer for
transfer of the share of the Certified Local Government Fund.
   DETAIL. The architectural aspects which, due to particular treatment, draw
attention to certain parts of features of a structure.
   GOOD REPAIR. Condition which not only meets minimum standard of health and
safety, but which also guarantees continued attractiveness, continued
structural soundness and continued usefulness.
   HEIGHTS. The vertical dimension of a given structure, building or monument.
   NATIONAL HISTORIC LANDMARK. Any building, district, site or structure that
is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The national list is a
list composed of district sites, buildings, structures and objects significant
in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture
maintained by the Secretary of the Interior under the authority of § 101(0)(1)
(A) of the National Historic Preservation Act, being 54 U.S.C. § 302706(a), as
amended.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS. Any work for which a building permit or
any other city permit or certificate is not required and where the purposes of
stabilization, and further, where such work will not noticeably change the
exterior appearance of the resource. Any work not satisfying all of the above
requirements shall not be considered ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. The
following examples shall not be considered ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: the
application of paint to previously unpainted brick or masonry; the construction
or enlargement of driveway or parking area; and the replacement of exterior
doors or windows except for repairs of broken glass or screens by use of like
glass or screens; further, there are other types of construction or other work
that shall not be considered ORDINARY MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR.
   PROPORTION. The relative physical sizes within and between buildings and
building components.
   RHYTHM. A regular pattern of shapes, including, but not limited to, windows,
doors, projection or heights within a building of structure or monuments or a
group of the same.
   SCALE. The harmonious proportion of parts of the building, structure or
monuments to one another and to the human figure.
   SETTING. The surrounding buildings, structures, monuments or landscaping
which provides visual aesthetics quality to the historical or architectural
resources.
   SHAPE. The physical configuration of structures or buildings or monuments,
and their components, including, but not limited to, roofs, doors, windows and
facades.
   SIGNIFICANT CHARACTERISTICS OF HISTORICAL OR ARCHITECTURAL RESOURCES. The
characteristics which are important to or expressive of historical,
architectural or cultural quality and integrity of its setting and which
include, but are not limited to, building materials, details, heights, mast,
proportion, rhythm, scales, setbacks, setting, shapes, street, accessories and
workmanship.
   STATE REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The state list of districts, sites,
buildings, structures and objects significant in state history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering and culture maintained by the State Historic
Preservation Officer under the authority of 53 O.S. §§ 351 through 355, 1984
supplement.
   STREET ACCESSORIES. The sidewalks or those street fixtures which provide
cleanliness, comfort, directional or safety and are compatible in design to
their surroundings and include, but are not limited to, receptacles benches,
advertising displays, signs, lights, hydrants and landscaping, including, but
not limited to, trees, shrubbery and planters.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground; this includes, but is not limited to,
buildings, fences, walls, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and signs.
§ 18-804 JURISDICTION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONING ORDINANCE.
   This article shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the city,
except in those areas that are designed by the Department of the Interior as
national historic landmarks or national historic districts, in which case the
involved properties shall be consistent with the Secretary of Interior
standards for rehabilitation. Property owners that are located within the
city’s Business District Zone may apply for voluntary designation of this
article.
§ 18-805 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Historic Preservation Commission of the
City of Lexington.
   (B)   Its members shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval
of the Mayor and City Council. In making appointments to the Commission, the
City Manager shall make an attempt to maintain a balance of interest and skills
on the Commission by asserting the individual qualifications of the candidates,
including, but not limited to, their knowledge and interest in preservation
related fields such as architecture, history, archaeology, planning, design,
landscape architecture or law. All members shall have a knowledge of, or
interest in, historical preservation and will have demonstrated their civic
interest and knowledge of the history of the city.
   (C)   The primary purpose for the City Historic Preservation Commission is
to allow for coordination of regulation with the preservation of the review
process and functions as the Preservation Review Commission.
§ 18-806 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   Six members shall be appointed to the Historic Preservation Commission so
the staggering terms initially get two members to be appointed for one year;
two members for two years; and two members for three years. All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation. Members shall be appointed to fill
remainders left by vacant offices as the City Manager deems necessary.
§ 18-807 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall be empowered to adopt rules
for the conduct of its business. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a
secretary. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. Any
person or his or her duly appointed representative shall be entitled to appear
and be heard on any matter before the Commission. The Commission shall keep a
record of its proceeding, a copy of which shall be filed for public view in the
office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   No business of the Commission may be conducted unless a quorum of not
less than three members is present. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
meet at least four times per year. The Historic Preservation Commission may
conduct a meeting with four of its six members present as a quorum, and
vacancies on said Commission shall be filled by the City Manager within 60
days.
§ 18-808 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Unless otherwise specified in this article, the duties of the Historical
Preservation Commission include, but may not be limited to, the duty to:
   (A)   Prepare or cause to be prepared a comprehensive inventory of
historical, architectural, archaeological and cultural resources within the
city;
   (B)   Prepare or cause to be prepared a general historic preservation plan
to be incorporated into the plans of the city;
   (C)   Prepare findings of fact, relating to the recommendation for
designation of historical, architectural, archaeological or cultural resources;
   (D)   Prepare findings of fact pursuant to action taken by the Commission
relating to the certificate of appropriateness;
   (E)   Make recommendation of the City Council concerning the acquisition of
development rights for facade easement and the development of historical
preservation plans;
   (F)   Make reservation to the City Council concerning grants from federal
and state agencies, private groups and individuals, and the utilization of
budget appropriations to promote the preservation of historical, architectural,
cultural and archaeological resources;
   (G)   To increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural,
architectural and archaeological resources by developing and participating in
public information programs and by recommending the updated preservation
program and by giving of advice to owners or residents of such resources as to
the problems and techniques of preservation work; and further, by placing
monuments and markers at historical sites as that are located by the Historic
Preservation Commission;
   (H)   To make comments and recommendations concerning actions undertaken by
our city or action of other governmental units with respect to the effect of
such actions upon historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological
resources; and
   (I)   Conduct a periodical review of the status of designated landmarks and
historical districts that provide periodical reports on the findings of said
review, along with any resolution for action as considered appropriate to the
City Council.
§ 18-809 HISTORIC PRESERVATION ZONING DISTRICT.
   The Historic Preservation District and its regulations may be applied to
property located in any other zoning district, whether residential, commercial,
industrial or agricultural, in accordance with the provisions of the historical
preservation ordinance. The Historical Preservation District is intended to be
an Overlay Zoning District and the regulations imposed by such district shall
be in addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning districts applicable
to the subject parcel or area. All provisions of this article, including the
definitions contained therein, shall be applicable to this district.
§ 18-810 DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION.
   Tracts, buildings, sites or other areas designated by the Historic
Preservation Commission as being within the Historical Preservation District
shall be identified on the official zoning map of the city and in other
official writings.
§ 18-811 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The designating ordinance shall prescribe the significant exterior
architectural features, the types of construction, alteration, demolition and
removal, other than those requiring a building or demolition permit that should
be reviewed for appropriateness; the design guidelines for applying the
criteria for review of appropriateness, special uses, permitted uses, height
and area regulations, sign regulations and parking regulations.
§ 18-812 ORDINARY MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance
or repair of any structure, except exterior changes.
§ 18-813 MAINTENANCE OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC SITES; BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Every person in charge of an improvement on a historic site or in a
historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of
such improvement and all interior portions which, if not so maintained, may
cause or tend to cause the exterior portions of such improvements to fall into
a state of disrepair. This section shall be in addition to all other provisions
of law or local ordinance or code requiring buildings or structures to be well
maintained.
   (B)   Insofar as they are applicable to a landmark, historic site or
improvement in any historic district, any provisions of the Building Code may
be varied or waived, on application, by the Building Inspector, provided such
variance or waiver does not endanger public health or safety.
   (C)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall utilize, hereinafter, the
Secretary of the Interior’s standards for rehabilitation. These standards are
as follows.
      (1)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or
site and its environment.
      (2)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment should not be destroyed. The removal or
alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features
should be avoided when possible.
      (3)   All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to
create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
      (4)   Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and
its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own
right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
      (5)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of styled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with
sensitivity.
      (6)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictoric evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
      (7)   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
      (8)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
      (9)   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material; and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the
property, neighborhood or environment.
      (10)   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures
shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be
removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would
be unimpaired.
§ 18-814 USES ADJACENT TO HISTORICAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Any use permitted in a residential, commercial, business or industrial
district while lying adjacent to, or across the street from, structures or
areas falling within the Historical Preservation District shall be screened or
designated, as appropriate, so as to minimize its effect upon the structures or
area.
   (B)   This required screening or design is specifically made existent at the
time of enactment date of this code.
§ 18-815 HISTORICAL DISTRICT ZONING DESIGNATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The city may designate tracts and sites for inclusion within the
Historical Landmark District and/or the Historical Preservation District in the
same manner prescribed for the designation of other zoning districts and
subject to compliance with this article; provided, however, that all
designations of tracts and sites for inclusion within the preservation district
shall be reviewed and considered by the Historical Preservation Commission.
Such Commission shall forward its recommendation regarding a proposed
designation to the Director of Community Development and City Council.
   (B)   The initiation of a proposal of designation may be made by the
Historical Preservation Commission, the City Council, or on the application of
any owner or owners of the parcels to be designated to their authorized agents.
Any such applications shall be made upon forms or pursuant to standards set by
the Commission for this purpose.
   (C)   Notice of consideration of a district designation by the City
Historical Preservation Commission shall be the same as it is required for
consideration of the adoption or amendment of zoning district boundaries by the
city government and city code. As a part of such notice, the City Manager, by
recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission, shall notify the owner
or owners of record of affected properties by certified mail, with return
receipts requested, of the proposed designation, including a copy of the
proposed designation ordinance, a letter outlining the basis for the
designation and the obligations and restrictions which result from such
designation.
   (D)   The Historical Preservation Commission may solicit and present expert
testimony or documentary evidence regarding the historical, archaeological,
architectural or cultural importance of the property or district proposed for
designation.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development of the
city to report to the Historical Preservation Commission as to the existence of
such plans, programs or authorizations which might have application to the
property proposed for designation, and further to offer a professional opinion
as to whether or not the proposed designation is in accordance with such plans,
programs or authorizations.
   (F)   As part of every proposed designation or proposed amendment of a
designation, the Commission shall state in written form to the City Manager and
City Council the attributes of the area of property proposed for designation or
the degree to which such attributes relate to and comply with the review
criteria set forth in this article. In addition, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall state, in writing:
      (1)   Whether or not, in its review, designation would be in compliance
with prior actions of the City Council approving plans, programs or
authorizations for public trusts, agencies or authorities of the city;
      (2)   The proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for a
review of certificates of appropriateness to the district proposed for
designation; and
      (3)   The recommendation as to appropriate permitted uses, uses permitted
on review, height and area regulations, sign regulations and parking
regulations necessary or appropriate to the preservation of the district
proposed for designation.
   (G)   The Director of Community Development shall initially notify the
Commission of all approvals or disapprovals of designation ordinances at the
next regular meeting of the Historic Commission following the City Council
action.
   (H)   The Historic Commission shall have the authority to effect the
amendment or repeal of any designation of a site, structure, building, district
or monument in the same manner and according to the same procedure as provided
herein for the original designation.
§ 18-816 INTERIM CONTROL.
   No building permit shall be issued by the city for alteration, construction,
demolition or removal of any property or structure within a nominated
historical district from the date of the meeting of the Commission at which an
application form is first presented until its final disposition by the City
Council unless such alterations, removal or demolition is authorized by formal
resolution of the City Council as necessary for public health, welfare or
safety. In no event shall the delay be for more than 180 days.
§ 18-817 DISTRICT DESIGNATION CRITERIA.
   A site, structure, building or monument may be designated for preservation
as a landmark or historical district and thus may be included within the
Historical Preservation District if such possesses the following attributes
within the categories below.
   (A)   Historical, cultural category.
      (1)   Such has significant character, interest or value as part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the locality, state or
nation; or is associated with the life of a personality significant to the
past;
      (2)   Such is the site of a historical event with a significant effect
upon the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the locality,
state or nation; and/or
      (3)   Such exemplifies a facet of the cultural, political, economic,
social or historical heritage of the city.
   (B)   Architectural and engineering category.
      (1)   Such portrays the environment in an era of history characterized by
a distinctive architectural style;
      (2)   Such embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type;
      (3)   Such is the work of a designer or architect whose individual work
has influenced the development of the community or of this nation;
      (4)   Such contains elements of design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship which represents a style unique to the past;
      (5)   Such is a part of or related to a square, park or other distinctive
area and thus should be developed and preserved according to a plan based on a
historical, cultural or architectural motif; and/or
      (6)   Such represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood, community or skyline owing to its unique location or singular
physical characteristics.
   (C)   Archaeology category.
      (1)   Such has yielded, based upon physical evidence, information
important to the history or prehistory; and/or
      (2)   Such is a part of or related to a distinctive geographical area
which should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on cultural,
historic or architectural motif.
§ 18-818 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required in the following
instances, before the commencement of work upon any structure or site located
within the Historical Preservation District:
      (1)   Whenever such work requires a building permit issued by the city;
      (2)   Whenever such work includes the application of paint to a
previously unpainted brick or masonry exterior surface or the construction or
enlargement of a driveway or parking area; or
      (3)   Whenever such work includes the construction, erection, moving,
demolition, reconstruction, rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization or
alteration of the exterior of any structure or site, except when such work
satisfies all the requirements for ordinary maintenance and repair as defined
in this article.
   (B)   No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official for any
structure or site located within the Historical Preservation District until the
application for such permit has been reviewed by the Historic Preservation
Commission and a certificate of appropriateness approved by the Commission. If
the Commission disapproves such a certificate of appropriateness, no permit
shall be issued and the applicant shall not proceed with the proposed work.
   (C)   When applying for such a permit, the applicant shall furnish two
copies of all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives and specifications, and
the Director of Community Development shall forward to the Historic
Preservation Commission such application for a building permit within five days
of receipt thereof. Any applicant may request a meeting with the Historic
Preservation Commission before submitting an application and may consult with
the Historic Preservation Commission during the review of the permit
application.
   (D)   Upon review of the application, the Historic Preservation Commission
shall determine whether the proposed work is of a nature which will adversely
affect any historical or architectural resource and whether such work is
appropriate and consistent with the spirit and intent of this article and the
designating ordinance. The Historic Preservation Commission shall apply the
criteria established by this article and, based thereon, shall approve or
disapprove such certificate of appropriateness.
   (E)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall develop such guidelines as
it may find necessary to supplement the provisions of this article and to
inform owners, residents and the general public of those techniques which are
considered most proper for undertaking work relating to historical and
architectural resources. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
opportunity to advise the City Council concerning provisions in the Building,
Electrical, Plumbing, Heat and Air and Housing Codes and other codes which
affect preservation work.
   (F)   It is not the intent of this article to limit new construction to any
one period or architectural style, but to preserve the integrity of historic
and architectural resources and to ensure the compatibility of new work
constructed in the vicinity. In the case of the disapproval of plans by the
Historic Preservation Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
state, in writing, the reasons for such disapproval and may include suggestions
of the Historic Preservation Commission in regard to actions the applicant
might take to secure the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission as to
the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
   (G)   With regard to the development of a property containing a designated
archaeological resource, a certificate of appropriateness shall be required
prior to the issuance of the permit for which the applicant has applied; and
further, the following requirements shall be satisfied.
      (1)   Archaeological resources shall be protected from inappropriate or
improper digging by demonstration by the applicant that the appropriate permits
and standards are met for study as set by the state historical society.
      (2)   Any discovered materials shall be properly recorded, reported,
stored or exhibited according to the standards set by the State Historical
Society.
      (3)   All development affecting the designated archaeological resources
shall provide for the permanent preservation of the resource or provide for the
completion of the necessary work as recommended by the qualified archaeologist.
      (4)   Prior to the hearing by the Historic Preservation Commission for
issuance of the certificate of appropriateness, the applicant or the Historic
Preservation Commission shall cause to have presented the comments and
recommendations of a qualified archaeologist with respect to the resource under
consideration and the application which would affect it.
   (H)   The Historic Preservation Commission may approve certificate of
appropriateness subject to certain conditions. Work performed pursuant to the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements
of such certificate, if any. It shall be the duty of the Director of Community
Development and the Code Enforcement Department to inspect from time to time
any work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness to assure such
compliance. In the event that all such work is not in compliance, the Community
Development Director shall issue a stop work order. The Historic Preservation
Commission may request by resolution that the Community Development Director
inspect the work and issue a stop work order.
   (I)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall be guided by the following
certificate review criteria:
      (1)   The purpose and intent of this article;
      (2)   The degree to which the proposed work may destroy or alter all or
part of a resource;
      (3)   The degree to which the proposed work would serve to isolate the
resource from its historical or architectural surroundings, or would introduce
visual, audible, vibratory or polluting elements that are out of character with
the resource and its setting, or that adversely affect the physical integrity
of the resource;
      (4)   The compatibility of the building material with the aesthetic and
structural appearance of the resource, including, but not limited to, the
consideration of texture, style, color or components, and their combinations of
elements, such as brick, stone, concrete, shingle, wood or stucco;
      (5)   The compatibility of the proposed design to the significant
characteristics of the resource, including, but not limited to, a consideration
of a harmony of materials, details, height, mass, proportion, rhythm, scale,
setback, shape, street accessories and workmanship.
§ 18-819 CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   (A)   Application. Application on forms prescribed by the Commission for
certificate of economic hardship may be made by an owner or his or her agent
who has been denied on a certificate of appropriateness for any work specified.
   (B)   General provisions and procedures. The Historic Preservation
Commission may require that the applicant for a certificate of economic
hardship make submission concerning any or all of the following information
before it makes a determination on the application:
      (1)   An estimate of the costs of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition or removal and an estimate of any additional costs that would be
incurred to comply with the recommendations of the Preservation Commission for
changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness;
      (2)   A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property
and their suitability for rehabilitation;
      (3)   The estimated market value of the property in its current
condition, after completion of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition or removal, after any changes recommended by the Preservation
Commission and, in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the
existing property for continued uses;
      (4)   In the case of proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect,
developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional
experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility or rehabilitation
or reuse of the existing structure on the property;
      (5)   Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party
from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property
was purchased and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer;
      (6)   If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income for
the property for the previous two years, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two years, and depreciation deduction and annual cash
flow before and after debt services, if any, during the same period;
      (7)   Remaining balance on any mortgage or financing secured by the
property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years;
      (8)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner
or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the
property;
      (9)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous two years; and
      (10)   Assessed values of the property according to the two most recent
assessments.
   (C)   Public hearing required. After the application for certificate of
economic hardship has been submitted, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing at which any person may testify concerning economic hardship.
   (D)   Determination of economic hardship. The Commission shall review all
the evidence and information required of any applicant for a certificate of
economic hardship and make a determination within 45 days of receipt of the
application, whether the denial of a certificate of appropriateness has
deprived, or will deprive, the owner of the property, of reasonable use of, or
economic return on, the property. If the Commission disapproves such a
certificate of economic hardship, the applicant shall proceed with work only
when issued a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 18-820 DEMOLITION.
   No structure or site within any Historical Preservation District shall be
demolished or removed unless such demolition shall be approved by the
Historical Preservation Commission and a certificate of appropriateness for
such demolition shall be granted.
§ 18-821 PROCEDURE AND POSTPONEMENT ORDERS.
   (A)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of
considering a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or removal. After
such hearing, the Commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness
thereby authorizing the demolition, or the Commission may deny the certificate
of appropriateness and postpone the demolition or removal for a period of 180
days.
   (B)   At the conclusion of such period of postponement as specified, the
Commission, within 45 days thereafter, shall hold a second public hearing for
the purpose of considering whether or not the Commission should recommend to
the City Council that additional postponement of demolition be ordered.
   (C)   In the event the Commission should make a recommendation of additional
postponement to the City Council, the City Council shall hold a public hearing
for the purpose of considering such additional postponement of demolition.
   (D)   (1)   At such public hearing, the City Council may enter an order
approving the demolition or may enter an order postponing demolition for an
additional period not to exceed 120 days from the date of such order.
      (2)   At the conclusion of this final period of postponement, the
Director of Community Development shall issue a permit approving the
demolition.
§ 18-822 CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF DEMOLITION.
   The Historic Preservation Commission and City Council shall be guided by the
following criteria in considering certificates of appropriateness and
authorizations for demolition of structures or sites within the Historical
Preservation District:
   (A)   The purposes and intent of this article;
   (B)   The degree to which the proposed removal of the historical resources
would serve to destroy the integrity and continuity of the Historical
Preservation District of which it is a part;
   (C)   The nature of the resource as a representative type of style or
architecture, socio-economic development, historical association or other
element of the original designation criteria applicable to such structure of
site;
   (D)   The condition of the resources from the standpoint of a structural
integrity; and
   (E)   The alternatives available to the demolition applicant, including:
      (1)   Donation of the subject structure or site to a public benevolent
agency;
      (2)   Donation of a part of the value of the subject structure or site to
a public or benevolent agency, including the conveyance of development rights
and facade easements;
      (3)   The possibility of sale of the structure or site, or any part
thereof, to a perspective purchaser capable of preserving such structure or
site;
      (4)   The potential of such structure or site for renovation and its
potential for continuing use;
      (5)   The potential of the subject structure or site for rezoning in an
effort to render such property more compatible with the physical potential for
the structure; and
      (6)   The availability of the subject structure or site to produce a
reasonable economic return on investment of its owner; provided, however, that
it is specifically intended that this factor shall not have exclusive control
and effect, but shall be considered along with all other criteria contained in
this section.
§ 18-823 MINIMUM MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Designated landmarks, or structures, buildings or monuments within
Historical Preservation Districts shall be maintained to meet the minimum
requirements of codes and ordinances governing the public health, safety and
welfare. The Historic Preservation Commission, on its own initiative, may file
a resolution with the appropriate officers requesting said officers to proceed
under the appropriate codes to require correction of defects or initiation of
repairs.
   (B)   All persons in charge of landmark, structure, building or monument
within a historical district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior
proportions of such resources, including appropriate landscaping.
§ 18-824 HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION REVIEW.
   All matter regarding property or sites situated within the Historical
Preservation District shall be reviewed and considered by the Historical
Preservation Commission prior to final action by the city municipal government,
the Traffic Commission, the Board of Adjustment or the City Council.
§ 18-825 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Commission shall have such right
to appeal as may otherwise be provided by law.
§ 18-826 TAXES.
   Nothing in this article shall be constructed as reason for an increased
evaluation of property for purposes of ad valorem taxation because of
historical designation.
§ 18-827 PROPERTY OWNED BY PUBLIC AGENCIES.
   The requirements, provisions and purposes of this article shall apply to all
property owned by the city or any other public agency; provided, however,
designation pursuant to this article shall not affect the validity of prior
actions of the City Council approving plans, programs or authorizations for
public trust, agencies or authorities of the city without an express amendment
of such plan, program or authority.
§ 18-828 SEPARABILITY.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, sentence or provision of this article
shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity
or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause, sentence or provision
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this article, and, to this
end, the provisions of this article are declared to be separable.
§ 18-829 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an offense against the
city. A violation exists whenever there is a performance of an act which is
prohibited by the provisions of this article, or a failure to perform an act
which is required by this article. Each day this article is violated shall be
considered a separate offense.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, externally
reconstructed, externally altered, added to or demolished in violation of this
article, the city or any person may institute an appropriate action proceeding
in a court with competent jurisdiction to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, addition or demolition, and
the violating party shall pay all court costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees, if the court should find in favor of the city or
the persons suing on behalf of the city to enforce this article.
ARTICLE 9. COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
§ 18-901 COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   As defined herein, commercial communication towers are prohibited within any
public right-of-way or residential zoning district. Such users are allowed by
right within the C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, M-1, A-1 or A-2 Zoning Districts, subject
to the following restrictions.
   (A)   Ownership. The lease area should be large enough to accommodate the
communication tower and support facilities, and include access to a public
street or accessible parking area. Purchase or ownership of a separate parcel
may require platting and improvements before construction permits can be
issued.
   (B)   Construction. In order to minimize visual impacts that can result from
the presence of such facilities, towers (including attached antennas) are
limited to monopole construction and may not exceed 250 feet in height.
Compliance with all requirements of the Building Code, including an engineer’s
structural certification of the tower structure, must be demonstrated before a
construction permit can be issued.
   (C)   Setback. No commercial tower shall be located closer to the boundary
line of any property zoned or used for any residential purpose than 250 feet or
within 250 feet of any residential structure. All towers shall observe a
minimum setback from any abutting street right-of-way equal to the height of
the tower.
   (D)   Appearance. No lights, signals or illuminations shall be permitted on
any tower unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or city agency. No commercial
advertising, signage or flags shall be allowed on any tower. This shall not
prevent the joint use of a legal existing sign structure as a support mechanism
for antennas or microwave dishes. Towers and accessory facilities should be
colored or painted in muted tones that minimize their visibility, unless
otherwise required by the FCC or FAA.
   (E)   Site design. The area containing the monopole and accessory structures
and any immediate surrounding area utilized for servicing of the communication
tower shall be secured by a seven-foot chain link fence, and the area within
the fence paved or graveled and kept weed-free. Other than the street side of
the site, any side that faces any residential use shall include opaque fencing
or sufficient shrubs to screen the site. If security lighting is installed,
such light should be directed into the site and only triggered by motion
detectors.
   (F)   Collocation.
      (1)   To minimize tower proliferation, all reasonable efforts should be
made to collocate facilities on existing or new towers. If not possible,
communication towers shall be located at least 1,000 feet apart. Antennas may
be placed wholly within any building legally permitted in a commercial or
industrial zoning district, or any publicly owned building. A commercial
antenna may be mounted flush to the exterior of such buildings if painted and
integrated into the overall architectural design. Roof-mounted antennas may not
extend more than 20 feet above the highest point of the roof structure,
provided any supporting equipment is screened from nearby residential
districts.
      (2)   Antennas may be attached to any utility structure (such as a water
tower or electrical transmission tower) or public building not located in a
street right-of-way, if the property is owned by a government or public agency;
further provided, that the antennas do not extend more than 20 feet above the
height of the structure.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-3-2007)
§ 18-902 HEIGHT.
   (A)   The regulations set forth herein qualify or supplement, as the case
may be, the specific district regulations appearing in
Chapter 26 of this code.
   (B)   Chimneys, elevators, flagpoles, spires, tanks, water towers and other
projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit.
This shall not be construed to allow a commercial communication tower.
§ 18-903 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure composed of a single spire
erected and maintained by a public service corporation that supports antennas
and necessary attachments, including, but not limited to, microwave antennas
used as part of a cellular mobile telephone communication system, and an
accessory building not to exceed 400 square feet used to house equipment
necessary for the operation of the cellular communication monopole and related
facilities.
§ 18-904 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
article is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this article.
CHAPTER 19: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section
Article 1. Water Service
19-101 Reading of meters
19-102 Disconnections
19-103 Prepare map
19-104 Meter record
19-105 Custodian
19-106 Meters; city to supply; dual connections
19-107 Meters; location
19-108 Freezing
19-109 Yard hydrants
19-110 Tampering with curb boxes
19-111 Tampering with meters
19-112 Theft of water
19-113 Failure of water supply
19-114 Mandatory connections; tapping fee
19-115 Meter deposit
19-116 Service liability
19-117 Delinquent water bills
19-118 Water rates
19-119 Rereading meters
19-120 Water bill adjustment
Article 2. Electric Service
19-201 Scope of rules, regulations; authority to amend
19-202 Rates
19-203 Charges to building contractors
19-204 Reading meters
19-205 Disconnections
19-206 Meter record
19-207 Custodian
19-208 Meters; city to supply
19-209 Tampering
19-210 Theft of electricity
19-211 Failure of service
19-212 Delinquent bills
19-213 Utilities Clerk to collect
19-214 Meter deposits
19-215 Metering required
19-216 Injury or damage
19-217 Collection of charges
19-218 Late charges
19-219 Electrical Board
Article 3. Sewer Service
19-301 City to maintain sewer connections
19-302 Mandatory sewer connections
19-303 Private sewage disposal facilities
19-304 Connection and tap fees and sewer service fee
19-305 Certain substances prohibited; duties of Sewer Inspector; permits for
sewer connections for industrial wastes; notice to owners in event of
noncompliance
19-306 Private sewer line connections; limiting liability
Article 4. Deposits
19-401 Deposit required; amount
Article 5. Utility Service Termination Policy
19-501 Delinquent bills
19-502 Disconnection procedure
19-503 Hearing procedure
19-504 Reconnection procedure
19-505 Transfer fee
19-506 Life-threatening situation collection policy and procedures
Article 6. Public Works Inspectors
19-601 Inspectors’ duties
19-602 Appeals from Inspector’s decisions
Article 7. Cable Television
19-701 Grant of franchise
19-702 Effective date; term
19-703 Agreement
Article 7.1 Regulation of Basic Tier Service, Equipment and Installation Rates
19-704 Federal regulations adopted by reference
19-705 Summary
19-706 Effect of Subpart N
19-707 Further definitions
19-708 Procedure for consideration of views of interested parties; 47 C.F.R. §
76.935
19-709 Effect of amendments
19-710 Pole charge
Article 8. Ambulance Service
Reserved
Article 9. Gas Service
19-901 Grant of franchise
19-902 Laying of mains, pipes and laterals
19-903 Excavations; nonliability of city
19-904 Rules and regulations
19-905 Extension of mains and cost
19-906 Deposit required
19-907 Annual payment to city
19-908 Rights not exclusive
19-909 Repealer
Article 10. Public Works Authority
19-1001 Public Works Authority, trust indenture
Article 11. Validity and Punishment
19-1101 Validity
19-1102 Penalty
Article 12. Identity Theft Prevention Program
19-1201 Short title
19-1202 Purpose
19-1203 Definitions
19-1204 Findings
19-1205 Process of establishing covered account
19-1206 Access to covered account information
19-1207 Sources and types of red flags
19-1208 Prevention and mitigation of identity theft
19-1209 Updating program
19-1210 Program administration
19-1211 Outside service providers
ARTICLE 1. WATER SERVICE
§ 19-101 READING OF METERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Water Superintendent to read or cause to be read
all water meters connected to the municipal properties, once in each calendar
month, the same being done on or before the twentieth day of each month. He or
she shall make a record of such readings for each and every meter and report
the same to the Utilities Clerk, showing in each case the amount of water
currently consumed during the month as recorded by such meters.
§ 19-102 DISCONNECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Water Superintendent to disconnect any premises
connected to the water system upon notice from the Utilities Clerk and to keep
the same disconnected until ordered by such Utilities Clerk to reconnect the
same.
§ 19-103 PREPARE MAP.
   The Water Superintendent of the city shall prepare a map of the city on
which shall be exhibited the location of all main and lateral line pipes,
junctions, tap positions, manholes, main valves and the size and condition of
each.
§ 19-104 METER RECORD.
   The Water Superintendent shall keep a record of all meters by number,
showing the capacity, location, person in possession and any repairs made on
the same.
§ 19-105 CUSTODIAN.
   The Water Superintendent shall be the lawful custodian of all properties
belonging to the municipal water system and shall preserve the same in good
condition and prevent its use for any other purpose. It shall be his or her
duty to keep all machinery and plant equipment clean and in good operation.
§ 19-106 METERS; CITY TO SUPPLY; DUAL CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   All water meters shall be owned and provided by the city. No person
shall obtain any water from the city water system except when the same shall
pass through a properly installed and approved meter, and water thereby
obtained shall not thereafter be resold to regular consumers.
   (B)   Dual connections consisting of more than one household or business, or
other establishment per meter, shall not be permitted. Consumers shall be
billed for any and all damage to meters or fittings not caused by the city, the
City Public Works Authority, its agents or employees.
§ 19-107 METERS; LOCATION.
   Water meters shall be placed as near as possible and convenient to the curb
or property line of the property served thereby. Residence property meters may
be placed between the curb and the sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the
property line. Meters serving stores or business property shall be placed under
the floor or stairway, or in some place approved by the Water Superintendent.
All locations shall be approved by the Superintendent.
§ 19-108 FREEZING.
   Every water meter shall be protected at all times from freezing or other
injury. In case an injury shall occur, the Water Department will make the
necessary repairs at its own cost except in cases of neglect by the owner or
occupant, in which cases the city will make the repair at the cost of the owner
or occupant of the premises served. A failure to keep the water box covered
shall not be the neglect of the city but of the user, and freezing due to same
shall be at the cost of the user.
§ 19-109 YARD HYDRANTS.
   No yard hydrant shall be placed nearer than ten feet to any water meter and
in no case shall a yard hydrant be so placed that the drainage therefrom will
run toward or into the meter pit.
§ 19-110 TAMPERING WITH CURB BOXES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any curb box or any of
the contents within the same, or to throw, leave or deposit any matter, dirt or
material of any kind in the same.
§ 19-111 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized officer of
the city, to alter, change, bridge over or around, disconnect, injure or damage
in any manner or otherwise to interfere with any water meter or connection to
the same which is installed for use in connection with the city waterworks
system. Provided, that licensed plumbers shall have the right to temporarily
turn off the water when the same is necessary to make repairs on the plumbing
attached to the same. No plumber shall leave any meter turned off except in
cases of such repairs and only for the time necessary to make the repairs.
   (B)   In the event any customer causes or suffers to be caused any tampering
or interfering with the meters, pipes and fittings of the system, the authority
may immediately disconnect the customer’s connection to the system and may
require reasonable security prior to reconnection.
§ 19-112 THEFT OF WATER.
   (A)   Any person who, by fraud or stealth, in any way obtains water from the
municipal waterworks system of the city, or who turns on the water service
without authority of ordinance or duly authorized official, shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $100, plus the cost. Each day of such violation shall be a separate
offense. The amount of water that has been obtained by any person by fraud or
stealth or without permission from a proper city official, as provided by
ordinance, shall be estimated by the amount used by such person during the last
month previous that the meter operated and registered correctly all water; and
such person shall pay for the same at the rate fixed by the city for the
particular class of service obtained, before any further water connection is
made.
   (B)   In all cases of fraud or stealth, the city shall have the right to
install apparatus, locks and instruments which are necessary to prevent theft
at the expense of the consumer and shall maintain the same so long as deemed
necessary by the city, not exceeding one year from such installation.
§ 19-113 FAILURE OF WATER SUPPLY.
   In case water is limited, whether from natural causes or accidents of any
kind, the city shall not be liable for any damage of any kind for such reason
of failure. In all cases where the size of the service pipe and the amount of
water used is such that the main pressure in the immediate vicinity is
perceptibly affected, it shall be the duty of such person to install a storage
tank of sufficient capacity to enable them to operate entirely without water
direct from the mains. In such cases, it shall be the duty of such persons to
keep a storage of water on hand to meet the demands of such business without
reducing the water pressure in the immediate vicinity. The City Council
reserves the right and power, in cases of emergency, to govern and regulate the
use of water to all consumers, by resolution or proclamation, as it deems
proper for the public health and safety.
§ 19-114 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS; TAPPING FEE.
   (A)   Connection to water supply required. All houses, buildings or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes
situated within the city, except as excluded hereinbelow, shall connect with
the water supply of the city, and the owner of such property shall continue
that water supply to the farthest property line from the point where the supply
first reaches his or her property, at his or her expense. Private wells shall
be permitted for irrigation purposes only.
   (B)   Cost for connection.
      (1)   The cost for connection to the city water supply shall be
determined as follows.
         (a)   If an existing water main abuts the property of a parcel one
acre or more, the owner shall pay to the city an amount equal to the number of
acres in his or her development multiplied by the prevailing cost per mile of
installation of water mains (as determined by the City Clerk) divided by 640.
         (b)   If the city water main does not abut the property, the owner
shall extend the water main to his or her property and shall not be charged for
the connection. In such event, the city shall return to the owner any amounts
paid for subsequent connections to the line so installed for a period of 15
years or until the owner has been paid 80% of the cost of the installation of
the line from city supply to his or her nearest property line, whichever shall
sooner occur. In no event shall the cost of a six-inch, four-inch, two-inch or
smaller pipe be allowed for reimbursement by the city to the owner/developer.
         (c)   All construction must conform to specifications approved by the
City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk. Fire hydrants shall
also be installed by the developer in accordance with minimum requirement of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
      (2)   The total cost to the city of all repair and maintenance to said
distribution system for a period of three years from date of approval and
acceptance of distribution by the city shall be deducted from those amounts
determined in accordance with this section.
   (C)   Extensions and connections by city. The city shall have the right to
make any connections or cross-connections deemed necessary by city between the
water pipelines of the owner constructed pursuant to this agreement and any
other existing or future water line which may be constructed, without the
payment of any sum to the owner; provided, however, that said right shall be
restricted to water pipe lines owned or operated by the city. It is further
understood and agreed that the city shall have the right to make any extension
of the owner’s system deemed necessary by the city without the payment of any
sum to the owner when such extension is constructed by the city with public
funds.
   (D)   Connections or extensions by others. The city shall have the right and
privilege to permit the connection of other water pipe lines to be constructed
by others than the city to the water pipe lines constructed pursuant to this
agreement upon the following terms and conditions.
      (1)   In the event such connection is made to the water pipe line of the
owner, the city will require any such applicant so desiring to connect to the
owner’s system to pay to the city for the use and benefit of the owner in
accordance with the following schedule for each and every connection of any
line having a diameter of eight inches and larger:
         (a)   Twelve-inch diameter and larger: $2,000;
         (b)   Ten-inch diameter: $1,750; and
         (c)   Eight-inch diameter: $1,500.
      (2)   It is further understood and agreed that the charges provided for
in division (D)(1) above shall not be required if such applicant constructs
such extension at the applicant’s sole expense and, upon completion thereof,
conveys by appropriate instruments all of the applicant’s right, title and
interest in and to all the water pipe lines in the system so constructed, in
which event said system so constructed by such applicant shall become part of
the owner’s system.
      (3)   Any and all sums collected by the city under the terms of this
section shall be placed by the city in a special trust account and shall be
paid to the owner within 30 days after the completion and acceptance by the
city of the water system for which such payments have been received.
      (4)   The city shall have the right to permit the connection of water
pipe lines constructed by others without charge when such connections shall be
to pipe lines of the owner having a diameter less than ten inches.
      (5)   The city shall not be liable for fees.
   (E)   Final plan. Within a period of 30 days after the completion of the
construction of said distribution system, the owner shall furnish, in
triplicate, a plan (exhibit C), showing the correct location, sizes and length
of all lines, hydrants, valves and other accessories thereof, said plan being
drawn to scale by a competent draftsman; and after approval by the City Council
and acceptance by the city, one copy shall be returned to the owner, one copy
shall be filed in the City Clerk’s office and one copy shall be attached to and
form a part of the agreement.
   (F)   Costs. Within 30 days after the completion of the construction, the
owner shall furnish to the city, in triplicate, a certified, itemized statement
of cost of the distribution system herein described, and as shown on the plan
per division (C) above; said statement to be in form specified by the city, and
shall show separately itemized costs for each size water pipe line and
appurtenances. The total cost of said installation shall include cost of
materials, excavations, backfill and all other work incident thereto, including
engineering fees of not to exceed 5%; but said statement shall not include
attorneys’ fees, charges for installing water service connections and meters
thereof, or any other charge not hereinabove mentioned. Said itemized statement
shall be approved by City Council.
   (G)   Exception to connection requirement. The provisions of divisions (A)
and (B) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   A single-family residence constructed after April 7, 1981, unless a
water main is located within 100 feet of the property line along a street,
alley or right-of-way, in which case the owner shall connect to the public
water supply;
      (2)   Any structures existing as of April 7, 1981; and
      (3)   A residence constructed in a previously platted subdivision which
provided for private water wells in lieu of public water supply for the
subdivision as of April 7, 1981.
§ 19-115 METER DEPOSIT.
   Each and every person receiving water from the city waterworks shall deposit
and maintain a service deposit with the Utilities Clerk which shall remain with
the city to the credit of the depositor so long as service is continued at such
connection and shall be the subject to any charge for water service which is
unpaid or for repairs done by the city to such person’s water service. In all
cases where a charge is made against such deposit, it shall be the duty of the
person to pay the Utilities Clerk an amount equal to the charge and thereby
maintain the deposit equal to the required amount at all times until service is
discontinued. The deposit shall be returned to such depositor upon
discontinuance of service after all water rents and other service charges are
first paid. The amount of the deposit shall be as set forth in §
19-401 and as may be subsequently changed by motion or resolution by the City
Council.
§ 19-116 SERVICE LIABILITY.
   Each and every person using water from the city water system shall be liable
to the city for all water used according to the established rates and minimum
charges and according to the rates promulgated by the City Council.
§ 19-117 DELINQUENT WATER BILLS.
   (A)   All bills for utility services shall be rendered to consumers in
accordance with the established policy on file in the office of the City
Utilities Clerk, a copy of which is incorporated herein by reference, or in
accordance with any other applicable policies or ordinances of the city. The
amount billed shall be due and payable by the consumer upon receipt of the
statement and in accordance with the due dates, late dates, penalties and late
charges established in existing policies and ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $20.
§ 19-118 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Each customer shall pay for water service on a monthly basis according
to the following rates.
 
First 1,000 gallons           $8    (minimum charge)
All usage after 1,000 gallons $2.70 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   The water rates may be increased or decreased by motion or resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. 2003-06A, passed 11-4-2003)
§ 19-119 REREADING METERS.
   In the event a consumer requests that a water meter be reread, and in the
event the meter reading is correct, a $10 charge for rereading shall be
assessed and added to the next month’s utility bill. In the event the rereading
reveals that the utility billing is in error, an adjustment shall be made as
appropriate and no charge shall be assessed for the rereading of the meter.
§ 19-120 WATER BILL ADJUSTMENT.
   In the event that a customer requests an adjustment of his or her water bill
because a leak or some other factor has caused the bill to be unusually high,
the City Manager, in his or her discretion, shall have the authority to adjust
the water bill by splitting the difference between the amount of the
extraordinary bill and the amount of the customer’s average bill; provided,
however, that this authority shall not be exercised more than once each year
for any one customer.
ARTICLE 2. ELECTRIC SERVICE
§ 19-201 SCOPE OF RULES, REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY TO AMEND.
   Until otherwise provided by ordinance, all electric current or energy
furnished by the city shall be furnished by it at the rates and upon the terms
herein prescribed and established and any valid rules and regulations
heretofore prescribed by it. The city hereby reserves the right to amend or
repeal this article or any other rule or regulation for the furnishing by it of
electric current or energy.
§ 19-202 RATES.
   (A)   Rates.
      (1)   The following electric utility rate charge increases are approved
for implementation as of the effective date specified within the table set
forth immediately below:
Commercial Service  Effective Date
Commercial Service                                       Effective Date
   Minimum monthly charge                 $20.71      6-1-2024
   Energy charge                          $0.1437/kwh 6-1-2024
   Energy charge                          $0.1520/kwh 11-1-2024
Large Commercial Service
   Minimum monthly charge                 $869        6-1-2024
   Energy charge - over 10,000 kwh per mon$0.9020/kwh 6-1-2024
Residential Service
   Minimum monthly charge                 $10.36      6-1-2024
   Energy charge                          $0.1388/kwh 6-1-2024
   Energy charge                          $0.1469/kwh 11-1-1-2024
 
      (2)   The following fuel cost adjustment formula shall be implemented
effective June 1, 2024: Total OMPA Invoice + Total SWPA Invoice/Total kWh -
0.06 = Fuel cost adjustment per kWh.
      (3)   The fees established herein may be reviewed and changed by motion
or resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Lexington Public Works Authority
at least annually or more often as it deems appropriate.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      LARGE COMMERCIAL SERVICE. Nonresidential use over 10,000 kWh per month.
   (C)   Additional provisions.
      (1)   A variable fuel adjustment will be added to all of the above
charges for each kind of service.
      (2)   The electric rates may be increased or decreased by motion or
resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2003-06A, passed 11-4-2003; Res. 24-020, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 19-203 CHARGES TO BUILDING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   The following rates and charges (for the furnishing of electric
current or energy) shall be charged by the city to building contractors or
others requesting the service herein specified, in addition to other charges
that may be levied:
      (1)   If the building contractor or other person furnishes his or her own
pole, and sets the same in place at their own expense, the following fees shall
be owing by the contractor to the city:
         (a)   For installing the drop wire to one pole and meter: $50; and
         (b)   For each additional span of wire required between multiple
poles: $10.
      (2)   If the city shall furnish and install a pole or poles on the
building site and also install the drop wire and meters, or shall remove the
same, then the city shall receive the following fee:
         (a)   One pole: $75;
         (b)   Two poles: $125;
         (c)   Three poles: $150; and
         (d)   Each pole beyond three: $20.
   (B)   The fees set forth in division (A)(2) above shall be for the
installation of poles, drop wire and meters only and shall not be deemed as a
purchase price for poles set.
   (C)   (1)   The fees set forth in division (A)(2) above apply to poles that
are required to provide service to the site and do not apply if service will
remain after construction has been completed.
      (2)   If service will remain after construction, the fees set forth in
division (A)(2) above will apply.
§ 19-204 READING METERS.
   The Light and Power Superintendent shall cause all electric meters on the
city electric system to be read on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar
month and a record of the same to be made and reported to the City Utilities
Clerk.
§ 19-205 DISCONNECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Light and Power Superintendent to disconnect any
premises connected to the city electric system upon notice to do so from the
Utilities Clerk and to keep the same disconnected until ordered by said
Utilities Clerk to reconnect the same.
§ 19-206 METER RECORD.
   The Light and Power Superintendent shall keep a record of all electric
meters by number showing capacity, location, person in possession and any
repairs made on the same.
§ 19-207 CUSTODIAN.
   The Light and Power Superintendent shall be the lawful custodian of all
properties belonging to the city electric system and shall preserve the same in
good condition and prevent its use for any other purposes. He or she shall keep
the system clean and in good operation.
§ 19-208 METERS; CITY TO SUPPLY.
   (A)   The city will supply all electric meters and keep the same in a good
state of use; provided, that the user shall be liable for all damage and costs
of making repairs arising from his or her neglect or wrongful use.
   (B)   No person shall obtain any electricity from the city except when the
same shall pass through a properly installed and approved meter, and no
electricity shall thereafter be resold to any regular consumer.
§ 19-209 TAMPERING.
   It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or change any meter
installed for electric service or any of its working parts or any wires
connected therewith, or to connect any other wires thereto, or to bridge over
or around or to establish or maintain any loop or conductor of electric current
around any duly installed electric meter.
§ 19-210 THEFT OF ELECTRICITY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to use any electric current or power
from the city electric system which has been obtained by fraud or theft. Theft
shall consist of taking or using any electric current from the city light and
power system without the knowledge or consent of the City Council or in any
manner contrary to the provisions of the city ordinances.
   (B)   In all cases of theft of electric current, the amount so taken shall
be determined in the same manner as set for theft of water, and the premises
shall be disconnected until the charges therefor are paid in full.
   (C)   In prevention of such cases, the city shall have the right to install
such equipment for the prevention of theft at the expense of the owner as in
its judgment may be necessary, and to require the same to remain installed for
a period of not longer than one year.
§ 19-211 FAILURE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The city undertakes to render an efficient and adequate electric power
and light service for the inhabitants of the city, but shall not be responsible
for any damages arising from inadequate supply of power for unexpected needs
and beyond its potential capacity or ability to serve.
   (B)   All service is contingent upon the exercise of skill, good faith and
the means at hand.
§ 19-212 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   (A)   All bills for electric service shall be based on meter readings made
by the Light and Power Superintendent on the same conditions and at the same
time as in the case of water meters, to which shall be applied the fixed rates
of service as established by the City Council.
   (B)   (1)   All such bills shall become due and be paid within the period of
time allowed for water bills.
      (2)   If not so paid, they shall become delinquent as in the case of
water bills, and all such delinquent electric bills shall be collected and
service disconnected and reconnected upon the same terms within the same
periods of time allowed for water bills and with the same reconnection charges.
§ 19-213 UTILITIES CLERK TO COLLECT.
   The City Utilities Clerk shall collect all electric light and power bills
and give receipt for same showing consumption, person paying the same and date
of payment. All bills shall be on meter readings by the Light and Power
Superintendent, to which shall be applied the rates as prescribed by ordinance,
resolution or motion.
§ 19-214 METER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Each and every person receiving electricity from the city electrical
system shall deposit and maintain an electricity service deposit with the
Utilities Clerk which shall remain with the city to the credit of the depositor
so long as service is continued at such connection and shall be subject to any
charge for electric service which is unpaid or for repairs done by the city to
such person’s electric service.
   (B)   In all cases where a charge is made against such deposit, it shall be
the duty of the person to pay the Utilities Clerk an amount equal to the charge
and thereby maintain the deposit equal to the required amount at all times
until such service is discontinued. The deposit shall be returned to such
depositor upon discontinuance of service after all electrical rents and other
service charges are first paid. The meter deposit shall be as set forth in §
19-401 of this chapter and shall be subject to change hereafter by the City
Council by motion or resolution.
§ 19-215 METERING REQUIRED.
   Each dwelling, multi-family dwelling, business or multi-business must have a
separate service for each occupancy mounted on the outside of the building
accessible by the city meter reader, and each meter will have a separate
deposit paid by either the landlord or tenant as deemed necessary in §
19-214.
§ 19-216 INJURY OR DAMAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure or damage, in any manner, any of the
poles, wires or electric installations of the municipal electric light and
power plant or any of its streets or alley line construction, or to throw
objects at the insulators, wires or other appurtenances with intent to injure
the same.
§ 19-217 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   The City Manager and the City Clerk-Treasurer are conjointly and directly
responsible for collections and payment charges for electric energy and water.
§ 19-218 LATE CHARGES.
   Any consumer who does not pay his or her electric bill on or before the
tenth day of each month shall be charged a 10% penalty.
§ 19-219 ELECTRICAL BOARD.
   (A)   Members. The Electrical Board shall consist of three members, the
Electrical Inspector, one master electrician and one resident of the city. The
master and the resident will be appointed and approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Duties. The Electrical Board shall:
      (1)   Periodically review and recommend modifications in the application
and administration of all electrical ordinances;
      (2)   Prepare and conduct the local examinations for those applicants
desiring electrical licenses and grade those examinations;
      (3)   Assist the City Clerk in the official duties of licensing;
      (4)   The Electrical Board shall neither collect nor disburse any
examination or licensing monies; and
      (5)   The Electrical Board shall meet the third Tuesday of each month at
7:00 p.m., and, at this time, all electrical applications shall be reviewed and
examinations given and graded the same night.
ARTICLE 3. SEWER SERVICE
§ 19-301 CITY TO MAINTAIN SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   The city shall inspect and maintain all connections to its sewer lines upon
the payment to the city by the user or beneficiary thereof of the charge or
charges prescribed by the city.
§ 19-302 MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The owners of all houses, buildings or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a
public sanitary sewer of the city are hereby required, at their expense, to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to have such facilities
connected directly with the proper public sewer within 60 days after the date
of official notice to do so; provided, that such public sewer is within 150
feet of the property line.
   (B)   Such notice (see division (A) above) shall be served by any member of
the City Police Department by delivering a true and correct copy to the
property owner or leaving the same at his or her usual place of residence with
a member of his or her family over the age of 15 years; or, if such owner
cannot be found, by posting a copy of such notice at the front entrance of the
building involved.
   (C)   Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the terms
of this section after having been notified so to do as provided herein shall be
guilty of an offense, and each 24-hour period thereafter shall constitute a
separate offense. In the event of a continuous violation of this section by any
property owner, the city shall discontinue the furnishing of water to such
property owner until such time as a proper sewer connection has been made.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal
sanitary sewer system any cistern water, groundwater, roof runoff, foundation
drainage or other subsurface drainage.
§ 19-303 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Except as herein provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended to be used for the disposal of sewage
within the limits of the city.
   (B)   Where a connection to a public sanitary sewer line is not required
under the provisions of §
19-302 of this article, a private septic tank or cesspool facility for sewage
disposal may be constructed and maintained, provided it is constructed and
maintained under the rules and regulations of the city Health Officer or other
duly appointed city agency or employee and in compliance with the
recommendations and requirements of the State Department of Health. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural
outlet.
   (C)   The owner of private septic tanks or cesspools shall operate and
maintain the same in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city,
and no statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer of the
city, county or state.
   (D)   At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a septic tank or cesspool, a direct connection shall be made to such public
sewer in compliance with §
19-302 of this article, and the septic tank or cesspool shall immediately be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 19-304 CONNECTION AND TAP FEES AND SEWER SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   For each sewer tap made in the city, there shall be paid to the city a
fee of $25, and said tap shall be made and inspected by a city employee or
employees.
   (B)   For each dwelling, trailer house, business or other establishment of
any kind connected to the city sewer system, there shall be assessed a sewer
service fee in the amount of $7 and $1.60 per 1,000 gallons for all usage. The
sewer service charge shall be collected by and paid to the Utilities Clerk of
the city, and the collection procedure shall be the same as for electric or
water service. Service may be discontinued for failure to pay said sewer
service charge, even though charges for electric energy or water have been paid
and are not in arrears in respect to the premises for which the sewer service
charge is delinquent.
   (C)   The sewer tap fee and sewer service charge set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) above may be increased or decreased by motion or resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 2003-06A, passed 11-4-2003)
§ 19-305 CERTAIN SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED; DUTIES OF SEWER INSPECTOR; PERMITS FOR
SEWER CONNECTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTES; NOTICE TO OWNERS IN EVENT OF
NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
substances if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Sewer Inspector, that
such wastes can harm the sewers, the sewage treatment process or equipment;
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life,
limb or public property, or otherwise constitute a nuisance. The prohibited
substances are:
      (1)   Flammable or explosive materials;
      (2)   Water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils in excess of
one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing any substance which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures higher than 32°F;
      (3)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
      (4)   Any garbage or food waste not properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any grinder or shredder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower or greater shall be subject to review and approval by the Sewer
Inspector;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing the metals listed below or other
toxic substances in quantities determined by the Sewer Inspector to be harmful:
         (a)   Antimony;
         (b)   Arsenic;
         (c)   Barium;
         (d)   Beryllium;
         (e)   Bismuth;
         (f)   Boron;
         (g)   Cadmium;
         (h)   Chromium;
         (i)   Cobalt;
         (j)   Copper;
         (k)   Iron;
         (l)   Lead;
         (m)   Manganese;
         (n)   Mercury;
         (o)   Molybdenum;
         (p)   Nickel;
         (q)   Rhenium;
         (r)   Selenium;
         (s)   Silver;
         (t)   Strontium;
         (u)   Tellurium;
         (v)   Tin;
         (w)   Uranium; and
         (x)   Zinc.
      (6)   Any water or waste containing iron pickling wastes or plating
solutions;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances;
      (8)   Any radioactive wastes of a half-life or concentration determined
by the Sewer Inspector to be harmful;
      (9)   Any water or wastes having pH lower than 5.5 or having any
corrosive property capable of damaging installations, equipment or personnel of
the sewage works;
      (10)   Solid or viscous substances of such size or in such quantities
capable of causing obstruction of sewers or interference with operation of
sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair, fleshings, entrails and paper containers;
      (11)   Wastes containing unusual concentrations of suspended solids, such
as fuller’s earth, lime or clay;
      (12)   Wastes containing unusual concentrations of dissolved substances,
such as sodium chloride or sodium sulfate;
      (13)   Water or wastes containing excessive coloration, such as that
caused by dye wastes and tanning solutions;
      (14)   Wastes containing unusual concentrations of organic material, such
as whey, milk, yeast, blood or unusual biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),
chemical oxygen demand (COD) or chlorine requirement, constituting a
significant load on the sewage treatment facilities; and
      (15)   Materials which cause unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting slugs which adversely affect the sewage treatment process.
   (B)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged
which contain the substances described in division (A) above, the Sewer
Inspector may prohibit their discharge; require the responsible party to
pretreat the waste before discharge; limit the quantity, rates and time of
discharge; require the installation of a control manhole for observation,
sampling and metering of the wastes; and assess a surcharge based on the
quantity and strength of the wastes. If pretreatment is to be accomplished, the
design, installation and operation of the plant and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Sewer Inspector.
   (C)   Application for permits for sewer connections for industrial wastes
shall show the following information:
      (1)   A plat of the property showing all existing sewers and storm
drains;
      (2)   Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be done
under the permit;
      (3)   A schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or
to be produced, a description of the character of each waste, the daily volumes
and maximum rates of discharge and representative analyses; and
      (4)   The name of the firm or person who will perform the work covered by
the application.
   (D)   The Sewer Inspector shall cause to be served on the owner or occupant
of any establishment having sewer connections which do not conform to the
provisions hereof at the effective date hereof a notice in writing advising
that 30 days from the day of service of the notice, if the proper measures have
not been taken, enforcement action may be initiated as set forth elsewhere in
this chapter.
   (E)   The Sewer Inspector shall cause samples of wastes from industrial
establishments to be obtained and tested periodically to determine the quantity
and composition thereof.
§ 19-306 PRIVATE SEWER LINE CONNECTIONS; LIMITING LIABILITY.
   (A)   Private sewer line connections.
      (1)   All private service lines connected to the city public sewer system
from and after the date of this section shall include a pop-off device or other
city approved backflow prevention device connected to the sanitary sewer
cleanout to protect against backflow.
      (2)   Said device shall be of sufficient size and quality to prevent
backflow to individual residences or businesses.
      (3)   All installed pop-off devices and other city approved backflow
prevention devices shall be registered with the city and properly maintained
and secured by said property owner.
      (4)   For those service lines already connected to the city’s public
sewer system, the city shall provide a sewer inspection fee and waiver in the
form attached to the ordinance codified herein to allow those who are already
connected to the city’s public sewer system an opportunity to install a pop-off
device or other approved backflow prevention device.
   (B)   Limiting liability. Failure to meet the conditions of this section
effectively limits the city’s liability in the event of a sanitary sewer backup
to the cost of the pop-off or other backflow device.
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 8-5-2014)
ARTICLE 4. DEPOSITS
§ 19-401 DEPOSIT REQUIRED; AMOUNT.
   (A)   Any customer desiring utility service shall make application to the
City Utilities Clerk on forms provided for that purpose. The application shall
state the name of the customer, including spouse, the premises to be served,
the size of piping and such other information as may be required by the Water
or Electrical Superintendent. The application shall be accompanied by a deposit
in the following amounts:
      (1)   Commercial property: one and one-half times the average bill for
the previous six months;
      (2)   Rental property with electric service: $200 ($100 if letter of good
credit from previous utility);
      (3)   Rental property or owner occupied without electric service: $60;
and
      (4)   Owner occupied: $50.
   (B)   (1)   The amount of deposit required shall hereafter be regulated by
the City Council by motion or resolution.
      (2)   Upon payment of all fees required and making of the application,
the city will make the connection as required by the application.
      (3)   Subject to any applicable provision of Article 5 of this chapter,
no connection shall be made or service provided on any premises for any
customer who is in arrears on the payment of any utility bill at any location
within the city.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division (B), CUSTOMER shall include any
partners, a spouse or adult persons, excluding dependent children, living at or
occupying the premises.
ARTICLE 5. UTILITY SERVICE TERMINATION POLICY
§ 19-501 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   (A)   All bills for utility service shall be based on meter readings to
which shall be applied the fixed rates of service as established by the City
Council. All bills shall be due and payable on the first day of each month for
the service rendered in each month after maturity or be considered delinquent.
Those bills paid after the fifteenth and on or before the twenty-third of each
month shall incur a penalty of 10% of the total amount due. Any person
delinquent in payment past the twenty-third of each month shall have service
discontinued.
   (B)   On the sixteenth of each month, the Utility Billing Clerk shall mail
out courtesy notices giving the customer seven days from the date of the notice
to pay the delinquent balance or service will be disconnected. Courtesy notices
shall contain the following:
      (1)   Balance due, including any late charge;
      (2)   Termination date;
      (3)   Customer’s right to have a hearing before the Utility Hearing
Board; and
      (4)   Procedure for requesting a hearing.
(Ord. 2002-03, passed 7-2-2002)
§ 19-502 DISCONNECTION PROCEDURE.
   If no hearing is requested by the customer, the following procedure shall be
used to disconnect service.
   (A)   Hours. Disconnections will be made only during regular business hours
from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.
   (B)   Days. Disconnections will be made only Monday through Thursday, except
that no disconnection will be made on the day before a holiday.
   (C)   Cut-off date. The cut-off date shall be on or after the nineteenth day
of each month.
   (D)   Notice of termination. Immediately after, or simultaneously with, the
termination of service, the Light and Power Superintendent shall post a “Notice
Of Termination” at the location where service has been disconnected. The notice
of termination shall contain the following:
      (1)   Notice that service has been terminated;
      (2)   Balance due, including all additional charges; and
      (3)   Procedure for reconnection.
§ 19-503 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A hearing prior to disconnection of utility service is required only
if the customer requests a hearing prior to the eighteenth day of the month and
only if the customer pays one-third of the amount due. Once a hearing has been
requested and the money paid, the actual date of the hearing shall be set
within three business days. The hearing shall be conducted by the Utility
Hearing Board. This Board shall consist of the Light and Power Superintendent,
the City Manager, Utility Billing Clerk, City Clerk and one member of the City
Council, any two of whom may conduct the hearing. The Utility Hearing Board
shall have the authority to grant a ten-day extension to pay the remaining two-
thirds of the bill. If the customer has been a long-time resident and has a
good payment history, the Utility Hearing Board may arrange a deferred payment
plan extending the time to pay that month’s bill, up to 90 days from the
original due date. No customer may be eligible for a deferred plan (either ten-
day or 90-day) who is not current on his or her bill prior to the month in
which the deferment is requested. The full amount shall be due immediately in
the event the customer becomes delinquent on a subsequent bill.
   (B)   A written record of the hearing shall be maintained and signed by both
the customer and at least two members of the Utility Hearing Board. A clear
disposition of the dispute should be made at the hearing and the written record
should reflect how the matter was resolved.
   (C)   The Utility Hearing Board shall present to the City Council, at the
next regularly scheduled meeting, a copy of the written record of all hearings
conducted during the preceding month.
   (D)   If adequate payment is not arranged at the time of the hearing, or a
deferred payment plan is not arranged, the utility service shall be
disconnected within three days of the hearing. No additional “Final Notice”
shall be required prior to actual disconnection. If payments pursuant to the
deferred payment plan are not made when due, the utility service shall be
disconnected immediately without further notice.
§ 19-504 RECONNECTION PROCEDURE.
   Once utility service has been disconnected, restoration of service shall not
be had until all accounts are paid in full. Any person whose utility service
has been discontinued for an unpaid utility bill may have the same reconnected
upon the payment of all utility bills due and the further sum of $20 to cover
the costs. In the event the city has applied the customer’s deposit to the
bill, the customer shall be required to make a new deposit as set forth in §
19-401 of this chapter.
§ 19-505 TRANSFER FEE.
   Residents who transfer utility service from one location to another shall
pay a fee to the City Clerk of $20 per transfer to cover the costs of the
transfer.
§ 19-506 LIFE-THREATENING SITUATION COLLECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The City Public Works Authority and the city will suspend collection
activity when a consumer certifies that the consumer or a permanent member of
the household has a medical condition where the discontinuance of electrical
service would be life-threatening.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a LIFE-THREATENING CONDITION is
defined as one where the consumer or other permanent resident of the household
is dependent upon electric-operated equipment that is prescribed by a physician
and is needed to sustain the person’s life.
   (C)   Examples of life-sustaining equipment include: kidney dialysis
machine; iron lung; oxygen concentrator and certain other oxygen machines;
cardiac monitor; heating and air conditioning equipment; other equipment that
is prescribed by a licensed medical doctor. If a battery backup is normally
available for the life-sustaining equipment, then the medical condition is not
considered life-threatening. The following equipment is not considered to be
life-sustaining equipment: hot water heater; refrigerator; range/stove;
nebulizer that is battery-driven or hand-driven or self-contained; battery-
driven sleep apnea monitor; battery-driven cardiac monitor.
   (D)   The consumer may initially certify the condition, but further
verification of the condition by a licensed medical or osteopathic doctor is
required within ten days of initial notification. Completion of a form provided
by the City Public Works Authority and a payment plan worked out between a
customer service representative and the consumer will suspend disconnection of
electrical service to a specified residence for a period of 30 days from the
initial notification. Electric service may be suspended immediately if the
physician’s certification is not received within ten days of initial
notification. The 30-day period may be extended by the City Public Works
Authority at the request of the consumer for one additional contiguous 30-day
period, but only if necessitated by the life-threatening condition as indicated
by doctor verification. The request for the additional 30-day extension must be
made before the end of the initial 30-day period. The City Public Works
Authority is not required to furnish service to the consumer beyond a total of
60 days for life-threatening condition without full payment of the account or
acceptable payment arrangements on any unpaid balance.
   (E)   Failure of the consumer to fully comply with this policy may result in
denial of life-threatening status and renewed collection activity by the City
Public Works Authority, including termination of service to the residence.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 11-2-2010)
ARTICLE 6. PUBLIC WORKS INSPECTORS
§ 19-601 INSPECTORS’ DUTIES.
   Inspectors of the Public Works Department shall have the authority to:
   (A)   Delay construction of any building or structure, or the repair or the
wrecking thereof, if such is being done in a careless or reckless manner, or in
violation of effective codes;
   (B)   Call upon the Police Department in enforcing violations of this
chapter, or for violation committed in the presence of the Inspector;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of water service to any building, structure
or premises being constructed, used or occupied in violation of this chapter,
and such water service shall remain discontinued until such time as the
violations have been remedied to the satisfaction of the Inspector;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of electric service where improper or
defective wiring exists or where electrical construction or equipment has been
installed without the proper license or permit;
   (E)   Enter upon or in any building, structure or premises at all reasonable
times so as to inspect all electrical wiring, electrical equipment, plumbing,
air conditioning systems, heating systems or refrigeration systems which are
now or may hereinafter be installed, or to ascertain the sanitary conditions,
damage or structural soundness of that building, structure or premises;
   (F)   Revoke any permit where it is found there has been a misrepresentation
of facts or in violation of any ordinance or any code adopted by the city; and
   (G)   Require an owner or agent who is constructing with reenforced concrete
or structural steel, to supply a non-city inspector satisfactory to the Public
Works Department, such inspector to oversee all work during the construction.
§ 19-602 APPEALS FROM INSPECTOR’S DECISIONS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an inspector exercising his or her power and
authority pursuant to §
19-601 of this chapter must, before instituting suit, appeal to the Public
Works Appeals Board, which shall consist of the Public Works Director, the City
Attorney and a designee of the Mayor.
   (B)   (1)   Any such appeal shall be made within five working days after the
decision of the inspector and shall be in writing, stating the reasons for the
appeal.
      (2)   The date and place of all hearings shall be fixed by the Appeals
Board, and all interested parties shall be given written notice of the hearing.
   (C)   The Appeals Board shall give written decision within ten working days
of the hearing and, if accepted by the appealing party, the Board shall take
necessary steps to give effect thereto.
ARTICLE 7. CABLE TELEVISION
§ 19-701 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   The city hereby grants to T.C.I. Cablevision of Oklahoma, Inc., the right,
privilege and authority to provide services, facilities and equipment necessary
to meet the present and future cable related needs of the community.
§ 19-702 EFFECTIVE DATE; TERM.
   The franchise hereby granted shall be effective from and after the effective
date hereof and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 15 years
unless otherwise terminated as allowed by law.
§ 19-703 AGREEMENT.
   The franchise hereby granted shall be in accordance with the franchise
agreement, §§ I through IX, and attached schedules, a copy of which is on file
with the City Clerk.
ARTICLE 7.1. REGULATION OF BASIC TIER SERVICE, EQUIPMENT
AND INSTALLATION RATES
§ 19-704 FEDERAL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions of 47 C.F.R. part 76, Subpart N, cable rate regulation, are
hereby adopted by reference, shall be published by summary, and shall be
retained on file in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to 11 O.S. § 14-107.
§ 19-705 SUMMARY.
   Summary publication of said Subpart N shall be as follows.
76 C.F.R. Subpart N, Cable Rate Regulation
C.F.R. Section Subject
76 C.F.R. Subpart N, Cable Rate Regulation
C.F.R. Section Subject
76.900         Temporary freeze of cable rates
76.901         Definitions
76.905         Standards for identification of cable systems subject to effect
               competition
76.906         Presumption of no effective competition
76.910         Franchising authority certification
76.911         Petition for reconsideration of certification
76.912         Joint certification
76.913         Assumption of jurisdiction by the Commission
76.914         Revocation of certification
76.915         Change in status of cable operator
76.916         Petition for recertification
76.920         Composition of the basic tier
76.921         Buy-through of other tiers prohibited
76.922         Rates for the basic service tier and cable programming services
               tiers
76.923         Rates for equipment and installation used to receive the basic
               service tier
76.924         Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements
76.925         Costs of franchise requirements
76.930         Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates
76.931         Notification of basic tier availability
76.932         Notification of proposed rate increase
76.933         Franchising authority review of basic cable rates and equipment
               costs
76.934         Small systems
76.935         Participation of interested parties
76.936         Written decision
76.937         Burden of proof
76.938         Proprietary information
76.940         Prospective rate reduction
76.941         Rate prescription
76.942         Refunds
76.943         Fines
76.944         Commission review of franchising authority decisions on rates
               for the basic service tier and associated equipment
76.945         Procedures for Commission review of basic service rates
76.950         Complaints regarding cable programming service rates
76.951         Standard complaint form; other filing requirements
76.952         Information to be provided by cable operator on monthly
               subscriber bills
76.953         Limitation on filing a complaint
76.954         Initial review of complaint; minimum showing requirement;
               dismissal of defective complaints
76.955         Additional opportunity to file corrected complaint
76.956         Cable operator response
76.957         Commission adjudication of the complaint
76.960         Prospective rate reductions
76.961         Refunds
76.962         Implementation and certification of compliance
76.963         Forfeiture
76.964         Advance written notification of rate increases
76.970         Commercial leased access rates
76.971         Commercial leased access terms and conditions
76.975         Commercial leased access dispute resolution
76.977         Minority and educational programming used in lieu of deregulated
               commercial leased access capacity
76.980         Charges for customer changes
76.981         Negative option billing
76.982         Continuation of rate agreements
76.983         Discrimination
76.984         Geographically uniform rate structure
76.985         Subscriber bill itemization
 
§ 19-706 EFFECT OF SUBPART N.
   Said Subpart N, as supplemented herein and as applicable to any cable rate
regulation proceeding before the City Council as a “franchising authority”
under 47 U.S.C. § 543, shall govern such proceeding.
§ 19-707 FURTHER DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any “grantee” under this article.
   COMMISSION. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. The City of Lexington.
§ 19-708 PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF VIEWS OF INTERESTED PARTIES; 47 C.F.R.
§ 76.935.
   (A)   Any basic service, equipment or installation rate filing by a cable
operator on the franchising authority under Subpart N shall contain a brief
summary or description for publication purposes, and shall include appropriate
FCC forms and/or worksheets.
   (B)   A cable operator shall make Subpart N filings with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Upon such filing, the City Clerk shall forthwith place on the agenda
for the next regular scheduled meeting of the City Council an agenda item
conforming to the requirements of the Open Meeting Act (25 O.S. §§ 301 et seq.)
for the Council to set a public hearing on said basic service, equipment or
installation rate request.
   (D)   Said hearing shall then be set by Council on a date at least seven,
but not more than 14, days thereafter.
   (E)   Notice of the date, time and place of such hearing, together with a
brief summary or description of the rate request, shall be published by the
City Clerk in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days prior to
said hearing.
   (F)   In the event additional days are taken under 47 C.F.R. § 76.933, said
hearing shall be deemed continued until final regulatory action is taken by the
Council, which shall be in open meeting under the notice and agenda requirement
of the Open Meeting Act (25 O.S. §§ 301 et seq.).
§ 19-709 EFFECT OF AMENDMENTS.
   Any amendments to Subpart N, as adopted by reference in § 19-704 of this
article shall be deemed effective as published by the FCC, including, but not
limited to, effective dates; provided, that said amendments will not be
enforced hereunder absent ratification by the Council; provided further, that
no 47 C.F.R. § 76.943 fines shall be levied thereunder absent adoption by the
Council; and provided further, that no gap in rate regulation authority shall
be implied by or inferred from any failure of the Council to anticipate or
simultaneously adopt revisions as contemplated at 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(2).
§ 19-710 POLE CHARGE.
   (A)   The City Public Works Authority hereby grants to CATV a franchise for
the right to construct communication lines and necessary drop and electrical
equipment on the city’s power pole communication spacing, moreover, 17,010 feet
to 21.10 feet.
   (B)   The franchise is to maintain proper National Safety Code ethics as
spelled out in the franchise agreement on file with the City Clerk. In
consideration therefor, the franchisee must pay to the city the sum of $4 per
pole per year for the life of the franchise.
ARTICLE 8. AMBULANCE SERVICE
   [Reserved]
ARTICLE 9. GAS SERVICE
§ 19-901 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   There is hereby granted to the Lone Star Gas Company, hereinafter called
“company,” its successors and assigns, the right, privilege and franchise to
construct, maintain and operate in the present and future streets, alleys,
parkways and public places in the city, a system of gas mains, supply pipes and
laterals, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances for the purpose of
supplying natural gas to said city, the inhabitants thereof and persons and
corporations beyond the city limits, for light, heat, power and other purposes;
and that the right, privilege and franchise herein granted shall be and remain
in the company, its successors and assigns, for a term of 25 years from and
after the date of the approval of this article.
§ 19-902 LAYING OF MAINS, PIPES AND LATERALS.
   All mains, pipes and laterals shall be so laid as to interfere as little as
possible with traffic over the streets and alleys. The location of all mains,
pipes and laterals may be fixed under the supervision of the governing
authorities of the city.
§ 19-903 EXCAVATIONS; NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   When the company shall make or cause to be made excavations, or shall place
obstructions in any city streets, alleys or avenues, the public shall be
protected from all damage by reason of the existence of such excavations or
obstructions by barriers and lights placed, erected and maintained by said
company, and in the event of injury to any person or property by reason of the
construction, operation or maintenance of said system, the company shall
indemnify and keep harmless the city from any and all liability by reason of
the company’s operation under this franchise, and the company shall repair and
clean up and restore to an approximate original condition all streets and
alleys disturbed during construction and repair of its gas distributing plant.
§ 19-904 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The company may make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations in the
conduct of its business.
§ 19-905 EXTENSION OF MAINS AND COST.
   The company shall extend its mains longitudinally on any street within the
corporate limits of the city, or any recorded addition thereto, or located
within a reasonable distance from existing mains, up to 100 feet for any one
consumer of natural gas without cost to the consumer, except that the free
extension service, when applied to mobile home service, shall be 50 feet,
subject, however, to the rules for further extensions as more specifically
provided in Rule 41, Order No. 88052 by the State Corporation Commission, as
now written or as hereinafter modified by any future rules or rulings of the
State Corporation Commission, or in any regulations of the company as approved
by the State Corporation Commission.
§ 19-906 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The company may require from any consumer, before gas service is
commenced, a cash deposit which shall not exceed in amount one-sixth of the
estimated annual bill of the consumer (exclusive of any penalty for late
payment), or a minimum deposit of $10, which deposit may be retained by the
company until service is discontinued and all bills therefor have been paid.
   (B)   (1)   Interest shall be paid by the company upon such deposit at the
rate of 6% months.
      (2)   No interest shall accumulate on a deposit after final
discontinuation of service or after written notice to a consumer at his or her
last known address that the deposit is no longer required by the company and
may be withdrawn. The company shall be entitled to apply said deposit, with
accrued interest, to any indebtedness owed the company by the consumer making
the deposit.
§ 19-907 ANNUAL PAYMENT TO CITY.
   (A)   The company, its successors and assigns, agrees to pay and the city
agrees to accept, on or before March 1, 1974, and on or before the same day of
each succeeding year during the life of this franchise, up to and including the
year 1998, a sum of money which shall be equivalent to 2% of the gross receipts
received by the company from the sale of gas to its residential and commercial
consumers within the city limits of said city for the preceding calendar year,
expressly excluding, however, receipts derived from the sales of gas to
industrial users and consumers within the city limits of said city, which
annual payment shall be for the rights and privileges herein granted to the
company, including expressly, without limitation, the right to use the streets,
alleys and public ways of said city, and which annual payment is fixed and
determined to be the reasonable, adequate and complete compensation for all the
rights and privileges herein granted, and it is expressly agreed that said
annual payment shall be in lieu of any and all other franchise, license,
occupation or excise taxes and in lieu of all other and additional charges,
levies, fees and rentals of whatsoever kind and character and howsoever levied
which said city may impose or hereafter be authorized to levy and collect,
excepting only the usual general or special ad valorem taxes which the city is
authorized to levy and impose upon real and personal property.
   (B)   (1)   In order to determine the gross receipts received by the company
from the sale of gas within the corporate limits of said city, the company
agrees that on the same date that payments are made as provided in division (A)
above, it will file with the City Clerk a sworn report showing the gross
receipts for the sale of gas to its domestic and commercial consumers within
said city limits for the respective calendar year preceding the respective date
of payment.
      (2)   The city may, if it sees fit, have the books and records of the
company examined by a representative of said city to ascertain the correctness
of the sworn reports to be filed herein.
§ 19-908 RIGHTS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The rights, privileges and franchise granted by this article are not to be
considered exclusive, and the city hereby expressly reserves the right to
grant, at any time, like privileges, rights and franchises, as it may see fit,
to any other person or corporation for the purpose of furnishing gas for light,
heat and power to, and for, the city, and to other consumers.
§ 19-909 REPEALER.
   This franchise ordinance shall take the place of, nullify and repeal that
certain franchise ordinance passed and approved on November 16, 1948, and of
record in the minutes of the City Clerk, but the enactment of this franchise
ordinance and the repeal of said ordinance passed on November 16, 1948, shall
not affect, change or amend, but said present rates and charges shall continue
in full force and effect, unless changed by final and valid order of the State
Corporation Commission.
ARTICLE 10. PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY
§ 19-1001 PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY, TRUST INDENTURE.
THE LEXINGTON PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY
   TRUST INDENTURE
THIS TRUST INDENTURE dated as of the 9th day of October, 1972, by Claude Baxter
(hereinafter referred to as the Trustor), as Claude Baxter, C.E. Qualls, Gerald
Page, Paul Thompson, and their respective successors in office, to be known as
the Trustees of the Lexington Public Works Authority, who shall be and are
hereinafter referred to as Trustees of said Authority (hereinafter referred to
as Trust) herein set out.
   WITNESSETH:
That in consideration of the payment by the Trustor to the Trustees of the sum
of $1, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, the mutual covenants herein set
forth, and other valuable considerations, said Trustees agree to hold, manage,
invest, assign, convey and distribute as herein provided, authorized and
directed, each property as Trustor, or others, may from time to time assign,
transfer, lease, convey, give, bequeath, devise or deliver unto this Trust or
the Trustees hereof.
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD such property and the proceeds, rents, profits and
increases thereof unto said Trustees and said Trustees’ successors and assigns,
but nevertheless in trust, for the use and benefit of the City of Lexington,
Oklahoma, hereinafter referred to as Beneficiary, and upon the following
trusts, terms and conditions herein stated.
ARTICLE I. CREATION OF TRUST
The undersigned Trustor creates and establishes a trust for the use and benefit
of the Beneficiary, to finance, operate, construct and administer any public
works, improvements or facilities and for the public purposes hereinafter set
forth, under the provisions of 60 O.S. §§ 176 through 180, inclusive, the
Oklahoma Trust Act, being 60 O.S. §§ 175.1 through 175.57, and other applicable
statutes of the State of Oklahoma.
ARTICLE II
The Trustees of this Trust shall conduct all business and execute or authorize
the execution of all instruments in the name of this Trust, and otherwise
perform the duties and functions required in the execution of this Trust.
ARTICLE III
The purposes of this Trust are:
(1)   To acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, lease, purchase, install,
equip, maintain, repair, enlarge, remodel and operate buildings and other
facilities for use by the United States of America, or the State of Oklahoma,
or for use by authorities or agencies of the United States of America or the
State of Oklahoma or of any municipality thereof, or for use by municipal or
other political subdivisions of the State of Oklahoma, including the
Beneficiary hereof or for the use of corporations, individuals, partnerships,
associations or proprietary companies for industrial development; to plan,
establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, extend, maintain, equip,
operate, lease, furnish, provide, supply, regulate, hold, store and administer
utilities and/or buildings or other facilities either within or without the
territorial boundaries of the Beneficiary which are or shall be of public use,
or useful in securing, developing and maintaining industrial and manufacturing
activities, including, but without limitation, water, sewer, electrical,
garbage, trash disposal, recreational and industrial facilities; and to service
machinery or equipment in connection with such utilities, buildings and
facilities.
(2)   To hold, maintain and administer any leasehold rights in and to physical
properties demised to the Beneficiary and to comply with the terms and
conditions of any such lease.
(3)   To acquire by lease, purchase, production, reduction to possession or
otherwise, and to plan, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve,
extend, maintain, equip, operate, furnish, provide, supply, regulate, hold
store and administer any and all physical properties (real, personal or mixed),
rights, privileges, immunities, benefits and any other thing of value,
designated or needful for utilization in furnishing, providing or supplying the
aforementioned services, utilities, buildings and facilities; to finance and
refinance and to enter into contracts of purchase, lease-purchase or other
interest in or operation and maintenance of said properties, and revenues
thereof, and to comply with the terms and conditions of any such contracts,
leases or other contracts made in connection with the acquisition, equipping,
maintenance and disposal of any of said property; and to relinquish, dispose
of, rent or otherwise make provisions for properties owned or controlled by the
Trust but no longer needful for trust purposes.
(4)   To perform on behalf of the Beneficiary the functions and powers as
authorized by industrial development statutes.
(5)   To provide funds for the cost of financing, refinancing, acquiring,
constructing, purchasing, equipping, maintaining, leasing, repairing,
improving, extending, enlarging, remodeling, holding, storing, operating and
administering any or all aforesaid property, improvements, buildings,
facilities and all properties (real, personal or mixed) needful for executing
and fulfilling the Trust purposes as set forth in this instrument and all other
charges, costs and expenses necessarily incurred in connection therewith and in
so doing, to incur indebtedness, either unsecured or secured by all or any part
of the Trust Estate and its revenues.
(6)   To expend all funds coming into the hands of the Trustees as revenue or
otherwise for the payment of any indebtedness incurred by the Trustees for
purposes specified herein, and in the payment of the aforesaid costs and
expenses, and in payment of any other obligation properly chargeable against
the Trust Estate, and to distribute the residue and remainder of such funds to
the Beneficiary.
ARTICLE IV. DURATION OF TRUST
This Trust shall have duration for the term of duration of the beneficiary and
until such time as its purpose shall have been fully fulfilled, or until it
shall be terminated as hereinafter provided.
ARTICLE V. THE TRUST ESTATE
The Trust Estate shall consist of:
(1)   The funds and property presently in the hands of the Trustees or to be
acquired or constricted by Trustees and dedicated by the Trustor and others to
be used for trust purposes.
(2)   Any and all leasehold rights remised to the Trustees by the Beneficiary
as authorized and empowered by law.
(3)   Any and all money, property (real, personal or mixed), rights, choses in
action, contracts, leases, privileges, immunities, licenses, franchises,
benefits and all other things of value coming into the possession of the
Trustees pursuant to the provisions of this Trust Indenture.
(4)   Cash in the sum of $1 paid to Trustees, receipt of which is hereby
acknowledged by the Trustees.
The instruments executed for each project, and such issuance of Trustees Bonds
and other indebtedness, shall set out the specific property of the Trust Estate
exclusively pledged and mortgaged for the payment of such indebtedness.
ARTICLE VI. THE TRUSTEES
(1)   The Trustees of this Trust shall be citizens and residents of the
Beneficiary who are the persons presently constituting the President of the
Board of Trustees and members of the governing board of the Beneficiary, and
the persons who shall be their successors as President of the Board of
Trustees, and members of said governing board of said Beneficiary, and each
such successor in office shall, without any further act, deed or conveyance,
automatically become Trustees of this Trust and become fully vested with all
the estate, properties, rights, powers, duties and obligations of his or her
predecessor hereunder with like effect as if originally named as a Trustee
herein.
(2)   The person who shall be the President of the Board of Trustees of the
Beneficiary shall become automatically the Chairperson of the Trustees and
shall preside at all meetings and perform other duties designated by the
Trustees. The Trustees shall designate the time and place of all regular
meetings. All actions by the Trustees pursuant to the provisions of this Trust
Indenture shall be approved by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of
the Trustees qualified to act as such under the provisions of this Trust
Indenture. The Trustees shall select one of their members to be Vice
Chairperson who shall act in the place of the Chairperson during the latter’s
absence or incapacity to act.
(3)   The person who shall be the City Clerk of the Beneficiary shall act as
Secretary of the Trustees. The Secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings of
the Trustees and shall maintain complete and accurate records of all their
financial transactions, all such minutes, books and records to be on file in
the office of the Trust. All meetings of the Trustees shall be open to the
public, and the books, records and minutes of the Trustees shall be considered
as public records and available for inspection at all times by any interested
party.
(4)   The person who shall be the Town Treasurer of the Beneficiary, shall act
as Treasurer of the Trustees.
(5)   The Trustees may appoint a general manager for the Trust Estate, and the
Trustees may employ such other clerical, professional, legal and technical
assistance as may be deemed necessary in the discretion of the Trustees to
properly operate the business of the Trust Estate, and may fix their duties,
terms of employment and compensation. Any such employee may be a person who
shall be an officer or employee of the Beneficiary, in which event such officer
or employee may receive compensation from the Trust Estate. All Trustees shall
serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties hereunder. In the event a general manager of
the Trust Estate is appointed by the Trustees, said general manager shall
administer the business of the Trust Estate as directed from time to time by
the Trustees.
(6)   Every person hereafter becoming a Trustee first shall take the oath of
office required of an elected public officer and every officer and employee who
handles funds of the public trust shall furnish a good and sufficient fidelity
bond in an amount and with surety as may be specified and approved by the
persons constituting a majority of the governing body of the Beneficiary of
this Trust. Such Bond to be in a surety company authorized to transact surety
business in the State of Oklahoma. The cost of said Bond shall be paid from
funds of the Trust Authority. The oaths of office shall be administered by any
person authorized to administer oaths in the State of Oklahoma, and shall be
filed in the office of the clerk of the Beneficiary.
(7)   Trustees may be removed from office for cause, including incompetency,
neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, by a District Court having
jurisdiction. In the event of removal of a Trustee under this Section, a
successor Trustee shall be appointed as provided in this Trust instrument.
Provided, however, in the event a Trustee is so removed by a District Court who
is also a member of the governing Board of the Beneficiary, the successor
Trustee shall be appointed by the judge of the Court wherein the removal
occurred; said successor Trustee shall serve only until the removed Trustee
ceases to serve as a member of the governing board of the Beneficiary and his
or her successor on said Board has qualified as provided in this Trust
Indenture.
(8)   The Trustees are authorized to contract, in connection with the incurring
of any funded indebtedness secured by the Trust Estate and/or its revenues, or
any part of either or both, that in the event of a default in the fulfillment
of any contract obligation undertaken on behalf of the Trust Estate or in the
payment of any indebtedness incurred on behalf of the Trust Estate, that a
Temporary Trustee or Trustees or Receiver shall be appointed to succeed to the
rights, powers and duties of the Trustees then in office. Any such contract, if
made, shall set out the terms and conditions under which such Temporary Trustee
or Trustees or Receiver shall be appointed, and operate the Trust Estate and
provide for compensation to be paid, and appointment to be vacated and
permanent Trustees to be automatically reinstated upon termination of all
defaults by which their appointment was authorized.
(9)   Bonds or other evidences of indebtedness to be issued by the Trustees
shall not constitute an indebtedness of the State of Oklahoma, or of the
Beneficiary, or personal obligations of the Trustees of the Trust, but shall
constitute obligations of the Trustees payable solely from the Trust Estate.
(10) The Trustees, the State of Oklahoma and the beneficiary hereof shall not
be charged personally with any liability whatsoever by reason of any act or
omission committed or suffered in good faith or in the exercise of their honest
discretion in the performance of such Trust or in the operation of the Trust
Estate; but any act or liability for any omission or obligation of the Trustees
in the execution of such Trust, or in the operation of the Trust Estate, shall
extend to the whole of the Trust Estate or so much thereof as may be necessary
to discharge such liability or obligation.
(11) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Indenture which shall appear
to provide otherwise, no Trustee or Trustees shall have the power or authority
to bind or obligate any other Trustee, or the Beneficiary, in his, her or its
capacity, nor can the Beneficiary bind or obligate the Trust or any individual
Trustee.
ARTICLE VII. POWER AND DUTIES OF THE TRUSTEES
To accomplish the purposes of the Trust, and subject to the provisions and
limitations otherwise provided in this Trust Indenture, the Trustees shall
have, in addition to the usual powers incident to their office and the powers
granted to them in other parts of this Trust Indenture, the following rights,
powers, duties, authority, discretion and privileges, all of which may be
exercised by them without any order or authority from any court:
(1)   To finance, refinance, acquire, establish, develop, constrict, enlarge,
improve, extend, maintain, equip, operate, lease, furnish, provide, supply,
regulate, hold store and administer any of the facilities designated pursuant
to Article III hereof as the Trustees shall determine necessary for the benefit
and development of the Beneficiary;
(2)   To enter into contracts for the acquisition and construction of
facilities authorized to be acquired and constructed pursuant to the terms of
this Trust Indenture and in compliance herewith, other than those facilities to
be constructed by the employees of the Trustees;
(3)   To employ such architectural and engineering firm or firms as the
Trustees deem necessary to prepare such preliminary and detailed studies,
plans, specifications, cost estimates and feasibility reports as are required
in the opinion of the Trustees. The cost of such engineering and architectural
work shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale of bonds or from such other
funds as may be available therefor;
(4)   To enter into contracts for the sale of bonds, notes or other evidences
of indebtedness or obligations of the Trust for the purpose of acquiring or
constructing facilities authorized to be acquired or constructed pursuant to
the terms of this Trust Indenture and for that purpose may:
(a)   Employ a financial advisor, or committee of advisors, to advise and
assist the Trustees in the marketing of such bonds, notes or other evidences of
indebtedness or obligations, and to present financial plans for the financing
of the acquisition or construction of each project, and to recommend to, or
consult with, the Trustees concerning the terms and provisions of bond
indentures and bond issues, and may pay appropriate compensation for such work
and services performed in the furtherance of the project;
(b)   Sell all bonds, notes or other evidences of indebtedness or obligations
of the Trust in whole or in installments or series and on such terms and
conditions and in such manner as the Trustees shall deem to be in the best
interest of the Trust Estate; and
(c)   Appoint and compensate attorneys, paying agencies and corporate trustees
in connection with the issuance of any such bonds, notes, evidences of
indebtedness or other obligations of the Trust.
(5)   To enter into and execute, purchase, lease or otherwise acquire property,
real, personal or mixed, contracts, leases, rights, privileges, benefits,
choses in action or other things of value and to pay for the same in cash, with
bonds or other evidences of indebtedness or otherwise;
(6)   To make and change investments, to convert real into personal property,
and vice versa, to lease, improve, exchange or sell, at public or private sale,
upon such terms as they deem proper, and to resell, at any time and as often as
they deem advisable, any or all the property in the Trust, real and personal;
to borrow money, or renew loans to the Trust, to refund outstanding bonded
indebtedness, and to execute therefor, notes, bonds or other evidences of
indebtedness, and to secure the same by mortgage, lien, pledge or otherwise; to
purchase property from any person, firm or corporation, and lease land and
other property to and from the Beneficiary and construct, improve, repair,
extend, remodel and equip facilities thereon and to operate or lease or rent
the same to individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations and others,
including the United States of America, or the State of Oklahoma and agencies
or authorities of the United States of America, or of the State of Oklahoma, or
of any municipality thereof, and also including all municipal or other
political subdivisions of the State of Oklahoma as well as the Beneficiary
hereof, and to do all things provided for in Article III of this Trust
Indenture, and procure funds necessary for such purpose by the sale of bonds or
other evidences of indebtedness by a mortgage, lien, pledge or other
encumbrance or otherwise of such real and personal property and facilities
owned or otherwise acquired, leased or controlled by Trustees, and by rentals,
income, receipts and profits therefrom, or from any other revenues associated
with the ownership, operation or control of the property of the Trust; to lease
or sublease any property of the Trust or of which the Trustees may become
owners or lessees;
(7)   To fix, demand and collect charges, rentals and fees for the services and
facilities of the Trust to the same extent as the Beneficiary might do and to
discontinue furnishing of services and facilities to any person, firm or
corporation, or public instrumentality, delinquent in the payment of any
indebtedness to the Trust; to purchase and sell such supplies, goods and
commodities as are incident to the operation of its properties;
(8)   To make and perform contracts of every kind, including management
contracts, with any person, firm, corporation, association, trusteeship,
municipality, government or sovereignty; and without limit as to amount to
draw, make, accept, endorse, assume, guarantee, account, execute and issue
promissory notes, drafts, bills of exchange, acceptances, warranties, bonds,
debentures and other negotiable or nonnegotiable instruments, obligations and
evidences of unsecured indebtedness, or of indebtedness secured by mortgage,
deed of trust or otherwise upon any or all income of the Trust, in the same
manner and to the same extent as a natural person might or could do. To collect
and receive any property, money, rents or income of any sort and distribute the
same or any portion thereof for the furtherance of the authorized Trust
purposes set out herein; and
(9)   To do all other acts in their judgment necessary or desirable, for the
proper and advantageous management, investment and distribution of the Trust
Estate and income therefrom.
   The whole title, legal and equitable, to the properties of the Trust is and
shall be vested in the Trustees, as such title in the Trustees is necessary for
the due protection of this Trust. Said Trustees shall have and exercise
exclusive management and control of the properties of the Trust Estate for the
use and benefit of the Beneficiary; but may agree for approval of any or all of
its actions and transactions by the governing board of the Beneficiary.
   The Trustees may contract for the furnishing of any services or the
performance of any duties that they may deem necessary or proper, and pay for
the same as they see fit.
   The Trustees may select depositories for the funds and securities of this
Trust. Temporary Trustee or Trustees or Receiver appointed pursuant to
paragraph 6 of Article VI hereof may employ special counsel to represent them
and such special counsel’s compensation shall be paid from revenues of the
Trust Estate.
   The Trustees may compromise any debts or claims of or against the Trust
Estate, and may adjust any dispute in relation to such debts or claims by
arbitration or otherwise and may pay any debts or claims against the Trust
Estate upon any evidence deemed by the Trustees to be sufficient. The Trustees
may bring any suit or action which, in their judgment, is necessary or proper
to protect interest of the Trust Estate, or to enforce any claim, demand or
contract for the Trust; and they shall defend, in their discretion, any suit
against the Trust, or the Trustees or employees, agents or servants thereof.
They may compromise and settle any suit or action, and discharge the same out
of assets of the Trust Estate, together with court costs and attorneys’ fees.
All such expenditures shall be treated as expenses of executing this Trust.
   No purchaser at any sale or lessee under a lease made by the Trustees shall
be bound to inquire into the expediency, propriety, validity or necessity of
such sale or lease or to see to or be liable for the application of the
purchase or rental monies arising therefrom.
ARTICLE VIII. BENEFICIARY OF TRUST
(1)   The Beneficiary of this Trust shall be the Beneficiary, under and
pursuant to 60 O.S. §§ 176 through 180, inclusive, as amended and supplemented,
and other statutes of the State of Oklahoma presently in force and effect.
Trustor now declares that this Trust Indenture shall not be subject to
revocation, alteration, amendment, revision, modification or termination from
and after the date any indebtedness is incurred by the Trustees.
(2)   The Beneficiary shall have no legal title, claim or right to the Trust
Estate, its income, or to any part thereof or to demand or require any
partition or distribution thereof. Neither shall the Beneficiary have any
authority, power or right, whatsoever to do or transact any business for, or on
behalf of, or binding upon the Trustees or upon the Trust Estate, nor the right
to control or direct the actions of the Trustees pertaining to the Trust
Estate, or any part thereof. The Beneficiary shall be entitled solely to the
benefits of this Trust, as administered by the Trustees hereunder, and at the
termination of the Trust, as provided herein, and then only, the Beneficiary
shall receive the residue of the Trust Estate.
ARTICLE IX. TERMINATION OF TRUST
This Trust shall terminate:
(1)   When the purposes set out in Article III of this instrument shall have
been fully executed; or
(2)   In the manner provided by 60 O.S. § 180. Provided, however, that this
Trust shall not be terminated by voluntary action if there be outstanding
indebtedness or fixed term obligations of the Trustees, unless all owners of
such indebtedness or obligations shall have consented in writing to such
termination.
Upon the termination of this Trust, the Trustees shall proceed to wind up the
affairs of this Trust, and after payments of all debts, expenses and
obligations out of the monies and properties of the Trust Estate to the Extent
thereof, shall distribute any residue of the money and properties of the Trust
Estate to the Beneficiary here made. Upon final distribution, the powers,
duties and authority of the Trustees hereunder shall cease.
ARTICLE X
The Trustees accept the Trust herein created and provided for, and agree to
carry out the provisions of this Trust Indenture on their part to be performed.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Trustor and the Trustees have hereunto set their hands
on the day and year indicated.
Claude Baxter, Trustee
Gerald Page, Trustee
C.E. Qualls, Trustee
Paul Thompson, Trustee
ARTICLE 11. VALIDITY AND PUNISHMENT
§ 19-1101 VALIDITY.
   The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter hereby adopted
shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.
§ 19-1102 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in any amount not exceeding $100, plus costs. Each day upon which a violation
continues shall be a separate offense.
ARTICLE 12. IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
§ 19-1201 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the “Identity Theft Prevention Program.”
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1202 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 in order to
detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting
identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that
will prevent identity theft.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1203 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Lexington.
   COVERED ACCOUNT. A utility account.
   CREDIT. The right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt
or to incur debts and defer payment or to purchase property or services and
defer payment therefor.
   CREDITOR. The City of Lexington, for the purpose of this article.
   CUSTOMER. A person that has a covered account with the city.
   IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using identifying information
of another person without authority.
   PERSON. A natural person, a corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, trust estate, partnership, cooperative or association.
   PERSONAL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. A person’s credit card account
information, debit card information, bank account information and driver’s
license information; and for a natural person, includes his or her Social
Security number, mother’s birth name and date of birth.
   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   SERVICE PROVIDER. A person that provides a service directly to the city.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1204 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 due to its
provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in
arrears.
   (B)   Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city
services include water, trash, sewer, electric and ambulance services.
   (C)   The city’s previous experience with identity theft related to covered
accounts is as follows: none.
   (D)   The process of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing
covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as
potential processes in which identity theft could occur.
   (E)   The city limits access to personal identifying information to those
employees responsible for, or otherwise involved in, opening or restoring
covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information
provided to such employees is entered directly into the city’s computer system
and is not otherwise recorded.
   (F)   The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft
occurring in the following ways:
      (1)   Use by an applicant of another person’s personal identifying
information to establish a new covered account;
      (2)   Use of a previous customer’s personal identifying information by
another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer’s
name;
      (3)   Use of another person’s bank account or other method of payment by
a customer to pay such customer’s covered account or accounts; and
      (4)   Use by a customer desiring to restore such covered account of
another person’s credit card, bank account or other method of payment.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1205 PROCESS OF ESTABLISHING COVERED ACCOUNT.
   (A)   As a precondition to opening a covered account, each applicant shall
provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer as
follows: a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph
of the customer; or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of
the customer’s agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered
directly into the city’s computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded.
   (B)   Each account shall be assigned an account number. The city may utilize
computer software to encrypt account numbers.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1206 ACCESS TO COVERED ACCOUNT INFORMATION.
   (A)   Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be
limited to authorized city personnel.
   (B)   Such passwords shall be changed by the City Treasurer.
   (C)   Any unauthorized access to, or other breach of, customer accounts is
to be reported immediately to the City Manager and the password changed
immediately.
   (D)   Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is
considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be
immediately forwarded to the City Manager and the City Attorney.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1207 SOURCES AND TYPES OF RED FLAGS.
   All employees responsible for, or involved in, the process of opening a
covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity
theft, and such red flags may include:
   (A)   Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or
service providers;
   (B)   Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
      (1)   Documents provided for identification that appear altered or
forged;
      (2)   Identification on which the photograph or physical description is
inconsistent with the appearance of the customer;
      (3)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with the
information provided by the customer; and
      (4)   An application that appears to have been altered or forged.
   (C)   Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change.
Examples of suspicious identifying information include:
      (1)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer that is
inconsistent with other external personal identifying information;
      (2)   Fictitious mailing addresses, invalid phone or pager numbers;
      (3)   Social Security numbers that have been submitted by other
customers;
      (4)   Addresses and phone numbers that have been submitted by other
customers;
      (5)   Incomplete applications;
      (6)   Inconsistent information on file for that customer; and
      (7)   The applicant cannot provide authentication information beyond that
which would generally be available from a wallet or consumer report.
   (D)   Unusual use of, or suspicious activity relating to, a covered account.
Examples of suspicious activity include:
      (1)   An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example:
         (a)   Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
and
         (b)   A material change in use of service patterns.
      (2)   Mail sent the customer is returned although transactions continue
to be conducted in regard to the account;
      (3)   The city is notified the customer is not receiving paper account
statements;
      (4)   The city is notified of unauthorized changes or transactions in
connection with a customer’s account; and
      (5)   The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement officer or
other person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in
identity theft.
   (E)   Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable
sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered
accounts.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1208 PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF IDENTITY THEFT.
   In the event that any city responsible for, or involved in, a covered
account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft, such
employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or
combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her
discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity
theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red
flags to the City Manager. If the City Manager in his or her discretion
determines that further action is necessary, he or she shall direct the
appropriate city employee to perform a response which may include:
   (A)   Contacting the customer;
   (B)   Making changes to the account, such as changing the account number or
closing the account;
   (C)   Notifying law enforcement;
   (D)   Taking other appropriate action;
   (E)   Requesting additional information; and
   (F)   Denying an application for a new account.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1209 UPDATING PROGRAM.
   The City Council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the
Council, update the program and red flags in order to reflect changes in risks
and ensure the soundness of the accounts. In so doing, the Council shall
consider the following factors, among others:
   (A)   The city’s experience with identity theft;
   (B)   Updates in methods of identity theft;
   (C)   Updates in methods of detection;
   (D)   Changes to types of city accounts; and
   (E)   Changes in service provider arrangements.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1210 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Manager is responsible for the oversight and implementation of the
program. The City Council shall approve the program and any material changes
the City Manager recommends. The City Manager is responsible for the training
necessary to implement and maintain the program.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008)
§ 19-1211 OUTSIDE SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   In the event the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in
connection with one or more covered accounts, the City Manager shall exercise
his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure that
the service provider’s activities are conducted in accordance with policies and
procedures that are designed to detect red flags and to take appropriate steps
to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. 2008-4, passed 11-4-2008), Sidewalks and Other Public Areas
CHAPTER 20: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS
Section
Article 1. General
20-101 Certain ordinances not affected by chapter
Article 2. Use and Obstruction
20-201 Trees, shrubbery and grass
20-202 Rights-of-way and easements
20-203 Drainage of polluting substance
20-204 Obstructions
20-205 Special requirements
Article 3. Penalty
20-301 Penalty
Article 4. Procedure for Closing Public Way
20-401 Preliminary request
20-402 Consideration by City Council
20-403 Separate ordinance for each closing
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
§ 20-101 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CHAPTER.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter or the ordinance adopting this chapter shall
affect any ordinance relating to the following:
      (1)   Vacating, opening or dedicating specific streets and alleys;
      (2)   Relating to specific street improvements and assessments therefor;
      (3)   Relating to the grade or alignment of specific streets;
      (4)   Naming or renaming specific streets; and
      (5)   Granting railroads the right to use specific streets and alleys.
   (B)   All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this chapter.
ARTICLE 2. USE AND OBSTRUCTION
§ 20-201 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND GRASS.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of any premises abutting any street, alley or public
thoroughfare shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing into the parking area
and between the sidewalks and the part of the premises adjacent to the
sidewalks or any street, alley or public thoroughfare, in such manner that the
boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage and
travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys.
      (2)   When such premises are occupied by an individual or individuals
other than the owner, such occupant(s) shall trim the trees and shrubbery in
the same manner as hereinbefore required of the owner.
   (B)   The owner of any premises abutting any alley shall mow and maintain
any grass and/or weeds growing within the alley from the centerline of the
alley up to the owner’s property line so as to prevent the creation of a
nuisance, subject to the provisions of division (C) below.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or attempt to remove any
tree or shrubbery located within a street or alley. Notwithstanding, trees and/
or shrubbery may be removed by the owner of property abutting such alley only
with the consent of, or in concert with, the city. The purpose of this
provision is to protect any utility, water, gas and the like lines that may
exist under the surface of the alley.
(Ord. 23-013, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 20-202 RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct
or otherwise prevent access to a street, alley or other city owned property;
provided, that the city may prevent or provide access to streets, alleys and
city owned property from time to time in the public interest.
   (B)   The city may permit certain streets, alleys and city property which is
dedicated, but not required, for traffic or other public access or use to be
fenced or otherwise made inaccessible to the public, as in the case of land
being farmed or grazed as a part of a larger field or pasture; provided, that
the city or any of its officers or employees shall have the right of ingress,
egress and easement for the purpose of installing or maintaining utilities,
cleaning, grading, mowing or any other activity which is in the public
interest.
   (C)   Persons, companies, corporations or individuals who have fenced in or
are farming or grazing dedicated but unopened streets, alleys or city property
as permitted above shall:
      (1)   Not construct any building, structure, earthworks or ponds, nor in
any other way disturb the general grade and slope of the land;
      (2)   Maintain the property so that no nuisance is created;
      (3)   Immediately relinquish any rights presumed to be held concerning
the property upon notice by the city; and
      (4)   Permit access to the property at any time when requested to do so
by a city officer or employee.
§ 20-203 DRAINAGE OF POLLUTING SUBSTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any residence, business or industry to allow
drainage of a polluting substance into any street, alley or sidewalk.
§ 20-204 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks
of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic
thereon or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in any manner
so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon, or permit to be
placed upon, the sidewalks, parking areas, streets and alleys of the city any
goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction and leave the
same thereon or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit,
throw or sweep into or upon streets, alleys, parking areas or sidewalks any
paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or
other refuse of any kind.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting
upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area
adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or
sidewalk area. Such area shall be cleaned upon notification by city
authorities.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit to be
open or leave open any cellar door, manhole or grating of any kind in or upon
any street, sidewalk or alley of the city.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or cutting
in any street, sidewalk, alley or public grounds or to remove any earth or
construction material therefrom, except when authorized to do so by the city;
excavations so authorized shall be properly guarded or protected to prevent
said excavations from being or becoming dangerous to life or limb.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct
any street, sidewalk or alley by placing any approach, driveway or other
obstruction or substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural
flow of water into the storm sewers or drains or dam the same so as to back any
water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or gutter.
§ 20-205 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Hedges, shrubbery or bushes of more than three feet in height shall
not be planted, placed or maintained on a corner so as to restrict the vision
of drivers, persons on bicycles or pedestrians.
   (B)   All signs, including temporary signs, shall be maintained in a neat
and presentable condition, and, in the event their use shall cease, shall be
promptly removed and the surrounding area restored to a condition free from
refuse and trash.
   (C)   Sight-proof fencing shall not be erected within the building line
setback of the adjoining street. However, an exception may be requested in
writing by the property owner and sent to the Planning Commission for review.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-7-2017)
ARTICLE 3. PENALTY
§ 20-301 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects to trim trees and
shrubbery, as provided in §
20-201 of this chapter, after receiving five days’ notice from the City Marshal
to do so, shall be guilty of an offense. Every day that the owner or occupant
fails, refuses or neglects to trim such trees or shrubbery, after the
expiration of five days’ notice, shall be a separate offense.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100, plus
costs.
ARTICLE 4. PROCEDURE FOR CLOSING PUBLIC WAY
§ 20-401 PRELIMINARY REQUEST.
   Any person may make a preliminary request for the closing of a public way.
The request must be in writing and state the reasons the closing is requested.
It must also clearly describe the public way sought to be closed. The request
must be delivered to the City Clerk. Upon verification by the City Manager that
the request meets these two requirements, the City Manager may either decline
the request if he or she feels it is in the city’s best interest to do so or he
or she may place the matter on a City Council meeting agenda. If the City
Manager makes the request, it does not have to be in writing.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 20-402 CONSIDERATION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   In the event the City Manager places the request on the agenda, he or she
shall ensure that written notice of the proposed closing is given to any holder
of a franchise or anyone else who has a special right or privilege granted by
ordinance or legislative enactment to use the public way or easement at least
30 days prior to the City Council meeting which includes the proposed closing
on the agenda. The City Manager may give such other notice as he or she
determines is proper. The City Council must determine whether the closing is in
the best interest of the city. If it determines the closing is not in the best
interest of the city, no further action will be taken and the person making the
request will be notified by the City Clerk that the request was denied. If the
City Council determines the closing may be in the city’s best interest, the
matter shall be set on a future agenda for consideration of an ordinance
officially closing the public way. A Council member’s initial approval of the
closing under this section shall not compel him or her to vote in favor of an
ordinance closing the public way at a later meeting.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 20-403 SEPARATE ORDINANCE FOR EACH CLOSING.
   The City Council shall cause to be prepared a separate proposed ordinance
for each closing requests it grants. The consideration of the ordinance shall
be on an agenda following the month the request is granted. The public way
shall not be considered closed until the ordinance goes into effect 30 days
after its passing unless an emergency is declared.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 11-3-2009)
CHAPTER 21: TAXICABS
   [Reserved]
CHAPTER 22: TRAFFIC
Section
Article 1. Words and Phrases Defined
22-101 Definitions of words and phrases
Article 2. Traffic Administration; Obedience to Traffic Regulation
22-201 Duty of Police Department and Fire Department
22-202 Emergency and experimental regulation
22-203 Required obedience to traffic chapter
22-204 Obedience to Police and Fire Department officials
22-205 Persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles to obey traffic regulations
22-206 Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted
22-207 Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations
22-208 Persons working on streets; exceptions
22-209 Maintenance and construction zones
22-210 Authorized emergency vehicles
22-211 Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
22-212 Report of accident
Article 3. Certain Vehicles Prohibited; Equipment
22-301 Vehicles injurious to streets
22-302 Obstructive and dangerous vehicles
22-303 Equipment
22-304 Mufflers, cut-outs
22-305 Width, height, length, weight and load
22-306 Inspection of vehicles
22-307 Junk vehicles and boats
Article 4. Traffic Control Devices
22-401 Authority to install traffic control devices
22-402 Manual and specifications for traffic control systems
22-403 Obedience to official traffic control devices
22-404 When traffic signals required for enforcement purposes
22-405 Traffic control signal legend
22-406 Pedestrian control signals
22-407 Flashing signals
22-408 Pedestrian actuated school crossing signals
22-409 Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings
22-410 Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or
signals
22-411 Play streets, authority to establish
22-412 Play streets; restrictions on use
22-413 Chief of Police to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones
22-414 Traffic lanes
Article 5. Driving on Right Side of Roadway; Overtaking and Passing
22-501 Drive on right side of roadway; exceptions
22-502 Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite direction
22-503 Overtaking vehicle on left
22-504 When overtaking on right permitted
22-505 Reserved
22-506 Limitations on overtaking on left
22-507 Further limitations on driving to left of center of roadway
22-508 No passing zones
22-509 Driving on roadways laned for traffic
22-510 Following too closely
Article 6. Speed Regulations
22-601 Basic rule and maximum limits
Article 7. Reckless Driving; Driving While Intoxicated or under Influence of
Drugs; Driver’s License
22-701 Reckless driving
22-702 Careless or negligent driving, stopping or parking
22-703 Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of drugs
22-704 Driver’s license required
22-705 Unlawful to operate vehicle without state vehicle license
22-706 Not to permit persons without license to drive motor vehicle
Article 8. Turning Movements; Signals on Turning and Stopping
22-801 Required position and method of turning at intersections
22-802 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers
22-803 Authority to place restricted turn signs
22-804 Obedience to no turn signs
22-805 Limitations on turning around
22-806 Turning movements and required signals
22-807 Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps
22-808 Method of giving hand and arm signals
Article 9. One-Way Streets and Alleys
22-901 Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys
22-902 One-way streets and alleys
Article 10. Right-of-Way at Stop and Yield Intersections, Railroad Crossings
22-1001 Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
22-1002 Vehicle turning left at intersection
22-1003 Through streets may be designated
22-1004 Signs required at through streets
22-1005 Other intersections where stop or yield required
22-1006 Stop signs and yield signs
22-1007 Vehicle entering stop intersection
22-1008 Vehicle entering yield intersection
22-1009 Two or more vehicles facing stop, slow, warning or caution signal
22-1010 Emerging from alley, driveway or building
22-1011 Stop when traffic obstructed
22-1012 Obedience to signal indicating approach of train
22-1013 Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade crossings
Article 11. Miscellaneous Regulations
22-1101 Following fire apparatus prohibited
22-1102 Crossing fire hose
22-1103 Driving through funeral or other procession
22-1104 Drivers in procession
22-1105 Funeral processions to be identified
22-1106 When permits required for parades and processions
22-1107 Vehicle shall not be driven on sidewalk
22-1108 Starting parked vehicle
22-1109 Limitations on backing
22-1110 Opening and closing vehicle doors
22-1111 Riding on motorcycles
22-1112 Obstructions to driver’s view or driving mechanism
22-1113 Clinging to vehicles
22-1114 Controlled access
22-1115 Boarding or alighting
22-1116 Unlawful riding
22-1117 Railroad trains not to block streets
22-1118 Driving through safety zone prohibited
22-1119 Dangerous objects in streets
22-1120 Motor scooters; operation
22-1121 Turning into parking lanes
22-1122 Texting while driving
Article 12. Pedestrians’ Rights and Duties
22-1201 Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals
22-1202 Pedestrians’ right-of-way in crosswalks
22-1203 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
22-1204 Crossing at right angles
22-1205 When pedestrian shall yield
22-1206 Prohibited crossing
22-1207 Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals
22-1208 Pedestrians walking along roadways
22-1209 Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
22-1210 Drivers to exercise due care
Article 13. Bicycles
22-1301 Effect of regulations
22-1302 Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
22-1303 Obedience to traffic control devices
22-1304 Riding on bicycles
22-1305 Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
22-1306 Speed
22-1307 Emerging from alley or driveway
22-1308 Carrying articles
22-1309 Parking
22-1310 Riding on sidewalks
22-1311 Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
22-1312 Penalties
Article 14. Method of Parking
22-1401 Standing or parking close to curb; center parking
22-1402 Brakes; motor not to be left running; animals
22-1403 Signs or markings indicating angle parking
22-1404 Obedience to angle parking signs or markings
22-1405 Park in spaces marked off
22-1406 Permits for loading or unloading at angle to curb
22-1407 Penalties
Article 15. Stopping, Standing or Parking Regulated in Special Places
22-1501 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in designated places
22-1502 Parking in streets and alleys not to obstruct traffic
22-1503 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
22-1504 Parking time limits may be established; prohibitions
22-1505 Parking more than 24 hours prohibited
22-1506 Standing or parking on one-way roadways
22-1507 Penalties
Article 16. Stopping for Loading and Unloading Only
22-1601 Curb loading zones may be designated
22-1602 Standing in passenger curb loading zone
22-1603 Standing in freight curb loading zone
22-1604 Public carrier stops and stands may be designated
22-1605 Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated
22-1606 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands
22-1607 Penalties
Article 17. Truck Routes
22-1701 Truck routes
Article 18. Motorcycles and Motor Scooters
22-1801 Motorcycles and motor scooters
Article 19. Penalties and Procedure on Arrest
22-1901 Penalty
22-1902 Citation tags
22-1903 Failure to comply with citation tag
22-1904 Presumption in reference to illegal parking
22-1905 When complaint to be entered and warrant issued
22-1906 Impounded vehicles
Article 20. Parking Meters
22-2001 Parking meters (reserved)
Article 21. Security Verification
22-2101 Requirement to carry security verification
22-2102 Dismissal
22-2103 Court clerk to forward abstract
Article 22. Seat Belts
22-2201 Operators and front seat passengers required to wear safety belts
22-2202 Application
22-2203 Repealed
22-2204 Violation and penalties
Article 23. Bail Bond Schedule
22-2301 Bail bonds
Article 24. Vehicles Exceeding a Gross Carrying Capacity of Five Tons
22-2401 Restrictions for vehicles exceeding gross carrying capacity of five
tons with exceptions
Article 25. Validity and Penalty
22-2501 Validity
22-2502 Penalty
ARTICLE 1. WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED
§ 22-101 DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and ambulances.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in
diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street or roadway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway.
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel. The words HIGHWAY and STREET are synonymous
herein.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not
operated upon rails.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the
city.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, barricades, signals, markings
and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Municipal Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violation of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those persons having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, refers to any
such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE OR ISLAND. An area or space officially set apart within a
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a SAFETY ZONE OR ISLAND.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
receiving or discharging passengers.
   STOP or STOPPING.
      (1)   When required, complete cessation of movement.
      (2)   When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic
control sign or signal.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to
vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield
sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported, or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 2. TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION; OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATION
§ 22-201 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   It is the duty of the City Marshal and any deputy marshals to enforce
the street traffic regulation of the city and all of the state vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of
the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially
imposed upon the Department by this chapter and any other traffic ordinances of
the city.
   (B)   The City Marshal and his or her assistants are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws
and ordinances; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, city officers may direct traffic
as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic law and
ordinances.
   (C)   Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the
police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-202 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATION.
   The City Council is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than 90 days. The City Council may have traffic control devices tested
under actual conditions of traffic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-203 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CHAPTER.
   It is an offense against the city for any person to do any forbidden act or
fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-204 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-205 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS, RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal on a roadway, and
every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-206 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, such person shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as
authorized by ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-207 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, any state,
county, city or other governmental unit or agency as well as to other vehicles.
It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute;
provided, that this chapter shall not apply to the military forces of the
United States and organizations of the National Guard when performing any
military duty.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-208 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter, except
those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not
apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the surface of a street or to persons, motor vehicles and
other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or repair
of public utilities; provided, that all highway and public utility operations
shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flagmen; but
the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from such work.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-209 MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES.
   (A)   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the City Council, to
close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance
or construction. In exercising such authority, they shall erect or cause to be
erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public
that the street has been closed to traffic.
   (B)   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
division (A) above and traffic control devices or barricades have been erected,
it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over or
around such traffic control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the
closed area; except that the provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to
persons while engaged in construction, maintenance and repair, or to persons
entering therein for the protection of lives or property; provided, that
persons having their places of residence or places of business within the
closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own
risk.
   (C)   Whenever construction, repair or maintenance of any street or utility
line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel,
contractor or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using such
street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or other traffic
control devices which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic through
the construction or maintenance area.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-210 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limit so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of audible and
visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle
operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light
visible in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-211 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of an audible and visual signal meeting the requirements of the laws of
this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-
of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as
possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-212 REPORT OF ACCIDENT.
   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury or death to any person or in which it is apparent
that damage to one vehicle or other property is in excess of $50 shall, as soon
as practicable, report such accident to a police officer or to the Police
Department. Making out a written report of the accident in the office of the
Police Department as soon as practicable after the accident to be forwarded to
the State Department of Public Safety, in accordance with law, shall also be
deemed compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 3. CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; EQUIPMENT
§ 22-301 VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS.
   No vehicle or object which injures, or is likely to injure, the surface of a
street shall be driven or moved on any street.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-302 OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition so constructed or so
loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
Chief of Police and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-303 EQUIPMENT.
   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street in the
city which is not equipped as required by law. It shall also be unlawful to
fail to use such equipment in the manner required by law or to use it in a
manner prohibited by law. It shall also be unlawful to operate a vehicle which
has equipment prohibited by law upon a street of the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-304 MUFFLERS, CUT-OUTS.
   No motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within
the city unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and
sufficient muffler. No muffler cut-out or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be
used on any motor vehicle while operating within the city, except that exhaust
whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-305 WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, WEIGHT AND LOAD.
   No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
height, length, weight or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-306 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   Police officers shall have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon
the streets of the city at any time to determine whether it is safe, whether it
is properly equipped and/or whether its equipment is in proper adjustment and
repair.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-307 JUNK VEHICLES AND BOATS.
   (A)   Nuisance. Junk vehicles and boats which are abandoned, dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, inoperative, discarded or left about the
city in places other than authorized junkyards or other areas authorized by the
City Council and which tend to do any one or more of the following are hereby
declared to be a nuisance:
      (1)   Impede traffic in the streets;
      (2)   Reduce the value of private property;
      (3)   Create fire hazards;
      (4)   Extend and aggravate urban blight; or
      (5)   Result in a serious hazard to the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (B)   Automobile wrecking or salvage yards.
      (1)   The operation and maintenance of automobile wrecking or salvage
yards within the city limits would tend to cause the conditions enumerated in
division (A) above and, in addition, would tend to attract persons seeking
outlets for stolen goods.
      (2)   In order to protect the public interest for reasons that include,
but are not limited to, those referred to in division (B)(1) above, the
operation and maintenance of automobile wrecking or salvage yards within the
city limits are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and are hereby
prohibited, except as may be allowed in properly zoned areas.
   (C)   Junk vehicles and boats on private property prohibited. No person in
charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-
operating, wrecked, junked or unlicensed vehicles or boats to remain on such
property longer than seven days, and no person shall leave any such vehicle or
boat on any property within the city for a longer time than seven days. This
division (C) shall not apply with regard to a vehicle or boat in an enclosed
building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.
   (D)   Impoundment; release.
      (1)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove
and impound vehicles in violation of this article and under any of the
circumstances enumerated in this article.
      (2)   Prior to removal for impoundment of any vehicle, a member of the
Police Department will inventory all items in the vehicle.
   (E)   Leaving junked vehicle on street. No person shall leave any junked
motor vehicle or boat as defined herein on any street, highway, or alley within
the city limits.
   (F)   Junk vehicles nuisance; removal. The accumulation or storage of one or
more junked motor vehicles or boats or parts thereof shall constitute a
nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the city. It is the duty of the owner or person in control of such vehicle,
boat or the parts thereof, where such vehicle or boat is located, to cause to
be removed or remove the vehicle or boat from such property or have the vehicle
or boat housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street or
other private property. Such removal or enclosure shall be made within seven
calendar days after notice is given to the owner or person in control of the
vehicle or boat, or the owner, lessee, or person in control of the property
upon which such vehicle or boat is located. The time limit may be extended by
the City Manager or his or her designee in the case of obvious hardship.
   (G)   Notice. The Chief of Police or his or her designee, upon complaint of
any citizen or on the officer’s own volition, shall cause notice to be posted
on such junked motor vehicle or boat that the vehicle or boat is a nuisance and
shall be removed within the time limit as required in division (C) above.
   (H)   Removal. Upon any failure of the owner or person in control of the
junked motor vehicle or boat, or the owner, lessee or person in control of the
property on which the junked motor vehicle or boat may be located, to remove
the vehicle or boat and place it in an enclosed building within the time limit
set forth in division (C) above, after notice has been placed on the vehicle or
boat. After expiration of said time limit, the Police Department shall promptly
cause the vehicle or boat and its parts to be removed and stored in a proper
place, all at the expense of the owner, lessee or person in control of the
property.
   (I)   Recovery by owner. The owner or person in control of any vehicle or
boat so removed may regain possession thereof by making application to the
Chief of Police within 60 days after its removal and upon payment to the city
of all reasonable costs of removal and storage which shall have accrued to such
vehicle.
   (J)   Sale. If no claim for the junked motor vehicle or boat is made within
60 days after removal by the city, the vehicle or boat may be sold for the best
price obtainable as junk or otherwise and the proceeds shall be used first to
pay all reasonable removal or storage fees against the vehicle or boat and any
remaining funds shall be distributed to the owner.
   (K)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      JUNK VEHICLE OR BOAT. Any vehicle or boat as defined herein, which is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city, which is not public
property, as defined in this section.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. The property which is dedicated to the public use and
over which the federal, state or municipal governments or any political
subdivision thereof, exercise control and dominion.
      VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along
the ground, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts and golf
carts.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 10-2-2018)
ARTICLE 4. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 22-401 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The City Council shall have placed and maintained traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the
city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed
and maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals and devices as
they may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the
city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-402 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL SYSTEMS.
   All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highway Department. All signs and
signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All
traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of
state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-403 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or law, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-404 WHEN TRAFFIC SIGNALS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
   (A)   No provisions of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
   (B)   Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required,
such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-405 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by a traffic control signal exhibiting the
words “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights
successively at one time or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used, and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles
and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign or barricade at such place prohibits either
such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “Stop”
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to
cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Steady red alone or “stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is
shown alone; provided, that, after making such stop, vehicles near the right-
hand edge or curb of the roadway may cautiously turn right on red when
authorized by an official sign, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully within the crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “Go” is shown alone or until authorized to do so by a pedestrian
“Walk” signal, unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with
any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
   (E)   Applicability. In the event an official traffic control signal is
erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made; but in the
absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-406 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Wait” or “Don’t Walk” are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait or don’t walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
island while the “Wait” signal is showing.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-407 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows.
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens flashes, drivers of
vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or
at a limit line when marked or, if none, then before entering the intersection;
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-408 PEDESTRIAN ACTUATED SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Flashing yellow.
      (1)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass
such signal only with caution.
      (2)   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
actuate the signal control switch and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the signal when
the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
      (2)   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the
signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown.
   (C)   Steady red.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before passing
the signal or entering the intersection and shall remain standing until
flashing yellow is shown alone.
      (2)   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal
and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (D)   Steady red and steady yellow combined.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone.
      (2)   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is
about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing
shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-409 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway an unauthorized sign, signal or marking or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles, an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which protects any flashing or revolving beams of light, or which hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway, any traffic sign, signal or device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a
type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (D)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking or device is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the City Council is hereby empowered to
remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-410 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS
OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or, in fact, alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any
other part thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-411 PLAY STREETS, AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall have authority to declare
any street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs
or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-412 PLAY STREETS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or
portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences
are within such closed area; and then, any such driver shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-413 CHIEF OF POLICE TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES.
   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council may
give, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized:
   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his or her
opinion, there is a particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and
at such other places as he or she may deem necessary; and
   (B)   To establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-414 TRAFFIC LANES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council
may give, by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
   (B)   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by
ordinance.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 5. DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 22-501 DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-502 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right; and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-503 OVERTAKING VEHICLE ON LEFT.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-504 WHEN OVERTAKING ON RIGHT PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; and
      (3)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled portion of
the roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-505 RESERVED.
   [Reserved.]
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-506 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON LEFT.
   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway
before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-507 FURTHER LIMITATIONS ON DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing; and
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
   (B)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-508 NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The State Department of Highways, as regards state and federal
highways, and the Chief of Police, as regards all other streets, are hereby
authorized to determine those portions of a highway where overtaking and
passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous,
and shall, by appropriate sign or markings on the roadway, have the beginning
and end of such zones indicated. When such signs or markings are in place and
clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle
shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone, as
set forth in division (A) above, no driver shall at any time drive to the left
side of the roadway within such no passing zone or on the left side of any
pavement striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-509 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic
within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where such center
lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction
the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-510 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 6. SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 22-601 BASIC RULE AND MAXIMUM LIMITS.
   (A)   Any person driving a vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway, and
any other condition then existing; and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a
highway at a speed greater than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead.
   (B)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with division (A) above, the limits specified in this chapter or
established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no
person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess of such maximum
limits, as follows:
      (1)   Fifteen mph on any street adjacent to any school between 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. on days when school is in session, except as otherwise required
by state authority;
      (2)   Twenty-five mph on other streets and on streets adjacent to schools
at other times than that specified in division (B)(1) above; and
      (3)   Provided, that the City Council, by motion or resolution, or the
State Highway Department as regards state and federal highways, may reduce or
increase this speed limit. When it does so, appropriate signs shall be placed
on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall drive
any vehicle at speeds greater than the posted speed limit upon the highways,
roads, streets or portions thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2018-05, passed 7-16-2018)
ARTICLE 7. RECKLESS DRIVING; DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED OR UNDER
INFLUENCE OF DRUGS; DRIVER’S LICENSE
§ 22-701 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any vehicle in a wanton manner without regard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-702 CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING, STOPPING OR PARKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park or cause to be
parked or stop any vehicle in a careless or negligent manner or in such a
manner as to endanger life, limb, persons or property or as to interfere with
the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-703 PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR OF DRUGS.
   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or drugs to drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within
the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-704 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person who does not have a driver’s license as
required by state law for operation of a motor vehicle upon the state highways
to operate a motor vehicle within the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-705 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE VEHICLE WITHOUT STATE VEHICLE LICENSE.
   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city
without a state vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display
the state vehicle license as may be required by law.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-706 NOT TO PERMIT PERSONS WITHOUT LICENSE TO DRIVE MOTOR VEHICLE.
   It is unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor
vehicle owned by him or her or under his or her control to be driven upon any
street in the city by any person who is not authorized or licensed to drive a
motor vehicle under the laws of the state or under the laws of the state of the
driver’s residence.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 8. TURNING MOVEMENTS; SIGNALS ON TURNING AND STOPPING
§ 22-801 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows.
   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns on two-way roads. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such
centerline where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection,
the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn
shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of
the intersection.
   (C)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-802 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council
may give by motion or resolution, is authorized to have placed markers, buttons
or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections; such course to be traveled
as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or
ordinance.
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-803 AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council
may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-
turn and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections.
   (B)   The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of
any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-804 OBEDIENCE TO NO TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-805 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in the city, except at an
intersection; and furthermore, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to
make such a turn at any intersection:
      (1)   Where traffic control signals are installed;
      (2)   Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter’s
direction; or
      (3)   Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and is maintained.
   (B)   When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be made only when it can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-806 TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the
vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required by ordinance, or
turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle
from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until
such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be
affected by such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-807 SIGNALS BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL LAMPS.
   (A)   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either
by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided
in division (B) below.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and
required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single
vehicle and also to any combination of vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-808 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required to be given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 9. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 22-901 AUTHORITY TO SIGN ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever the City Council, by motion or resolution, designates any street or
alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley, the Chief of Police shall
have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no such regulation
shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the
direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-902 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts of
alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 10. RIGHT-OF-WAY AT STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS; RAILROAD CROSSINGS
§ 22-1001 VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway; provided, that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a
state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal
highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered
the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
   (B)   When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A) and (B) above are
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1002 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard; but said driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this chapter, may then make such left turn, and
the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said
opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left
turn.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1003 THROUGH STREETS MAY BE DESIGNATED.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may designate any street or part
of street a through street.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1004 SIGNS REQUIRED AT THROUGH STREETS.
   Whenever the City Council so designates and describes a through street, the
Chief of Police shall have placed and maintained a stop sign, or if deemed more
appropriate at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street
intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at
the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall
be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by
the Chief of Police or as desirable.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1005 OTHER INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED.
   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions given by the City Council by
motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets,
and to determine:
   (A)   Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event he or she shall cause to be erected a stop sign at
every such place where a stop is required; or
   (B)   Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersections as prescribed in division (A) above, in
which event he or she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place
where obedience thereto is required.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1006 STOP SIGNS AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Every stop sign shall bear the word “Stop” in letters not less than
eight inches in height. Every yield sign shall bear the word “Yield” in letters
not less than seven inches in height. Every stop sign and every yield sign
shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by internal illumination or by a
floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting
elements in the face of the sign.
   (B)   Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1007 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection.
   (B)   Such driver, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is
approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard; but
said driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle so proceeding.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1008 VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he or she is driving and to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
      (2)   The driver, having yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding; provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision
with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of his or her failure to yield right-of-way.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection; or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1009 TWO OR MORE VEHICLES FACING STOP, SLOW, WARNING OR CAUTION SIGNAL.
   Where two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or
signals on two or more intersecting cross streets and are approaching so as to
enter the intersection at the same time, where each vehicle is required to
stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each
vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the
right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle
coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is
required to stop and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or
taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is required to
slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have
the right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the
intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not so entered the
intersection.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1010 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1011 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1012 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagperson gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; and/
or
      (3)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad
train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1013 CERTAIN VEHICLES TO STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire or of any
school bus carrying any schoolchild or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing
at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50
feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and
while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for
any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. After stopping, as required herein, and upon proceeding when it is safe
to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the
vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing
such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or
tracks.
   (B)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a
traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 11. MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§ 22-1101 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1102 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1103 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1104 DRIVERS IN PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1105 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.
   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the Police Department.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1106 WHEN PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
   No funeral procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more
vehicles, except the military forces of the United States and the military
forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except
in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1107 VEHICLE SHALL NOT BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1108 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1109 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1110 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1111 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   A person operating a motorcycle, motor scooter or a motor bicycle shall ride
only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator
shall not carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride on the
vehicle, unless it is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride only upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two
persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the
operator.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1112 OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three adults (two
children under the age of 12 years shall constitute one adult), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1113 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1114 CONTROLLED ACCESS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway,
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1115 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1116 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1117 RAILROAD TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS.
   It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains
or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1118 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1119 DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed, or to let fall
and remain in or upon any street any scrap iron, nail, tack, glass, stick or
other thing which is likely to injure persons or damage property or to render a
street unsafe for traffic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1120 MOTOR SCOOTERS; OPERATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven cycle, including a
motor scooter or motor-driven bicycle, on a street in the city during a time
when state law prohibits the operation of such vehicle.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1121 TURNING INTO PARKING LANES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person proceeding east on Broadway Street to
make a left turn into any parking space on the north side of Broadway Street,
and it shall further be unlawful for any person proceeding west on Broadway
Street to make a left-hand turn into any parking space on the south side of
Broadway Street.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1122 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CELLULAR TELEPHONE. An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth
reserved for cellular telephones.
      COMPOSE, SEND or READ. With respect to a text message means the manual
entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or
device.
      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE.
         (a)   An electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit
a communication of written text by means other than through an oral transfer or
wire communication.
         (b)   This term does not include a device that is physically or
electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or a voice-operated global
positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle, or a
hands-free device that allows the user to write, send or read a text message
without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate or initiate a
feature or function.
      TEXT MESSAGE. Includes a text based message, instant message, electronic
message, photo, video or electronic mail.
   (B)   Texting while driving prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within the city while using
a handheld electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an
electronic text message while the motor vehicle is in motion.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of division (B) above
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 plus court
costs.
   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply if
the person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device
for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an
imminent emergency situation:
      (1)   An emergency response operator;
      (2)   A hospital, physician’s office or health clinic;
      (3)   A provider of ambulance services;
      (4)   A provider of firefighting services; or
      (5)   A law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2015-01, passed 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE 12. PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES
§ 22-1201 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore
declared in this chapter, but all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1202 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply under the conditions stated in §
22-1205(B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1203 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1204 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1205 WHEN PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the
conditions stated in §
22-1206 of this article when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at
certain designated places.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1206 PROHIBITED CROSSING.
   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1207 OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing while a signal is being sounded or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1208 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1209 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
donation, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. No person
shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of
soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be
parked on a street or highway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1210 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 13. BICYCLES
§ 22-1301 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this article.
   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this article.
   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to the exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1302 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by
the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those
provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1303 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle
to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1304 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1305 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
   (C)   Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1306 SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1307 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk
or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1308 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1309 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1310 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a Business
District.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to have erected signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person;
and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1311 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be
visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly
in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting
a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, clean, level pavement.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1312 PENALTIES.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $20, including costs, or by impounding
of such person’s bicycle for a period not to exceed ten days, or by combination
thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 14. METHOD OF PARKING
§ 22-1401 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB; CENTER PARKING.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb; provided, that every vehicle stopped or parked
upon the left-hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs
shall be parked or stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within 18
inches of the left-hand curb.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1402 BRAKES; MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING; ANIMALS.
   Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. Animals
left or parked on the streets shall be securely hitched.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1403 SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING.
   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council may
give by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall have such streets marked or
signed.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1404 OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
   On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1405 PARK IN SPACES MARKED OFF.
   In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park within a parking space as thus
marked off and not on or over a line delimiting a space.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1406 PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein. The Chief of Police may revoke such
permits at any time.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permit.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1407 PENALTIES.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $15, including costs.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 15. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING REGULATED IN SPECIAL PLACES
§ 22-1501 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED PLACES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within 15 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (D)   Within an intersection;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (G)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
said entrance (when properly signposted);
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (M)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
highway underpass;
   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
   (O)   On any private drive or property without the prior consent of the
owner or that person legally in possession of such property;
   (P)   In that space between the curb, curbline, or roadway edge and the
private property line along any street, unless parking is in an approved
cutback provided for such parking;
   (Q)   In a parking space designated for handicapped drivers, whether on
public or private property, unless the vehicle to be parked displays a
handicapped parking decal, card or sticker; and
   (R)   In any fire lanes, whether on public or private property.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1502 PARKING IN STREETS AND ALLEYS NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley
in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1503 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things; or
   (C)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by emergency.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1504 PARKING TIME LIMITS MAY BE ESTABLISHED; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council
may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to establish parking
time limits or to prohibit parking on designated streets and parts of streets
by having appropriate signs placed thereon.
   (B)   When such signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle in violation thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1505 PARKING MORE THAN 24 HOURS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park his or her vehicle on any street for a period of time
longer than 24 hours. This section shall not affect parking limits established
for shorter periods.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1506 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs or
marks are placed to permit such standing or parking. The Chief of Police,
subject to any directions which the City Council may give by motion or
resolution, is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway, and to have
signs or marks placed giving notice thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1507 PENALTIES.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $16, plus court costs.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 16. STOPPING FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING ONLY
§ 22-1601 CURB LOADING ZONES MAY BE DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council
may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and
maintained appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable. By the same authority,
such loading zones may be changed or discontinued.
   (B)   When such a loading zone is established on request of any person, the
Chief of Police shall not have signs placed until the applicant has paid to the
city an amount of money estimated by the Chief of Police to be adequate to
reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the same.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1602 STANDING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during the hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period of time not to exceed three minutes.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1603 STANDING IN FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious loading and delivery or pick up
and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which
is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1604 PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS MAY BE DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, subject to any directions which the City Council
may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized and required to
establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger
common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such
number as it determines to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the
public; and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall
be designated by appropriate signs.
   (B)   By the same authority, such stops and stands may be changed or
discontinued.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1605 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS REGULATED.
   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as
provided herein, except in case of emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the
bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement
of other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   (1)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle
upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein.
      (2)   This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1606 RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been
officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does
not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter such zone.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1607 PENALTIES.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $16, plus court costs.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 17. TRUCK ROUTES
§ 22-1701 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes
through the city for the use of trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds
and/or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles passing
through the city. The Chief of Police shall see that appropriate and adequate
signs are placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow
the routes.
   (B)   When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or
other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed as provided in division (A)
above, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and shall not
deviate therefrom, except in case of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall
follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and
not merely through the city.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 18. MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS
§ 22-1801 MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS.
   (A)   General requirements. No driver of a two- or three-wheel motor-driven
vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person on, upon or within such vehicle
on any street or highway in the city, except as hereinafter provided; provided,
however, that if any two- or three-wheel motor vehicle required by state law to
be licensed has either a double seating device with double footrests or a
sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar
attachment for each person riding therein so that such person is seated
entirely within the body of the sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an
operator who has attained the age of 16 years or older to carry a passenger. A
demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his or her employee is excepted from
the provisions hereof. No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any
sidewalk of the city. Handlebars on motorcycles and motor scooters shall not
exceed 12 inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment. No
rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall hold to any moving vehicle for the
purpose of being propelled.
   (B)   Special speed limitations. No person shall operate any motorcycle or
any motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted;
provided, that in no event, nor at any time, may an operator under the age of
16 years operate a motorcycle or motor scooter at a speed greater than 35 mph.
   (C)   Required equipment.
      (1)   Rearview mirrors. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with two mirrors containing a reflection surface of not less than
three inches in diameter mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned
so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of 200
feet to the rear of his or her vehicle.
      (2)   Windshield. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect
the operator from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield, the
operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect
him or her from foreign objects.
      (3)   Brakes. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped
with brakes adequate to control the movement of same to stop and hold such
vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One means shall
be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall be
effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels.
      (4)   Speedometer. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least
35 mph.
      (5)   Fenders. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped
with a fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the
manufacturer.
      (6)   Lights.
         (a)   All vehicles covered under this section shall carry at least one
lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in
the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one taillamp mounted on the
rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least
300 feet to the rear.
         (b)   Such lights required by this section shall be burning whenever
such vehicles are in motion during the period from one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient
light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the
streets are not clearly discernable at a distance of at least 500 feet ahead.
      (7)   Headgear. No person under the age of 21 years shall operate or ride
upon any vehicle covered under this section unless such person is equipped with
and wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for
use by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of
lining, padding and chinstraps.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 19. PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST
§ 22-1901 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a parent of a child or the guardian of a ward to
authorize or knowingly to permit any such child or ward to violate any
provision of this chapter.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to authorize or
knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in his or her or its name to be
driven or to stand or be parked in violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter or performs any unlawful act as defined in this chapter or fails to
perform any act required in this chapter, is guilty of an offense against the
city and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $100,
plus costs.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1902 CITATION TAGS.
   (A)   (1)   Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons
violating provisions of this chapter by delivering citation tags to violators
or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation
of this chapter, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by means of which the
violation occurred. Such citation tags, among other things, shall indicate
briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle and shall
direct the violator to present the tag at the police station or other
designated place within five days or such other reasonable time as may be
specified thereon.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall abridge the power to arrest any
violator and to take him or her into custody or to file a complaint against him
or her at any time.
   (B)   The City Council may require that the police officers use citation
tags furnished by the City Clerk and that such tags be serially numbered and
may regulate the use and handling of citation tags.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1903 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH CITATION TAG.
   If a violator of any provision of this chapter who has been given a citation
tag as provided herein fails to appear in accordance with the instructions on
such tag, the Chief of Police or his or her authorized agent shall send to the
owner of the vehicle involved a letter or other written notice informing him or
her of the violation and warning him or her to appear as directed, and that in
the event such letter or notice is disregarded for a period of ten days, a
complaint will be filed and warrant of arrest issued; provided, that nothing in
this section shall abridge the power to file a complaint against him or her
prior to the expiration of such time.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1904 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was,
at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
   (B)   The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure
of giving a citation tag has been followed.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1905 WHEN COMPLAINT TO BE ENTERED AND WARRANT ISSUED.
   In the event any person fails to comply with a citation tag given to such
person or attached to a vehicle, the Chief of Police shall have a complaint
entered against such person before the Municipal Judge; and the Municipal Judge
shall issue a warrant for his or her arrest.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-1906 IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Purpose. The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions
of this section shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for the
protection of the public peace, safety, welfare and the safeguarding of
property. Such procedure shall be used generally for the prevention and removal
of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from
obstructions placed and left in derogation of such rights, to safeguard and
protect recovered stolen vehicles and to protect the property of persons
arrested from damage or theft.
   (B)   Authority to impound vehicles. Members of the Police Department are
hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from any street, highway, private
property or public property to a garage or other place of public safety under
any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   When a vehicle is left unattended upon any public right-of-way and
is so parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic or parked where parking is prohibited;
      (2)   When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury or otherwise incapacitated to such an extent as to
be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
      (3)   When a derelict vehicle has been parked upon public right-of-way
for a period of 48 hours;
      (4)   When a vehicle has been parked on private property without the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property;
      (5)   When any vehicle is left abandoned upon public right-of-way in
excess of two days from the date it was first reported or observed by officers;
      (6)   When officers recover a vehicle reported stolen and the owner
cannot be located, or is unable or unwilling to effect the removal of the
vehicle within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed one hour, or the
preservation and collection of evidence requires removal;
      (7)   Where the vehicle has any evidentiary value, has directly or
indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to
transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a
firearm, or was directly or indirectly associated with a drive-by shooting;
      (8)   When a police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator
of a vehicle out of said vehicle, and no person immediately present can
lawfully or reasonably be given custody of such vehicle;
      (9)   When a vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a period
in excess of 90 days, bears a license plate which has been altered or tampered
with, or bears a temporary paper tag which has been expired for a period in
excess of 90 days, or bears no license plate which could be in conformance with
the State Vehicle License Act (47 O.S. § 1101);
      (10)   Any place, including place of residence when a police officer
effects the arrest of the operator of the vehicle, out of said vehicle, and the
operator is found to have operated the vehicle under any of the following
violations: reckless driving; careless driving; driving under the influence of
drugs and alcohol; driving while impaired; driving under a suspended, revoked
or denied license; driving with no state driver’s license; eluding a police
officer, duty to give information and render aid or otherwise involved in a hit
and run accident; or
      (11)   When a vehicle is not compliant with the State Vehicle Compulsory
Insurance Law (47 O.S. § 7-606).
   (C)   Impound fee. Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted herein
shall be stored and held until a written order for its release, signed by an
authorized officer of the city, has been issued. The proper city authority to
authorize the release of an impounded vehicle shall be any of the following:
Police Chief, City Manager, City Judge, City Attorney or City Clerk. Such order
of release shall be conditioned upon the payment of an impound fee in the
amount of $50 by the person to whom the release is issued. This impound fee
shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees which may be assessed from
citations issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or other ordinance
violations involving the impounded vehicle. This fee is also independent of any
costs associated with the individual wrecker services used by the city and
independent of any fees charged by the impoundment facility.
   (D)   Redemption of impounded vehicle. Presentation of the order of release
at the place of impoundment, together with payment or tender of payment of all
impoundment costs and accrued storage charges due, shall entitle the person
presenting such release to obtain possession of such vehicle.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE 20. PARKING METERS
§ 22-2001 PARKING METERS.
   [Reserved.]
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 21. SECURITY VERIFICATION
§ 22-2101 REQUIREMENT TO CARRY SECURITY VERIFICATION.
   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall, while
operating or using such vehicle, carry either an operator’s or owner’s security
verification form issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded
from coverage thereon; or an equivalent form issued by the Department of Public
Safety, reflecting liability coverage, which shall be produced by any driver
thereof upon request for inspection by any law enforcement officer of the city,
and, in case of a collision, the form shall be shown upon request to any person
affected by the collision.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-2102 DISMISSAL.
   Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification
form or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department reflecting
liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of the alleged
offense shall be entitled to a dismissal of such charge.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-2103 COURT CLERK TO FORWARD ABSTRACT.
   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court clerk
shall forward an abstract to the Department of Public Safety within ten days
reflecting the action taken by the court.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 22. SEAT BELTS
§ 22-2201 OPERATORS AND FRONT SEAT PASSENGERS REQUIRED TO WEAR SAFETY BELTS.
   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in this
state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. For the purpose of this section,
PASSENGER CAR shall mean AUTOMOBILE, as defined in state law, except that
PASSENGER CAR shall not include trucks, pickup trucks, truck-tractors,
recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles or motorized bicycles.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-2202 APPLICATION.
   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car
in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification form from a
physician licensed in this state that he or she is unable to wear a safety seat
belt system for medical reasons; provided, that the issuance of such
verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall
such physician thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise,
to any person injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt
system. This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a
route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-2203 REPEALED.
   This section was repealed by Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-2204 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   Any person convicted of violating §
22-2201 of this article shall be punished by a fine of $10 and shall pay court
costs of $15; provided, that the Department of Public Safety shall not assess
points to the driving record of any licensed or unlicensed person convicted of
a violation of §
22-2201 of this article.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
ARTICLE 23. BAIL BOND SCHEDULE
§ 22-2301 BAIL BONDS.
   The City Council hereby adopts the following bond schedule.
     City                                                             Fail
Code Code/   Description Fine Court CLEET AFIS Forensic Training Tech to     A&D Total
     State                    Cost                               Fee  Appear
     Statute
          City Code/ State                                                            Court                              Tech Fail
Code      Statute            Description                                         Fine Cost  CLEET AFIS Forensic Training Fee  to     A&D Total
                                                                                                                              Appear
                           Dismissed with cost                                      $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $66
          63 O.S. § 2-405(B)Possession of drug paraphernalia                    $134 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $250
Narcotics §                 Possession of marijuana/CDS                         $134 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $250
          15-204
          §                 Animal at large                                     $144 $21                       $5       $10             $180
          5-701
          §                 Assault and battery                                 $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-401
          §                 Carrying concealed weapon                           $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-301
          §                 Conduct/acts prohibited on/near school grounds      $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-210
          21 O.S. § 856     Contributing to delinquency of minor                $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Curfew violation                                    $144 $21                       $5       $10             $180
          15-902
          §                 Destruction of property                             $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-503
          §                 Discharge a “bow” within city limits            $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-309
          §                 Discharging firearms in city limits                 $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-302
          §                 Disturbing the peace/ disorderly conduct            $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-305
          §                 Drinking in public                                  $99  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $215
          15-213
          §                 Fail to obtain kennel license                       $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          5-501
                            Fail to pay citation                                $0                                                      $0
          §                 Failure to appear                                   $200                                                    $200
          13-321(A)
          §                 Fireworks and explosives prohibited in city limits  $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          10-201
          §                 First offense minor in possession of tobacco        $25                                                     $25
          15-803
          21 O.S. § 1705    Grand larceny                                       $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          21 O.S. § 1021.1  Indecent exposure - urinate in public               $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (A)
          21 O.S. § 1737    Larceny of cable television service                 $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Littering/public nuisance (abandoned auto) (tall    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-508             grass)
          §                 Loitering                                           $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-202
          §                 Minor in possession of alcohol                      $134 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $250
          15-211
          §                 Noise complaint violation                           $144 $21                       $5       $10             $180
          15-306
Non-      21 O.S. § 540     Obstructing officer                                 $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
traffic   §                 Open burning prohibited                             $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          9-122
          §                 Petit larceny                                       $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-501
          §                 Prohibited electronic devices and tobacco used on   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-1005            city owned property indoor and outdoor
          §                 Public intoxication                                 $109 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $225
          15-213
          §                 Receiving stolen property                           $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-502
          §                 Remove dead animal                                  $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          12-402
          §                 Resisting arrest                                    $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-602
          §                 Second offense minor in possession of tobacco       $50                                                     $50
          15-803
          §                 Sell or furnish tobacco products to a minor first   $25  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $91
          15-802             offense
          §                 Sell or furnish tobacco products to a minor second  $50  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $116
          15-802             offense
          §                 Sell or furnish tobacco products to a minor third   $75  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $141
          15-802             offense
          §                 Smoking prohibited in public places/parks           $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-308
          §                 Soliciting without city license/permit              $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          7-102
          §                 Tampering with public utilities                     $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-609
          §                 Third offense minor in possession of tobacco        $75                                                     $75
          15-803
          §                 Tobacco must be sold in original sealed package     $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-805
          21 O.S. § 1835    Trespassing                                         $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Unauthorized dumping in private/public receptacle   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          15-508(C)
          §                 Unlawful entry                                      $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-504
          §                 Unlawful intrusion                                  $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-505
          §                 Unlawful to burn garbage or trash                   $214 $21                       $5       $10             $250
          11-109
          §                 Vicious animal/dog                                  $144 $21                       $5       $10             $180
          5-601
          §                 Obstruction of pedestrian traffic                   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          20-204A
          47 O.S. § 11-1007 Parking in handicap                                 $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
Parking   §                 Parking in no parking zone - signed                 $15                                                     $15
          22-1501(N)
          §                 Standing in passenger loading zone - 3 minutes      $15                                                     $15
          22-1602
          21 O.S. § 540(A)  Attempting to elude police officer                  $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 11-901  Attentive driving required/ accident only           $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (B)
          §                 Brakes inadequate or defective equipment            $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-303
          §                 Careless/ negligent driving                         $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          22-702
          47 O.S. § 11-1112 Child safety restraint                              $50  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $116
          §                 DUI of alcohol or drugs/APC                         $134 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $250
          22-703
          §                 Depositing/ throwing destructive or injurious       $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-507             material on highway
          47 O.S. § 12-417  Driver or passenger not wearing seat belt           $20                                                     $20
          (A)
          §                 Driving left of center or in wrong lane             $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-501
          47 O.S. § 6-303(B)Driving under suspension                            $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          47 O.S. § 761     Driving while impaired DWI                          $109 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $225
          §                 Driving wrong way on one-way                        $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-902
          47 O.S. § 6-115   Expired driver’s license                          $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 12-203.2Fail to dim lights when meeting oncoming vehicle    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 6-112   Fail to have driver’s license in possession       $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 1137.1  Fail to register vehicle within 30 days of purchase $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (E)
          47 O.S. § 14-105  Fail to secure load                                 $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (B)
          47 O.S. § 12-201  Failure to display lighted lamps when required      $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 14-113  Failure to obey posted weight limit (bridge)        $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Failure to obey traffic control signal              $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-403
          47 O.S. § 1151(A) Failure to pay taxes due state                      $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (5)
          §                 Failure to provide proof of security verification   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-2101
          §                 Failure to signal                                   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-807
          §                 Failure to stop at stop sign                        $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-1006
          47 O.S. § 11-705  Failure to stop for school bus displaying a stop    $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          (A)                sign or signal
          47 O.S. § 11-405  Failure to yield for emergency vehicle              $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Failure to yield right-of-way                       $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-1006
          §                 Following too closely                               $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-510
          47 O.S. § 10-103  Hit and run (property)                              $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Illegal turn or illegal approach                    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-801
          47 O.S. § 11-1102 Improper backing                                    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 12-227  Improper display of blue light, red light, and      $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
Traffic   (D)                flashing light
          47 O.S. § 11-1003 Improper parking on roadway                         $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (A)
          §                 Improper passing                                    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-508
          47 O.S. § 12-217  Improper use of fog lamp                            $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (D)
          47 O.S. § 11-312  Improperly drive (onto/off of) controlled- access   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
                             road
          §                 Jake brake prohibited                               $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          14-104(D)(19)
          47 O.S. § 10-105  Leaving the scene of accident unattended vehicle    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 12-402  Modify exhaust to increase noise                    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 No license or violation of restrictions             $154 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $220
          22-704
          47 O.S. § 47-1151 Operate minibike, golf cart, go-cart, off road      $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (E)                vehicle on street/highway
          47 O.S. § 6-101(D)Operate a motorcycle without endorsement            $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          47 O.S. § 12-609  Operate motorcycle without proper eye protection    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (B)
          47 O.S. § 12-609  Operate or ride motorcycle without headgear when    $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (B)                under 18
          47 O.S. § 12-101  Operate unsafe vehicle. Defective or missing        $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (A)                equipment
          §                 Operate vehicle over 5-ton capacity on city street  $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-2401
          §                 Permitting a person without a driver’s license to $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-706             drive
          §                 Reckless driving                                    $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          22-701
          47 O.S. § 4-107(D)Remove license plate and affix unauthorized plate   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
                             to conceal identity
          47 O.S. § 4-107   Remove or alter decal                               $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Speeding (11 - 15 mph over)                         $134 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $200
          22-601
          §                 Speeding (16 - 20 mph over)                         $144 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $210
          22-601
          §                 Speeding (21 or more mph over)                      $174 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $240
          22-601
          §                 Speeding (minimum for 10 and under)                 $99  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $165
          22-601
          47 O.S. § 11-806.1Speeding in school zone                             $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          §                 TOC of alcohol while vehicle in motion              $99  $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10         $50 $215
          15-211
          21 O.S. § 1753.3  Throw/litter upon roadway                           $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          §                 Throw material from moving vehicle                  $184 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $250
          15-507
          §                 Turning into parking lane                           $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-1121
          47 O.S. § 12-422  Unlawful tint on window                             $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          (A)
          §                 Unlawful to operate without state vehicle license   $114 $21   $10   $10  $10      $5       $10             $180
          22-705             (tag)
 
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 10-3-2017)
ARTICLE 24. VEHICLES EXCEEDING A GROSS CARRYING CAPACITY OF FIVE TONS
§ 22-2401 RESTRICTIONS FOR VEHICLES EXCEEDING GROSS CARRYING CAPACITY OF FIVE
TONS WITH EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in that portion of the city,
zoned for residential use, when the carrying capacity of said vehicle exceeds
five tons. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such carrying
capacity rating in such areas except for the following:
   (A)   School buses;
   (B)   Recreational vehicles going to and from a specific residence;
   (C)   Any vehicle operated by the city, the county, the state and/or the
United States of America and/or the affiliates of such agencies carrying out
specific governmental functions; and
   (D)   Ambulances or other, similar emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 12-4-2012)
ARTICLE 25. VALIDITY AND PENALTY
§ 22-2501 VALIDITY.
   The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not
invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012)
§ 22-2502 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a traffic offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in any amount not exceeding $200, plus costs. Each day upon
which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   The fine for any other ordinance violation not otherwise specifically
addressed in these ordinances (whether in this chapter or elsewhere) shall be
$200, plus costs.
   (C)   (1)   The costs to be imposed in each Municipal Court case in which
there is a finding of guilt or a plea of guilt or no contest, or in which the
defendant does not make an appearance shall be as follows:
         (a)   City of Lexington: $22;
         (b)   CLEET: $9;
         (c)   Forensics: $5;
         (d)   AFIS: $5; and
         (e)   Police and fire training: $3.
      (2)   Total cost in each case to be assessed: $44.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2016-05, passed 8-2-2016)
CHAPTER 23: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
Article 1. Wards
23-101 Wards defined
Article 2. Boundaries and Annexations
23-201 Boundary
23-202 Annexations
23-203 Fees for proceedings pertaining to annexation
23-204 Petition for annexation submitted to Planning Commission for approval
prior to action by City Council
Article 3. Vacating Streets and Alleys
23-301 Certain streets and alleys vacated
23-302 Other public rights-of-way vacated
Article 4. Vacating Lot
23-401 Lot 7 Block 25
ARTICLE 1. WARDS
§ 23-101 WARDS DEFINED.
   The City of Lexington, Cleveland County, State of Oklahoma, is made up and
comprised of five wards as are more particularly hereinafter described, and as
shown by the map which shall be and remain on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
   (A)   Ward 1. All that part of the City of Lexington lying north of Broadway
Street and east of Main Street.
   (B)   Ward 2. All that part of the City of Lexington lying north of Broadway
Street and west of Main Street.
   (C)   Ward 3. All that part of the City of Lexington lying south of Broadway
Street and west of Main Street.
   (D)   Ward 4. All that part of the City of Lexington lying south of Broadway
Street, west of East Third Street and east of Main Street.
   (E)   Ward 5. All that part of the City of Lexington lying south of Broadway
Street and east of East Third Street.
ARTICLE 2. BOUNDARIES AND ANNEXATIONS
§ 23-201 BOUNDARY.
   Following is the legal description of Lexington as of December 6, 1999.
   (A)   Legal description.
 
Part of Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8, all in Township 6 North, Range 1 West of the
Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma, further described as beginning at
the northwest corner of said Section 5;
thence easterly along the north line of said Section 5 to the northwest corner
of the northeast quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 5;
thence southerly along the west line of said NE1/4 to the southwest corner of
said NE1/4;
thence easterly along the south line of said NE1/4 to the southeast corner of
said NE1/4;
thence southerly along the east line of said Section 5 for a distance of
1027.30 feet;
thence westerly for a distance of 1617.00 feet;
thence southerly for a distance of 1279.60 feet;
thence westerly for a distance of 102.33 feet;
thence southerly for a distance of 424.90 feet to the north line of said
Section 8;
thence easterly along the north line of said Section 8 for a distance of 994.32
feet;
thence southerly for a distance of 2147.88 feet;
thence easterly for a distance of 705.00 feet to the east line of said Section
8;
thence southerly along the east line of said Section 8 for a distance of 494.63
feet to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter (SE1/4) of said Section
8;
thence westerly along the north line of said SE1/4 to a point 209.00 feet east
of the northwest corner of said SE1/4;
thence southerly for a distance of 418.00 feet;
thence westerly for a distance of 209.00 feet to the west line of said SE1/4;
thence southerly along the west line of said SE1/4 for a distance of 481.00
feet;
thence westerly for a distance of 1695.00 feet;
thence northerly for a distance of 899.00 feet to the north line of the
southwest quarter (SW1/4) of said Section 8;
thence westerly along the north line of said SW1/4 to the northwest corner of
said SW1/4;
 
thence northerly along the east line of said Section 7 to the northeast corner
of the south half of the northeast quarter (S1/2-NE1/4) of said Section 7;
thence westerly along the north line of said S1/2-NE1/4 to the northwest corner
of said S1/2-NE1/4;
thence southerly along the west line of said S1/2-NE1/4 to the southeast corner
of Government Lot Two (2) of said Section 7;
thence westerly along the south line of said Government Lot 2 to the Meander
Line of the east bank of the South Canadian River;
thence northerly along said meander line through said Section 7 and 6 to the
north line of said Section 6;
thence easterly along the north line of said Section 6 to the Point of
Beginning.
 
   LESS AND EXCEPT
 
A tract of land in the south half of the northwest quarter (S1/2-NW1/4) of
Section 8, Township 6 North, Range 1 West of the Indian Meridian, Cleveland
County, Oklahoma, said tract further described as beginning 1150.00 feet east
of the northwest corner of said S1/2-NW1/4;
thence east 250.00 feet;
thence south 50.00 feet;
thence west 250.00 feet;
thence north 50.00 feet to the Point of Beginning.
 
   (B)   Note. The description in division (A) above was made without the
benefit of a boundary survey and was the result of combining all of the various
legals describing the annexed areas of the city, compiled by CPM Group, Inc.
§ 23-202 ANNEXATIONS.
   The corporate limits of the City of Lexington, Oklahoma, as set forth in §
23-201(A) of this article, have been extended to include the following areas.
 
   Part of the northeast quarter (NE/4) of Section 5, T6N, R1W, Cleveland
County, Oklahoma, described as follows: Beginning at the southeast corner of the
NE/4 of said section; thence north 182 feet; thence west 246 feet; thence south
182 feet; thence east 246 feet to the point of beginning. (Passed April 4, 2000)
 
   The east 50 acres, more or less, of the south half (S/2) of the northeast
quarter (NE/4) of Section 5, T6N, R1W, Cleveland County, Oklahoma, Less and
Except a tract of land about 1 acre in size 182 feet facing on the road, by 246
feet measured from the center of the road, lying in the SE/corner of the east 50
acres of the S/2 NE/4 of Section 5, T6N, R1W. (Passed April 4, 2000)
 
   Part of Sections 5, and 8, all in Township 6 North, Range 1 West of the
Indian Meridian, Cleveland County, Oklahoma, further described as beginning at
the northwest corner of said Section 5;
   thence easterly along the north line of said Section 5 to the northwest
corner of the northeast quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 5;
   thence southerly along the west line of said NE1/4 to the southwest corner of
said NE1/4;
   thence easterly along the south line of said NE1/4 to the southeast corner of
said NE1/4;
   thence southerly along the east line of said Section 5 for a distance of
1027.30 feet to the Point of Beginning;
 
   thence westerly for a distance of 1617.00 feet;
   thence southerly for a distance of 1279.60 feet;
   thence westerly for a distance of 102.33 feet;
   thence southerly for a distance of 424.90 feet to the north line of said
Section 8;
   thence easterly along the north line of said Section 8 for a distance of
994.32 feet;
   thence southerly for a distance of 2147.88 feet;
   thence easterly for a distance of 705.00 feet to the east line of said
Section 8;
   thence northerly along the east line of said Section 8 for a distance of
3,852.38 feet to the Point of Beginning. (Passed May 2, 2000)
 
§ 23-203 FEES FOR PROCEEDINGS PERTAINING TO ANNEXATION.
   A fee of $50 is set for all proceedings pertaining to annexation. Any person
desiring to annex any property to the city shall pay to the City Clerk a fee of
$50 concurrent with the filing of the petition for annexation.
§ 23-204 PETITION FOR ANNEXATION SUBMITTED TO PLANNING COMMISSION FOR APPROVAL
PRIOR TO ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   It is hereby required that any petition for annexation be submitted to the
Planning Commission as soon as practical after the filing of the petition. The
Planning Commission shall either approve or disapprove of the petition by
majority vote. In the event the petition is approved, it may be set before the
City Council at a regularly scheduled meeting. In the event the petition is not
approved, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council.
ARTICLE 3. VACATING STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 23-301 CERTAIN STREETS AND ALLEYS VACATED.
   The following streets and alleys in the city are hereby vacated.
   (A)   A strip of land 20 feet in width north and south, 400 feet east and
west, the same being more particularly described as follows: beginning at a
point 1,370 feet east and 1,320 feet south of the northwest corner of Section
8, T6N, R1W, Cleveland County, Oklahoma, thence west 420 feet; thence north 20
feet to the point of beginning. (1962)
   (B)   A strip of land lying between Lots 1-16, inclusive, and Lots 17-32,
inclusive, all being in Block 40, City of Lexington, Cleveland County,
Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof. (1964)
   (C)   The south 21 feet of the existing right-of-way along Ash Street
adjoining Lots 1 through 16, Block 40, original City-site of Lexington,
Cleveland County, Oklahoma, is hereby vacated subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   The existing structure shall not be structurally altered or
enlarged on the area being vacated.
      (2)   Any new building must be located within the City of Lexington’s
applicable setback lines and shall comply with all zoning and subdivision
regulations. (1986)
   (D)   The east two feet of West First Street adjoining and abutting Lot 16,
Block 79, City of Lexington, Cleveland County, Oklahoma. (1983)
   (E)   Beginning at the northeast corner of Lot 9, Block 72, thence east 26.2
feet; thence south 140 feet; thence west 26.2 feet; thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 9, Block 72, a distance of 140 feet to the point or place of
beginning, all in Cleveland County.
§ 23-302 OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY VACATED.
   (A)   Background.
      (1)   The public way intended as an alley or access street in a
residential area was originally platted as part of the original city. The
subsequent introduction of East 6th Street has destroyed any use the subject
property may have as platted. The property has been used for several years as a
residential area, although none was ever formally vacated.
      (2)   All such unused and unimproved rights-of-way should be vacated as
the opportunity to do so occurs to allow full utilization of such land by
abutting property to the ultimate advantage of the public.
   (B)   Vacation recommended. After careful consideration of the land use
proposed on abutting property, the City Council has determined that the public
interest of the city is best served by the vacation of the full remaining
right-of-way adjoining Lots 9 and 24, Block 49; Lot 24, Block 72; Lots 9 and
24, Block 73; Lot 9, Block 96; being a part of 6th Street as detailed in
division (D) below.
   (C)   Certification. It is hereby certified that the public rights-of-way as
set forth in division (D) below have not been improved or used for any public
purposes to date; are not now and never have been used for property access; nor
can any future use for same for public purposes be reasonably anticipated. It
is further certified that said rights-of-way are within the corporate limits of
the city.
   (D)   Vacation. The following public rights-of-way in the original city, and
more fully described as follows.
 
   Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot 9, Block 49, thence east 26.2
feet, thence south 140 feet, thence west 26.2 feet, thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 9, Block 49, to the point or place of beginning;
 
   and
 
   Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot 24, Block 49, thence east 26.2
feet, thence south 140 feet, thence west 26.2 feet, thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 24, Block 49, to the point or place of beginning;
 
   and
 
   Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot 24, Block 72, thence east 26.2
feet, thence south 140 feet, thence west 26.2 feet, thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 24, Block 72, to the point or place of beginning;
 
   and
 
   Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot 9, Block 73, thence east 26.2
feet, thence south 140 feet, thence west 26.2 feet, thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 9, Block 73, to the point or place of beginning;
 
   and
 
   Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot 24, Block 73, thence east 26.2
feet, thence south 140 feet, thence west 26.2 feet, thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 24, Block 73, to the point or place of beginning;
 
   and
 
   Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot 9, Block 96, thence east 26.2
feet, thence south 140 feet, thence west 26.2 feet, thence north along the east
boundary of Lot 9, Block 96, to the point or place of beginning;
 
   ALL in Cleveland County, Oklahoma,
 
   are hereby vacated and closed to public use.
 
   (E)   Plat of vacation. A plat of vacation accurately displaying the above
described portion of public street rights-of-way to be vacated is hereby made a
part of this article by reference.
ARTICLE 4. VACATING LOT
§ 23-401 LOT 7 BLOCK 25.
   (A)   Background. Lot 7, Block 25, City of Lexington, was deeded to the city
on October 28, 1968, by quitclaim deed from Robert F. Calonkey. The property is
in a residential area and has never been used by the city, is not suitable for
any current or future use, and should be sold to allow full utilization of such
land by private owners to the ultimate advantage of the public.
   (B)   Sale recommended. After careful consideration of possible land use by
the city, the City Council has determined that the public interest of the city
is best served by a sale of said property.
   (C)   Certification. It is hereby certified that Lot 7, Block 25, has not
been improved or used for any public purposes to date; nor can any future use
for same for public purposes be reasonably anticipated.
   (D)   Sale. A sale of Lot 7, Block 25, is hereby authorized and directed,
the same to be done by a sale to the highest bidder after publication of the
notice of such sale.
CHAPTER 24: DISCRIMINATION
Section
Article 1. Grievance Procedure
24-101 Filing complaint
24-102 Hearing on complaint
24-103 Findings and recommendation
24-104 Right to appeal Board decision
24-105 Civil Service Board established
ARTICLE 1. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
§ 24-101 FILING COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Any person who feels that he or she has been discriminated against on
the basis of handicapped status in admission to, or access to, or treatment in
any of the city’s programs and activities, or in employment, shall make a
formal complaint in writing to the Civil Service Board of the city. Components
of the written complaint should include:
      (1)   Statement of the complaint;
      (2)   Names of person and/or persons involved; and
      (3)   Documentation of facts.
   (B)   The formal complaint and all supporting documentation shall be filed
with the City Clerk, who shall be the person responsible to coordinate efforts
to comply with all prohibitions applicable to the city concerning
discrimination against qualified individuals because of handicapped status.
   (C)   The grievance procedure included in this chapter is adopted to comply
with the requirements of §§ 51 through 55 of the revenue sharing regulations as
published in the Federal Register on October 17, 1983, and shall apply to all
persons included within the scope of said federal revenue sharing regulations.
§ 24-102 HEARING ON COMPLAINT.
   The City Clerk shall notify the Civil Service Board of the complaint, and
the Board shall then set a hearing on the complaint. The City Clerk shall give
the complaining party not less than 15 days’ notice of the hearing date. At
said hearing, the complaining party shall have the burden of proof. Any oral or
documentary evidence may be received by the Board. Each party shall have the
right to present, in person or by counsel, his or her case or defense, by oral
or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such
examination and cross-examination as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts.
§ 24-103 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATION.
   Within 30 days after the hearing date, the Civil Service Board shall file
its written findings and recommendation for disposition of the complaint with
the City Clerk.
§ 24-104 RIGHT TO APPEAL BOARD DECISION.
   (A)   If the complaining party is not satisfied with the outcome of the
hearing, he or she may appeal the decision of the Civil Service Board to the
City Council. The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within
ten days following the adverse decision.
   (B)   The City Council shall then set a review hearing and shall give the
complaining party not less than ten days’ notice of said hearing. The City
Council shall have the right to review the evidence presented at the prior
hearing and may make any reasonable inquiry it feels necessary to resolve the
matter. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
§ 24-105 CIVIL SERVICE BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a Civil Service Board comprised of three members to be
appointed by the City Council. Said Board members shall serve for a term of one
year.
CHAPTER 25: RESERVED
   [Reserved]
CHAPTER 26: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
Article 1. Citation, Purpose, Nature and Application of Zoning Ordinance
26-101 Citation
26-102 Purpose
26-103 Nature and application
26-104 Zoning districts
26-105 Definitions
26-106 Interpretation of district boundaries
26-107 Schedule of fees and charges
26-108 Zoning procedure
Article 2. Specific District Regulations
26-201 A-1 General Agricultural District
26-201-1 General description
26-201-2 Uses permitted
26-201-3 Area regulations
26-201-4 Height regulations
26-202 R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District
26-202-1 General description
26-202-2 Uses permitted
26-202-3 Uses permitted on review
26-202-4 Area regulations
26-202-5 Height regulations
26-202-6 Freestanding mobile home regulations
26-203 R-2 General Residential District
26-203-1 General description
26-203-2 Uses permitted
26-203-3 Uses permitted on review
26-203-4 Area regulations
26-203-5 Height regulations
26-203-6 Mobile home park regulations
26-204 C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
26-204-1 General description
26-204-2 Uses permitted
26-204-3 Area regulations
26-204-4 Height requirements
26-205 C-2 General Commercial District
26-205-1 General description
26-205-2 Uses permitted
26-205-3 Open display uses permitted
26-205-4 Area regulations
26-206 I-1 Restricted Manufacturing and Warehousing District
26-206-1 General description
26-206-2 Uses permitted
26-206-3 Area regulations
26-206-4 Height regulations
26-207 I-2 Industrial District
26-207-1 General description
26-207-2 Uses permitted
26-207-3 Uses permitted on review
26-207-4 Area regulations
26-207-5 Height regulations
Article 3. General Provisions Applying to All or to Several Districts
26-301 Application of regulation to uses of more restricted district
26-302 Open space
26-303 Group housing projects
26-304 Architectural design of accessory buildings and fences
26-305 Animals
26-306 Storage of liquefied petroleum gas
26-307 Off-street automobile and vehicle parking and loading
26-307-1 General intent and application
26-307-2 Open space required
26-307-3 Location
26-307-4 Joint parking facilities
26-307-5 Size of off-street parking space
26-307-6 Amount of off-street parking and loading required
26-307-7 Off-street parking lots in residential districts
26-308 Mobile homes, travel, camping, house trailers and tiny homes
26-309 Portable storage containers and roll-off trash containers
Article 4. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses of Land
26-401 Nonconforming buildings and structures
26-401-1 Continuation of existing nonconforming building or structure
26-401-2 Alteration or enlargement of buildings and structures
26-401-3 Outdoor advertising signs and structures
26-401-4 Building vacancy
26-401-5 Change in use
26-402 Nonconforming uses of land
Article 5. Board of Adjustment
26-501 Board of Zoning Adjustment and methods of appeal
26-502 Membership
26-503 Procedure
26-504 Appeals
26-505 Powers
26-506 Appeal to district court
Article 6. Administration
26-601 Violations and penalties
26-602 Amendments; hearing
26-603 Vacation of public easements
26-604 Invalidity of part
ARTICLE 1. CITATION, PURPOSE, NATURE AND APPLICATION OF
ZONING ORDINANCE
§ 26-101 CITATION.
   This chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by the legislature of
the state in 11 O.S. §§ 36-401 through 36-410, shall be known as the “Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Lexington,” and may be cited as such.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-102 PURPOSE.
   The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage most appropriate
uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to reduce fire
hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health; to decrease
traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue concentration
of population; and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses
upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks,
public utilities and other facilities. In interpreting and applying the
provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be necessary for the
promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-103 NATURE AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the city, as hereinafter set forth,
by dividing the city into zones and regulating therein the use of the land and
the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage
of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of
buildings and the density of population.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no
building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved,
altered, enlarged or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be used
or maintained for any purpose or in any matter except in conformity with the
regulations contained herein.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-104 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into zones. The zoning map, as amended, and
all explanatory materials thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.
Zoning districts shall be designated as follows.
 
Agricultural district A-1 General Agricultural District
Commercial districts  C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
                      C-2 General Commercial District
Industrial districts  I-1 Restricted Manufacturing and Warehousing District
                      I-2 Industrial District
Residential districts R-1 Single-family Dwelling District
                      R-2 General Residential District
 
   (B)   Specific district regulations are set forth in Article 2 of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular
number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular,
except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The
word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the dominant use of the building or premises.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to
the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith.
   ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE. Any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden,
plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any
character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising
purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building
or structure. For the purpose of this definition, PLACED shall include
erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing,
sticking, carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any
manner whatsoever. The area of an ADVERTISING STRUCTURE shall be determined as
the area of the largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional,
warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their
public duties, nor merchandise or material being offered for sale shall be
construed as ADVERTISING SIGNS for the purpose of this chapter.
   AGRICULTURE.
      (1)   The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
storing or treating the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.
      (2)   The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards and auction
yards for horses, cattle or hogs shall be deemed an industrial and not an
AGRICULTURAL use.
   ALLEY. A public passage or way affording a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. See definition of DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.
   AUTOMOBILE. A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets
and highways for the conveyance of goods and people, including, but not limited
to, the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters and
motorcycles.
   BASEMENT. A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height
measurement, a BASEMENT shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of
its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided
for three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons on a weekly basis.
   BUILDING. Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for
persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings,
each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate
BUILDING.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average line of the highest
and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the
highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or
to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
   CHILDCARE CENTER. Any place, home or institution which receives three or
more children under the age of 16 years, and not of common parentage, for care
apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when received
for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this
definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or
approved under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public
institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their
parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes or
other church activities.
   COVERAGE. The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including
the area covered by all overhanging roofs, including carports.
   DISTRICT. Any section or sections of the city for which the regulations
governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and coverage of
buildings and their structures are uniform for each class or kind of building
therein.
   DWELLING. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as a
living quarters for one or more families, but not including trailer homes (see
definition of trailer home, mobile home or house trailer).
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by
three or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of hotels
or motels.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one
family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by two
families living independently of each other.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a
group not to exceed five persons not all related by blood or marriage,
occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for
group use.
   GARAGE APARTMENT. A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private
garage.
   GARAGE, PARKING. Any building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of
four or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is
incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities
are not provided.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or part of a main building used for
storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their
guests of the building to which it is an accessory.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles.
   GASOLINE SERVICE OR FILLING STATION. Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, or other
automobile accessories, and incidental services include facilities for
lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but
not including painting, major repair or automatic automobile washing, or the
sale of butane or propane fuels.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of the
dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which
is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided, that no
trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no
display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one non-illuminated
nameplate not more than two square feet in area attached to the main or
accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used, except such as is
customary for purely domestic or household purposes. A beauty shop or
barbershop, tearoom or restaurant, rest home or clinic, doctor’s or dentist’s
office, childcare center, tourist home or cabinet, metal or auto repair shop
shall not be deemed as a HOME OCCUPATION.
   HOTEL. A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six
or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without
meals for compensation, but not including trailer court or camp, sanatorium,
hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under
restraint.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which are kept four or more dogs, more than
six months of age.
   LOT. Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main
building, or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings and uses,
including such open spaces as are required by this chapter and other laws or
ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street.
   LOT AREA. The total area measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot
lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their
full lengths on a street; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection
of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.
   LOT, DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT, FRONTAGE. The dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   MEDICAL FACILITIES.
      (1)   CONVALESCENT, REST OR NURSING HOME. A health facility where persons
are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for
compensation.
      (2)   DENTAL CLINIC or MEDICAL CLINIC. A facility for the examination and
treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients; provided, that patients are
not kept overnight, except under emergency conditions.
      (3)   DENTAL OFFICE OR DOCTOR’S OFFICE. Same as DENTAL CLINIC or MEDICAL
CLINIC.
      (4)   HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services primarily for
human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral
part of the facilities.
      (5)   PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER. A facility primarily utilized by a health
unit for providing public health services, including related facilities, such
as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection
therewith.
      (6)   SANATORIUM. An institution providing health facilities for
inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural
therapeutic agents.
   MOBILE HOME. See definition of TRAILER HOME, MOBILE HOME or HOUSE TRAILER.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons. A building which has
accommodations for more than 20 persons shall be defined as a HOTEL under the
terms of this chapter.
   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY OR DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT. Any attended or
unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public
for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from or dry-cleaning
wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics and textiles of any kind by means of a
mechanical appliance which is operated primarily by the customer.
   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if
there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor
level, and which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished
off for use. A HALF STORY containing independent apartment or living quarters
shall be counted as a full story.
   STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of access to abutting property.
   STREET, INTERSECTING. Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in roof or in the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or which is attached to something having location on the
ground.
   TINY HOME. A small house typically consisting of 400 square feet or less;
either on wheels or a foundation.
      (1)   A structure on a single chassis, mounted on axle(s) and wheels is
considered a recreational vehicle. If the TINY HOME is mounted on axle(s) and
wheels then the home must comply with all zoning regulations pertaining to
recreational vehicles.
      (2)   A structure on a foundation. If the TINY HOME is on a foundation,
then the tiny home must comply with all zoning regulations pertaining to
dwellings.
   TOURIST COURT. An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended
to be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient persons or
families and intended primarily for automobile transients.
   TOURIST HOME. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in not more than
four rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
   TRAILER COURT or MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership
which has been designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for
occupancy by one or more trailer houses or mobile homes.
   TRAILER, HAULING. A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which
is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including
boats.
   TRAILER HOME, MOBILE HOME or HOUSE TRAILER. A portable or mobile living unit
used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis.
   TRAILER HOME OR MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a trailer court
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
   TRAILER, TRAVEL or CAMPING. A portable or mobile living unit used for
temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants,
and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants.
   TRAVEL OR CAMPING TRAILER PARK OR CAMP. A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been designed or improved or is intended to be used or
rented for occupancy by one or more travel trailers or camping trailers or
other camping unit either attached to or detached from the prime mover.
   YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except where otherwise specified in this chapter that the building or
structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building.
In measuring a YARD for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard,
the depth of a front or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal
distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building
and descending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the
main building.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the
lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and
interior lots, the REAR YARD shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the
lot from the front yard.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of
the main building.
(Ord. passed 7-2001; Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-6-2018)
§ 26-106 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines,
such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed
to be said boundaries.
   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as indicated on
the zoning maps.
   (D)   Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located on the easement line to which it is
closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement,
unless otherwise designated.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-107 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.
   It is the intent of this chapter that the city shall not be required to bear
any part of the cost of applications or petitions, and that fees and charges
herein set out represent the actual cost of legal advertising, postage,
clerical, filing and other costs in the processing of applications and
petitions. Fees paid are not returnable.
   (A)   Application for rezoning of land shall be $100.
   (B)   Application for a permissive use shall be $150.
(Ord. 2003-07, passed 12-2-2003)
§ 26-108 ZONING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The owner of the subject property, or the City Council, shall submit a
letter of interest to rezone said property three weeks prior to the Planning
Commission meeting with the following information: name of applicant, street
address or location, legal description, existing zoning, proposed zoning and
proposed use.
   (B)   The application shall include:
      (1)   Copy of deed to land, or executed instrument of ownership;
      (2)   Preliminary plat for rezoning or subdivision tract; and
      (3)   Site plan in petitions for commercial or industrial zoning of one
acre or more; or multi-family dwelling of more than two units.
   (C)   A public hearing on the proposed petition shall be placed on the
agenda for the next Planning Commission meeting, allowing for at least 15 days’
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Public notice
must be posted on subject property ten days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall submit a recommendation to the City
Council at the Council’s next meeting. The Council shall proceed to approve or
deny said petition. If approved, an ordinance shall be advertised and adopted.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
ARTICLE 2. SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 26-201 A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
§ 26-201-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   This district is intended to provide an area primarily for either
agricultural endeavors involving 20 or more acres under one ownership or the
extraction of the various products, such as oil, minerals, rock and gravel from
the earth. The rural nature and low density of population in this district
requires only that uses essential to agriculture, mining, quarrying and
extraction have a reasonable setback of buildings from streets and/or highways.
It is the purpose of this district to encourage and protect such uses from
urbanization until such is warranted and the appropriate change in district
classification is made.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-201-2 USES PERMITTED.
   Property and buildings in an A-1 General Agricultural District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Single-family dwelling structure for farm owner, operator or employee;
   (B)   All agricultural land uses, buildings and activities;
   (C)   Mining, quarrying and extraction industries;
   (D)   Drilling for and excavation of, oil and natural gas in accordance with
the ordinances of the city;
   (E)   Transportation, pipeline and utility easements and rights-of-way;
   (F)   Temporary roadside stands for the sale of farm and non-farm products
to include items not grown on the premises. Each vendor selling product at said
stand(s) must obtain a garage sale permit from the city. The fee shall be that
charged for garage sale permits at the time of application and shall be for a
period of three consecutive days. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the stand(s) to make certain that each vendor has a current permit, but only
vendors are required to have a permit. Vendors without a permit shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100 per day plus court costs;
   (G)   All the following uses:
      (1)   Airport or landing field;
      (2)   Cemetery;
      (3)   Church;
      (4)   Country club;
      (5)   Golf course;
      (6)   Home occupation;
      (7)   Library;
      (8)   Municipal use;
      (9)   Park or playground;
      (10)   Plant nursery;
      (11)   Public stable or riding area;
      (12)   Public utility buildings and facilities; and
      (13)   School.
   (H)   Accessory buildings which are not part of the main building, including
barns, sheds and other farm buildings, private garages and accessory buildings
which are a part of the main building.
(Ord. passed 7-2001; Ord. 2020-04, passed 12-1-2020)
§ 26-201-3 AREA REGULATIONS.
   All buildings shall be set back from the street rights-of-way lines to
comply with the following yard requirements, except as hereinafter provided in
§
26-302.
   (A)   Front yard.
      (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet.
      (2)   When a yard has double frontage, the yard requirements shall be
provided on both streets.
   (B)   Side yard and rear yard. There are no side yard or rear yard setback
requirements for either main or accessory buildings, except that clusters of
three or more dwellings on one parcel of land under one ownership shall be
located on the parcel in such a manner that each dwelling will comply with the
minimum side yard and rear yard requirements as set forth below, in the event
that one or more of the homesites is conveyed to a second party.
      (1)   For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than seven feet for dwellings of
one story, and of not less than ten feet for dwellings of more than one story,
except as hereinafter provided in §
26-302 of this chapter.
      (2)   For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story
buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three
feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building
are located more than 90 feet behind the front line.
      (3)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15
feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in
every other case; provided, however, that the side yard setback adjacent to a
federal, state or county highway and section line road shall be the same as the
front yard setback required on these facilities. The interior side yard on a
corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an
interior lot.
      (4)   Churches and main accessory buildings, other than dwellings and
buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all interior side lot
lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. The side yard setback from the
intersecting street on the corner lot shall be the same as required for
residential uses in division (B)(3) below.
      (5)   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20
feet or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached
buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
   (C)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   For a one-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less
than 10,000 square feet for each dwelling and building accessory thereto,
except as hereinafter provided in §
26-302 of this chapter.
      (2)   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the lines of
that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date hereof, that
lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches, permitted by this
section.
      (3)   For churches and main accessory buildings, other than dwellings and
buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the
yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required
in Article 3 of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church
shall not be less than 21,000 square feet, and for each increment in seating
capacity of 20 persons which exceeds a seating capacity of 100 persons in the
main auditorium, an additional 3,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided.
   (D)   Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 25%
of the lot area on interior lots and 30% of the lot area on corner lots;
accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20% of the rear yard.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-201-4 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height,
except as provided in §
26-303 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-202 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
§ 26-202-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use
of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and
educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive
residential area.
   (B)   These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from
the encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment.
   (C)   Stability of property values, attractiveness, order and efficiency are
encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings
and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional
relationship of the different uses.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-202-2 USES PERMITTED.
   Property and buildings in an R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District shall be
used only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Detached one-family dwelling;
   (B)   Churches, but not including missions or revival tents or arbors;
   (C)   Public school or school offering general education courses the same as
ordinarily given in public schools and having no rooms regularly used for
housing and sleeping;
   (D)   Public park or playground;
   (E)   Library;
   (F)   Home occupation;
   (G)   Transportation and utility easements, alleys and rights-of-way;
   (H)   Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building, including
one private garage, or accessory buildings which are a part of the main
building, including one private garage;
   (I)   A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in
area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which
board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or
sold;
   (J)   A church bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 15 square feet in area,
attached to the main building or located behind the front building line on the
same lot with the church building;
   (K)   Temporary buildings of the construction industry which are incidental
to the erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be
removed when construction work is completed; and
   (L)   Parking lot required to serve the uses permitted in this district.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-202-3 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions contained in §
26-505 of this chapter:
   (A)   Municipal use, public building and public utility;
   (B)   Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in
connection therewith; and
   (C)   Golf course or country club.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-5-2016)
§ 26-202-4 AREA REGULATIONS.
   All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way and lot lines to
comply with the following yard requirements.
   (A)   Front yard.
      (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet.
      (2)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be complied with on both side streets.
   (B)   Side yard.
      (1)   For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than five feet for dwellings of
one story, and of not less than ten feet for dwellings of more than one story,
except as hereinafter provided in §
26-302 of this chapter.
      (2)   For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story
buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three
feet from the interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building
are located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line.
      (3)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15
feet, in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in
every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as
for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
   (C)   Rear lot. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less
than 20 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller.
Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main
building.
   (D)   Lot width. For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 50
feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a
distance of not less than 35 feet.
   (E)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   For each dwelling, and building accessory thereto, there shall be a
lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet.
      (2)   For churches and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and
buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the
yard areas required by §
26-302 of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall
not be less than 14,000 square feet.
   (F)   Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 25%
of the lot area of interior lots and 30% of the lot area of corner lots.
Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20% of the rear yard.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-202-5 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height,
except as provided in §
26-303 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-202-6 FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME. A mobile home not located in an approved mobile
home park.
      MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle designed so as to permit occupancy thereof as
sleeping quarters for one or more persons which may be mounted on wheels and
not propelled by its own power and not designed to run on stationary rails and
which has been factory equipped with at least one water closet, one bathtub or
shower, one lavatory and one kitchen sink.
      TRAVEL TRAILERS. A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary
human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants. It is a
vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis; and designed to be used for a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation purposes, which:
         (a)   Is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a travel
trailer;
         (b)   Is not more than eight feet in body width; and
         (c)   Is of any weight, provided its body length does not exceed 29
feet, or is of any length, provided its gross weight, factory-equipped for the
road, does not exceed 4,500 pounds.
   (B)   Freestanding mobile home permit; location; other regulations.
      (1)   (a)   After approval of the permissive or nonconforming use as a
freestanding mobile home site by the Board of Adjustment, the owner of the site
shall request the Clerk for inspection. Upon payment by the owner of the
necessary inspection fees in the amount then charged by the city, the Building
Inspector shall make an inspection and shall notify the City Clerk on regular
form as to whether or not the site and mobile home meets the requirements of
this chapter. Upon the approval of the Building Inspector, the City Clerk will
issue a permit for the freestanding mobile home site and accept any and all
deposits required for utility hookup.
         (b)   Permits for freestanding mobile homes shall be issued by the
Building Inspector for the applicant but only after the applicant has obtained
the written consent of at least 60% of the property owners outside the subject
tract and within 300 feet of the property boundary line of the subject tract.
      (2)   A freestanding mobile home shall not be located, parked or stored
on any such tract of land where dwellings of residents are not permitted under
the zoning ordinances of the city.
      (3)   A freestanding mobile home shall be subject to and required to
comply with the Building Code as the same applies to a dwelling. A freestanding
mobile home shall be subject to all inspections and inspection fees applicable
to a dwelling under the Building Code, Electrical Code and Plumbing Code, and
the health ordinances. A freestanding mobile home shall be subject to, and
comply with, the provisions of all ordinances, including, but not limited to,
ordinances pertaining to disposal of refuse, waste and sewage safety, water
supply, garbage, drainage, fire prevention, health inspections and Health
Department licenses and approvals, where applicable, and as may be determined
and required by the Health Inspector.
      (4)   Specific requirements for skirting shall be: Skirting is required
and shall be permanently attached, made of durable material and compatible with
the mobile home and surrounding area.
      (5)   Specific requirements for tie downs shall be: Over-the-top and
frame ties at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional
ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long
requiring one additional tie per side. All components of the anchorage system
shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; any additions to the
mobile home shall be similarly anchored.
      (6)   Freestanding mobile homes which do not comply with the standards
adopted in this chapter shall exist as nonconforming uses and may be continued
in accordance with Article 4 of this chapter.
      (7)   A freestanding mobile home which is intended to replace a
freestanding mobile home must meet the following criteria: it must be installed
within one year from the time the original mobile home was removed; and it must
not be more than five years old, unless the City Inspector issues a certificate
of approval after a thorough inspection. The mobile home owner must pay an
inspection fee of $50 to the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-203 R-2 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
§ 26-203-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   This is a residential district to provide for medium and high population
density. The principal use of land may range from single-family to multi-family
and garden apartment uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally
with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted. The
recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide
an orderly and attractive residential area are permitted. Stability of property
values, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for
adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and
through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each use
permitted in the district.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-203-2 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Any use permitted in an R-1 Residential District;
   (B)   Two-family dwelling;
   (C)   Multiple-family dwelling;
   (D)   Rooming or boarding house;
   (E)   Garage apartment, when located on a separate lot or on the same lot
with another dwelling use; and
   (F)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses
when located on the same lot.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-203-3 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with provisions contained in §
26-505 of this chapter:
   (A)   Any use permitted on review in an R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District;
   (B)   Childcare center;
   (C)   Home beauty shop located in a dwelling, provided such shop is
conducted within the main dwelling, and is operated only by the inhabitants
thereof and does not exceed two operators. The use shall be conducted in such a
way that is clearly incidental to the dwelling use and shall not change the
character thereof. No sign shall be permitted, except one non-illuminated
nameplate, not exceeding two square feet in area, attached to the main
building;
   (D)   Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature;
   (E)   Private clubs and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which
is a service customarily carried on as a business;
   (F)   Medical facility;
   (G)   Mobile home park; and
   (H)   An off-street parking lot associated with a commercial use as required
under the provisions of §
26-307 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-203-4 AREA REGULATIONS.
   All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines or lot
lines to comply with the following yard requirements.
   (A)   Front yard.
      (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet.
      (2)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall
be complied with on both side streets.
   (B)   Side yard.
      (1)   For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard
on each side of the main building of not less than five feet for dwellings of
one story, and of not less than ten feet for dwellings of more than one story,
except as hereinafter provided in §
26-302 of this chapter.
      (2)   For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one-story
buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three
feet from the interior side lot when all parts of the accessory building are
located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line.
      (3)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15
feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and 20 feet in
every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as
for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
      (4)   Mobile home parks authorized under the provisions of §
26-203-3 of this article shall be planned in such a manner that no trailer, or
related building, shall be located closer than ten feet to any side lot lines.
      (5)   Churches and main accessory buildings, other than dwellings and
dwellings accessory to dwellings and trailers, shall set back from all interior
side lot lines a distance of not less than 25 feet.
   (C)   Rear yard.
      (1)   For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a
rear yard of not less than 20 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever is
smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard
of a main building.
      (2)   Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another
dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line.
   (D)   Lot width.
      (1)   There shall be a minimum lot width of 50 feet at the front building
line for single-family dwellings and ten feet additional width at the front
building line for each family, more than one, occupying a dwelling.
      (2)   However, a lot width at the front building line shall not be
required to exceed 150 feet. A lot shall abut onto a street for a distance of
not less than 35 feet.
   (E)   Intensity of use.
      (1)   There shall be a lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet for a
single-family dwelling, not less than 8,000 square feet for a two-family
dwelling, and an additional area of not less than 2,000 square feet for each
family, more than two, occupying a dwelling.
      (2)   There shall be a lot area of not less than 8,000 square feet where
a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling.
When a garage apartment is located in the rear yard of a two-family or multi-
family dwelling, the lot areas shall be not less than 2,000 square feet more
than is required for the two-family or multi-family dwelling.
      (3)   For churches and main accessory buildings, other than dwellings and
buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the
yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking area required in
§
26-307 of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall
not be less than 14,000 square feet.
   (F)   Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 35%
of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30% of the rear
yard.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-203-5 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No buildings shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height,
except as provided in §
26-303 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-203-6 MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for areas
within the corporate boundaries of the city, wherein the location and
development of manufactured housing, mobile homes, mobile home parks, trailer
parks, manufactured and manufactured home subdivisions and modular housing
units or additions may be safely continued and encouraged. The regulations set
forth in this section are designed to promote stable neighborhoods, prevent
health and safety hazards and encourage the economical and orderly development
and operation of manufactured housing and mobile home parks and subdivisions,
trailer parks and modular housing units and additions.
      (2)   Any existing parks which do not comply with the expressed intent
and standards adopted herein shall exist as nonconforming uses and may be
continued in accordance with Article 4 of this chapter.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit constructed to be towed on its own
chassis and capable of connection to utilities for year-round occupancy
fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with
transport features removed, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in
compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more
manufactured homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located,
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for the accommodations.
      MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. Any plot of ground within a manufactured home
park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home, and not located
on a mobile home sales lot.
      MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision designed and intended for
residential use, where residence is in mobile homes or manufactured housing
exclusively, and lots are sold for occupancy.
      MOBILE HOME. A structure of vehicular portable design, designed or
manufactured for human occupancy, built on a chassis, designed to be moved from
one site to another, and to be used with or without a permanent foundation,
whether or not the wheels have been attached thereto or removed, and which was
built prior to the enacting of the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., or before June 15, 1976.
      MODULAR HOME. A prefabricated building that consists of repeated sections
called modules. Modularity involves constructing sections away from the
building site, then delivering them to the intended site. Installation of the
prefabricated sections is complete on-site.
      PARK. A mobile/manufactured home and/or travel trailer park or
subdivision.
      PARK MODEL. A unique trailer-type recreational vehicle (RV) that is
designed to provide temporary accommodation for recreation, camping or seasonal
use. A PARK MODEL RV is built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels and having
a gross trailer area not exceeding 400 square feet in the set-up mode.
      TINY HOME. The tiny-house movement (also known as the “small-house
movement’‘) is an architectural and social movement that advocates living
simply in small homes. Within the context of this movement, a TINY HOME is a
dwelling not more than 400 square feet that is built with materials and
durability approximating a standard residential dwelling.
      TRAVEL TRAILER. All vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation use.
      TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more travel
trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of
whether or not a charge is made for the accommodations.
      TRAVEL TRAILER SPACE. A plot of ground within a travel trailer park
designed for accommodation of one travel trailer.
   (C)   Permit fees.
      (1)   Permit for manufactured homes, mobile homes and tiny homes. All
manufactured homes, mobile homes and tiny homes must pay a special permit fee
of $30 within 30 days of entrance into city limits, which shall exist over and
above the current $50 general permit fee. The city will not install the power
meter until the manufactured home, mobile home or tiny home is found to be in
full compliance with this requirement and all other requirements applicable
herein.
      (2)   Permit for temporary travel trailer parking.
         (a)   No truck, trailer, travel trailer (including recreational
vehicle), bus or other vehicle exceeding two axles and/or in excess of a length
of 20 feet or more shall be allowed to park on any street within city limits,
the principal use of which is for residential living activities, at any time
except as provided for within division (C)(3) below or for the immediate
loading or unloading of persons or materials. Parking may be permitted upon a
private driveway or alongside a residence for purposes of visitation of family
or friends for up to a 14-day period, and only then when not in violation of
any other provision of this chapter.
         (b)   Permits for up to 14 days for parking a travel trailer within
city limits, whether upon a private driveway or alongside a residence, will be
$10 and must be obtained from City Hall prior to engaging in any temporary
residential living activity therein.
         (c)   Under no circumstances shall a travel trailer be parked for a
period exceeding 14 days under this section without express permission from the
City Manager.
       (3)   Permit for temporary travel trailer during extensive remodel of
residence.
         (a)   No truck trailer, travel trailer (including recreational
vehicle), bus or other vehicle exceeding two axles and/or in excess of a length
of 20 feet or more shall be allowed to park on any street within city limits,
the principal use of which is for residential living activities, at any time
except as provided for within division (C)(2) above or during the period of
time in which an owner is remodeling his or her residence if such remodel is
extensive enough to require the owner to temporarily vacate such residence. In
such cases. the owner of such residence may park a travel trailer upon the same
property upon which the residence is located upon application and receipt of a
permit as provided for immediately below.
         (b)   Permits for temporarily parking a travel trailer during an
extensive remodel of a residence will be $50 per month, may be purchased at one
time for periods not to exceed one year and must be obtained from City Hall
prior to engaging in any temporary residential living activity therein.
         (c)   Travel trailers must not be parked during an extensive remodel
of a residence for more than one year without permission by the City Manager.
The City Manager may grant an extension of time in which a travel trailer may
be parked during an extensive remodel of a residence based on all attendant
circumstances. A permit must be obtained for all months in which the travel
trailer is actually parked upon the owner’s property at a rate of $50 per
month, without proration.
   (D)   Mobile homes and travel trailers generally.
      (1)   No manufactured or mobile homes shall be permitted within the
corporate limits of the city, unless it is being offered for sale or parked for
storage or located within a designated mobile home park, space or subdivision.
      (2)   Except for mobile homes or manufactured or mobile homes within
regular commercial mobile home or travel trailer sales lots, each mobile home
or travel trailer offered for sale, must be clearly marked as such and shall
not be occupied for either living or sleeping purposes.
      (3)   Travel trailers are generally prohibited within the city for
residential living activities except as provided for within divisions (C)(2)
and (C)(3) above, and upon payment of the required permit fees set forth
therein.
   (E)   Licensing, application and other regulations.
      (1)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish,
operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained, upon
any property controlled or owned by him or her, a manufactured home park/
subdivision or travel trailer park without having first secured a license
therefor and having paid the proper fee for inspection of the construction of
such park. Such license shall expire one year from the date of issue and may be
renewed annually upon written application to the City Clerk.
      (2)   Application for license. Any person desiring a license for the
operation of a park shall file application therefor with the City Clerk, and
pay to the City Clerk the sum of $20 per unit per year, and file a corporate
surety bond in the sum of $5,000 for new park unit compliance with the
requirements of this division (E)(2) during the term of said permit. The
application shall state the name and address of the owner of land involved and
the legal description of the premises upon which the park is to be located. The
licenses issued under the terms of this division (E)(2) shall not convey any
right to erect any buildings or to perform or cause to be performed any
electrical or plumbing work without compliance with other applicable ordinances
with reference thereto of the city.
      (3)   Plans and specifications. Any person desiring to construct and/or
operate a manufactured home park/subdivision or travel trailer park within the
corporate city limits shall file with the City Clerk an application for license
along with one complete set of plans and specifications for all improvements to
be placed upon the property. The plans for the area shall show the entire area
to be used together with improvements on adjoining property, if any, roads and
driveways within the park, locations on sites or lots and abutting streets and
alleys, locations of water lines, gas lines, sewer lines, electrical lines and
other utilities and plans for electrical street lighting, and any other
necessary information that the City Council issued. Prior to the issuance of
any such area according to said plans and specifications, within a time
specified by the City Council, which may be one and the same bond as that
required by division (E)(2) above.
   (F)   Manufactured home site requirements.
      (1)   No occupied manufactured home or building of any nature shall be
located within city limits nearer to the roads or streets than the applicable
setback line for the zoning district in which such manufactured home is
located. Side yards and back yards between homesites shall not be less than
required by ordinance for the zone in which the park is located.
      (2)   Every manufactured home park shall be located on an area having
good drainage of surface waters, and fire hydrants shall be installed every 500
feet or less along the streets therein.
      (3)   All sites or lots shall be clearly designated, and the park so
arranged that all sites about on a driveway or street at least 24 feet in
width, giving access to all units from a public street. All driveways and roads
within the park shall be paved so as to have natural drainage and shall be well
lighted at night and unobstructed.
      (4)   All sites abutting a street or drive of less than 30 feet in width
shall have at least one off-street parking space.
      (5)   Connections for sanitary sewer facilities, water, gas and
electricity shall be provided in a common location at each manufactured home
site. Electrical connections must be sufficient for a 200-amp circuit and a
200-amp circuit breaker installed at each site.
      (6)   Every manufactured home site shall be provided with garbage
disposal facilities according to the provisions of the city ordinances.
      (7)   Each site shall be improved by the construction of a 200 square
foot concrete patio.
      (8)   Each manufactured home is to be placed on a foundation to consist
of a series of concrete or metal blocks or piers on concrete pads with a
bearing area of at least 144 square inches or equivalent, bearing pads to be
spaced not more than ten feet apart along both sides of the manufactured home.
In addition, each manufactured home must be tied down and must be firmly
fastened to the ground to meet existing city ordinances as R-l Zoning, §
26-202-6 of this article.
   (G)   Manufactured home required area.
      (1)   In a manufactured home park, there shall not be more than ten
manufactured home spaces per acre, inclusive of streets, alleys and public
ways.
      (2)   Recreation and playground area shall be designated and consist of
not less than 5% of the total area within the confines of said park and shall
be maintained by the owner of the park.
   (H)   Manufactured homes generally.
      (1)   No manufactured homes older than ten years of age from the date the
applicable building permit application is submitted shall be permitted within
the corporate limits of the city.
      (2)   The City Council may, at the recommendation of the Board of
Adjustments, elect to allow a manufactured home older than ten years of age to
be permitted within the corporate limits of the city if the Council determines
that the subject manufactured home is in excellent condition and its inclusion
within the city limits would not harm or otherwise deter the purpose as is
stated within §
26-203-6(A) herein.
   (I)   Manufactured homes requirements, inspection. Every manufactured home
must be equipped with the following, which must be in working order:
      (1)   Sanitary facilities. Every manufactured home shall contain not less
than a kitchen sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower and a water closet all in
working condition when property connected to an approved water and sewer
system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in sanitary
working condition free from leaks and obstructions.
      (2)   Hot and cold-water supply. Every manufactured home must have a
kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower that is connected to a supply of
both cold and hot water.
      (3)   Water heating facilities. Every manufactured home shall have water-
heating facilities in safe, working condition.
      (4)   Heating facilities. Every manufactured home must have heating
facilities in safe, working condition.
         (a)   Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for
gas heaters listed for un-vented use and the total input rating of the un-
vented heaters is less than 20 BTU per hour per cubic foot of room content.
         (b)   Un-vented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms
and bathrooms.
         (c)   In lieu of inspecting the heating facilities of a manufactured
home, the city may request a heating inspection by a third party who is
qualified to inspect such facilities. Approval by such a person will be
accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established
herein which pertain to heating systems.
      (5)   Smoke detectors. Every manufactured home must have approved listed
smoke detectors installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations
and listing.
      (6)   Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens and
hallways shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to
the outdoors.
      (7)   Ventilation. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens and
hallways shall have at least one window which can be opened or such other
device that will ventilate the room.
      (8)   Electrical. All electrical components shall be in safe, working
condition. Approval by a third party who is qualified to inspect electrical
components will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety
standards established herein which pertain to electrical systems.
         (a)   Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved
listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings
covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections
shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible.
         (b)   The electrical system (including, but not limited to, switches,
receptacles, fixtures and the like) shall be properly installed, wired and
shall be in working condition. All manufactured homes shall be subjected to
electrical continuity test(s) in order to ensure all metallic parts are
properly bonded.
      (9)   Exterior walls. The exterior of all manufactured homes shall be
free or loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might
admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied
spaces of the manufactured home.
      (10)   Exterior siding. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust
and must be uniform in appearance.
      (11)   Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious
defects, which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior
portion of the home.
      (12)   Interior floors, walls and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or
moisture.
      (13)   Skirting. All manufactured homes, whether in a park or not, must
be skirted prior to occupancy. No vinyl skirting will be authorized. Block,
brick, metal or other high-quality skirting material approved by the city may
be authorized. All skirting must be vented in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions or at least one vent per 150 square
feet of the home. Ventilation by other means may be approved by the city if it
is found to meet the intent expressed herein. This provision shall not apply to
those manufactured homes within a pre-existing, lawfully approved community
having a common aesthetic theme prior to the passage of this section.
      (14)   Porches and steps. All exterior doors must have a least a four-
foot by four-foot landing deck or platform, with railing on all open sides.
This provision shall not apply to those manufactured homes within a pre-
existing, lawfully approved community having a common aesthetic theme prior to
the passage of this section.
   (J)   Permitted locations and type by zone, requirements of zones.
      (1)   Zones defined.
 
Zone A From the east side of 6th Street to the east city boundary
Zone B From the west side of 6th Street to the east side of 2nd Street
Zone C From the west side of 2nd Street to the west city boundary
 
      (2)   Permitted home type by zone.
 
Zone A No manufactured, modular, park model or tiny homes will be permitted.
Zone B Only new multi-section manufactured or multi-section modular homes will
       be permitted.
       Any manufactured or modular or tiny home or any new single or multi-
Zone C section manufactured or modular homes will be allowed.
       Park model homes will be allowed only so long as they are confined to an
       applicable park as defined herein.
Notes to Table:
Any home sited in Zone C must ensure the base floor of the home is at least six
inches off the base flood elevation. The base floor of the home shall be
defined as top of the I-beam or top of the bottom rim joist if no I-beam is
present.
 
      (3)   Other general requirements.
         (a)   All applicants seeking installation of a home in any zone must
obtain at least 60% approval from the property owners within 300 feet of the
proposed home situs. A consent form will be provided by city office for the
applicant to attempt to acquire the required signatures evidencing consent.
         (b)   Nothing in this section shall operate to supersede any
covenants, conditions or restrictions filed or recorded on behalf of a
subdivision.
         (c)   All manufactured, modular, park or tiny homes sited within any
of the above-described zones shall be occupied by the owner thereof. The intent
of this requirement is to foster home ownership and not rental residences.
   (K)   Additional requirements, prohibitions, installation and inspection.
      (1)   Installation and inspection. Requirements regarding installation of
all manufactured homes shall be according to the standards set by the O.A.C.
Title 765: Used Motor Vehicle and Parts Commission, Chapter 37 - Manufactured
Home Installers, as amended, or the manufacturer’s installation instructions or
a professional engineer’s instructions. The city code enforcement officer or
his or her authorized representative shall inspect each manufactured, modular,
park model or tiny home for compliance with the installation standards provided
herein, paying particular attention to anchoring/securing of the home in place.
      (2)   Additional requirements.
         (a)   A zoning compliance permit shall be required for all
manufactured, modular, park model or tiny homes brought into the corporate
limits of the city.
         (b)   All manufactured, modular, park model or tiny homes shall meet
the manufacturer’s specifications regarding safeguarding from high winds.
      (3)   Prohibitions. No person shall join two manufactured, modular, park
model, mobile, travel trailer or tiny homes, or a combination thereof, with any
other structure, or any other like units or structures to make a single
dwelling within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. passed 7-2001; Ord. 2021-02, passed 4-6-2021; Ord. 23-011, passed 11-7-
2023; Ord. 24-009, passed 5-7-2024)
§ 26-204 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT.
§ 26-204-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   This commercial district is for the conduct of retail trade and personal
service enterprises to meet the regular needs and for the convenience of the
people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be an
integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential,
religious, recreational and educational uses, more restrictive requirements for
light, air, open space and off-street parking are made than are provided in
other commercial districts.
§ 26-204-2 USES PERMITTED.
   Property and buildings in a C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Any use permitted in an R-2 Residential District;
   (B)   Any use permitted on review in an R-2 Residential District;
   (C)   Retail stores and shops which supply the regular and customary needs
of the residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their
convenience, as follows:
      (1)   Antique shop;
      (2)   Appliance store;
      (3)   Art school, gallery or museum;
      (4)   Artists materials, supply studio;
      (5)   Auto court or tourist court;
      (6)   Automobile parking lot;
      (7)   Baby shop;
      (8)   Bakery goods store;
      (9)   Barbershop;
      (10)   Beauty shop;
      (11)   Book or stationery store;
      (12)   Camera shop;
      (13)   Candy store;
      (14)   Catering establishment;
      (15)   Cleaning, pressing, laundry collection agency;
      (16)   Curio or gift shop;
      (17)   Dairy products or ice cream store;
      (18)   Delicatessen;
      (19)   Dress shop;
      (20)   Drugstore or fountain;
      (21)   Dry goods store;
      (22)   Florist shop, greenhouse, nursery;
      (23)   Furniture store;
      (24)   Grocery store, supermarket;
      (25)   Hardware store;
      (26)   Jewelry or notion store;
      (27)   Lodge hall;
      (28)   Meat market;
      (29)   Medical facility;
      (30)   Messenger or telegraph service;
      (31)   Musical instrument sales;
      (32)   Newspaper or magazine sales;
      (33)   Office business;
      (34)   Optometrists sales and service;
      (35)   Pharmacy;
      (36)   Photographer studio;
      (37)   Radio and television sales and service;
      (38)   Restaurant;
      (39)   Self-service laundry or dry-cleaning;
      (40)   Sewing machine sales, instruction;
      (41)   Shoe repair shop;
      (42)   Sporting goods sales;
      (43)   Tailor shop;
      (44)   Toy store; and
      (45)   Variety store.
   (D)   Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the store and premises
or to products sold on the premises;
   (E)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses;
and
   (F)   A building used for any of the above enumerated uses may not have more
than 40% of its floor area devoted to purposes incidental to the primary use.
No material or goods offered for sale or stored in connection with the uses
enumerated in divisions (A) through (E) above shall be displayed or stored
outside the building.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-204-3 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of
the R-2 General Residential District. The following requirements shall apply to
all other uses permitted in this district.
   (A)   Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-
way line to provide a front yard having not less than 25 feet in depth.
   (B)   Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. There shall be a side yard set
back from an intersecting street of not less than 25 feet.
   (C)   Rear yard. There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard
or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-204-4 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height,
except as hereinafter provided in §
26-303 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-205 C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
§ 26-205-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and
business services and the general retail business of the community. Persons
living in the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct
and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger
vehicles and those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-205-2 USES PERMITTED.
   Property and buildings in a C-2 Commercial District shall be used only for
the following purposes:
   (A)   Any use permitted in a C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District;
   (B)   Amusement enterprises;
   (C)   New automobile sales and services, new machinery sales and services
and public garages, provided no gasoline is stored aboveground; used
automobiles and machinery repairing if conducted in conjunction with a retail
agency and wholly within a completely enclosed building, but not including
automobile or machinery wrecking establishments or junkyards;
   (D)   Other uses, as follows:
      (1)   Advertising signs or structures;
      (2)   Ambulance service, office or garage;
      (3)   Auto court or tourist court;
      (4)   Automobile retail gasoline service station;
      (5)   Bait sales;
      (6)   Bakery;
      (7)   Bathhouse;
      (8)   Boat sales;
      (9)   Bus terminal;
      (10)   Cleaning plant;
      (11)   Clothing or apparel store;
      (12)   Commercial school or hall;
      (13)   Dance hall;
      (14)   Department store;
      (15)   Drive-in theater or restaurant;
      (16)   Electric transmission station;
      (17)   Feed and seed store;
      (18)   Frozen food locker;
      (19)   Funeral parlor and mortuary;
      (20)   Furniture repair and upholstery;
      (21)   Golf course, miniature or practice range;
      (22)   Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and services;
      (23)   Hospital for small animals;
      (24)   Ice storage locker plant or storage house for food;
      (25)   Interior decorating store;
      (26)   Kennel;
      (27)   Key shop;
      (28)   Laboratories, testing and experimental;
      (29)   Laundry;
      (30)   Leather goods shop;
      (31)   Liquor store;
      (32)   Museums;
      (33)   Music, radio or television shop;
      (34)   Nightclub;
      (35)   Novelty shop;
      (36)   Nursery or garden supply store;
      (37)   Outdoor advertising signs;
      (38)   Pawnshop;
      (39)   Pet shop;
      (40)   Printing plant;
      (41)   Recreation center;
      (42)   Research laboratory;
      (43)   Roller skating rink;
      (44)   Sign painting shop;
      (45)   Stock and bond broker;
      (46)   Tavern;
      (47)   Theater;
      (48)   Trailer home or mobile home park;
      (49)   Used automobile sales; and
      (50)   Wholesale distributing center.
   (E)   Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to
any of the uses listed in division (D) above; provided, that there shall be no
manufacture, processing or compounding of products other than such as are
customarily incidental and essential to retail establishments; and
   (F)   Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional or business services which do not produce more noise, odor, dust,
vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated in division (D) above.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-205-3 OPEN DISPLAY USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 General Commercial
District; provided, that they comply with the additional provisions of this
section:
      (1)   Boat sales and service;
      (2)   Farm implement and machinery, new and used and sales;
      (3)   Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grill work and decorative
wrought iron work and play equipment sales;
      (4)   Mobile home and travel trailer sales;
      (5)   Monument sales;
      (6)   New and used automobile sales;
      (7)   Prefabricated house sales; and
      (8)   Trailers for hauling, rental or sales.
   (B)   The uses enumerated in division (A) above shall comply with the
following provisions.
      (1)   All open storage and display of merchandise, material and equipment
shall be so screened by ornamental fencing that it cannot be seen by a person
standing on ground level in a residential district when located to the side or
rear of the lot on which said open storage or display occurs; provided,
however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven feet in
height.
      (2)   All yards, unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as
trafficways, shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good
condition year-round.
      (3)   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed 25 feet in
width, exclusive of curb returns.
      (4)   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of
reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent
land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing
intermittent type.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-205-4 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The area regulation for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of
the R-2 General Residential District. The following requirements shall apply to
all other uses permitted in this district.
   (A)   Front and side yards. There are no specific front or side yard
requirements for uses other than dwellings.
   (B)   Rear yard. There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard
or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet in width.
   (C)   Area for off-street parking. Buildings shall be provided with a yard
area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in §
26-307 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-206 I-1 RESTRICTED MANUFACTURING AND WAREHOUSING DISTRICT.
§ 26-206-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   This industrial district is intended primarily for manufacturing and
assembly plants and warehousing that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust and
glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building.
These industries may require direct access to rail, air or street
transportation facilities; however, the size and volume of the raw materials
and finished products involved should not produce the volume of freight
generated by the uses of the light and heavy industrial districts. Buildings in
this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped
yards.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-206-2 USES PERMITTED.
   Property and buildings in an I-1 District shall be used only for the
following purposes:
   (A)   Any use, except a residential use permitted in C-2 General Commercial
District. No dwelling uses shall be permitted, except sleeping facilities for
caretakers and nightwatchmen employed on the premises;
   (B)   Any of the following uses:
      (1)   Book bindery;
      (2)   Bottling works;
      (3)   Candy manufacturing;
      (4)   Electrical equipment assembly;
      (5)   Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture;
      (6)   Engraving plant;
      (7)   Food products processing and packing;
      (8)   Furniture manufacturing;
      (9)   Instrument and meter manufacturing;
      (10)   Jewelry and watch manufacturing;
      (11)   Laundry and cleaning establishment;
      (12)   Leather goods fabrication;
      (13)   Optical goods manufacturing;
      (14)   Paper products manufacturing;
      (15)   Shoe manufacturing;
      (16)   Sporting goods manufacturing; and
      (17)   Wholesale of warehousing enterprise.
   (C)   All of the uses permitted under this section shall have their primary
operations conducted entirely within enclosed buildings, and shall not emit any
dust or smoke, or noxious odors or fumes outside of the building housing the
operation, or produce a noise level at the property line that is greater than
the average noise level occurring on the adjacent street. Any article or
material stored temporarily outside of an enclosed building as an incidental
part of the primary operation shall be so screened by ornamental walls and
fences or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public
streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing at ground level.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-206-3 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines and
lots to comply with the following yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-
way line to provide a front yard having not less than 25 feet in depth.
      (2)   Side yard. No building shall be located closer than 25 feet to a
side lot line.
      (3)   Rear yard. No building shall be located closer than 25 feet to the
rear lot line.
      (4)   Coverage. Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and
loading facilities shall not cover more than 80% of the lot area.
   (B)   All yard areas required under this section and other yards and open
spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped and maintained in a neat
condition.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-206-4 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided
in §
26-303 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-207 I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
§ 26-207-1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This industrial district is intended primarily for the conduct of
manufacturing, assembling and fabrication.
   (B)   These uses do not depend primarily on frequent personal visits of
customers or clients, but usually require good accessibility to major rail, or
air or street transportation facilities.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-207-2 USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   Property and buildings in an I-2 Industrial District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the I-1 Industrial District. No dwelling use,
except sleeping facilities required by caretakers or nightwatchmen employed on
the premises, shall be permitted in an I-2 Industrial District;
      (2)   Blacksmith shop;
      (3)   Building materials sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of
rock, sand, gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but
not including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant;
      (4)   Contractor’s equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of
equipment commonly used by contractors;
      (5)   Farm produce, grain and feed storage, including grain elevators;
      (6)   Freighting or trucking yard terminal;
      (7)   Oil field equipment storage yard;
      (8)   Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transformer
station;
      (9)   City and country equipment service yard;
      (10)   The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed
building:
         (a)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone,
cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn,
leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stone, shell,
textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn and paint not employing a boiling process;
         (b)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other ceramic
products, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas;
         (c)   The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs,
commercial advertising structure, light sheet metal products, including heating
and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves and the like;
         (d)   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal
and rubber stamps;
         (e)   Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding,
reconditioning, body and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire
retreading and recapping and battery manufacturing;
         (f)   Machine shop;
         (g)   Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious
fumes or odors; and
         (h)   Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and
devices, radios and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only,
such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders and the like.
      (11)   Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily
incidental to any of the above uses.
   (B)   The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a
manner that no noxious odors, fumes or dust will be emitted beyond the property
line of the lot on which the use is located.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-207-3 USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW.
   The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions contained in §
26-505 of this chapter:
   (A)   Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture;
   (B)   Commercial feed pens for livestock;
   (C)   Disposal plants of all types, including trash and garbage, sewage
treatment, including lagoons and compost plants;
   (D)   Natural gas production and distribution;
   (E)   Packinghouse;
   (F)   Petroleum production and refining;
   (G)   Sale barn;
   (H)   Salvage yards for automobiles, building materials, scrap metal, junk
or for any other kind of salvage; provided, however, that all salvage
operations shall be so screened by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen
planting that it cannot be seen by a person standing at ground level at any
place immediately adjacent to the lot on which the salvage operation is
located;
   (I)   Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane, or other
petroleum products; and
   (J)   Any use not otherwise authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-207-4 AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front and side yard. There are no specific front or side yard
requirements for uses in this district; provided, however, that a building
shall set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the side lot lines that
adjoin the dwelling district.
   (B)   Rear yard. Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there
shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard or combination thereof not
less than 30 feet in width or of adequate area and width to provide for
maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is greater. In all other cases, no rear
yard is required; provided, however, that a building shall set back a distance
of not less than 25 feet from the rear lot line that adjoins a dwelling
district.
   (C)   Yard area. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to
meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in §
26-307 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-207-5 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided
in §
26-303 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR TO SEVERAL DISTRICTS
§ 26-301 APPLICATION OF REGULATION TO USES OF MORE RESTRICTED DISTRICT.
   (A)   Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district
permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to
the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district,
unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   It is intended that this chapter be interpreted as not permitting a
dwelling unit to be located on the sale lot or within a structure used or
intended to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-302 OPEN SPACE.
   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and
supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in
Article 2 of this chapter.
   (A)   An open space or lot area required for an eating building or structure
shall not be counted as open space for any other building or structure.
   (B)   Open eaves, cornices, windowsills and belt courses may project into
any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. Open uncovered porches or
open fire escapes may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to
exceed five feet. Fences, walls and hedges in residential districts may be
erected in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard; provided, that no
fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed
42 inches in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed seven feet in
height.
   (C)   Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the
depth of the front yard shall be measured starting at a point 25 feet from the
centerline of the street.
   (D)   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least
one street, at least 50 feet in width, for a distance of not less than 35 feet.
A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all
dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of
ingress and egress.
   (E)   No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are prescribed for commercial and
industrial uses. It is the intent of this chapter that lots of sufficient size
be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and
unloading space required for operation of the enterprise.
   (F)   On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall,
fence, sign, structure or plant growth which obstructs sightlines at elevations
between two feet and six inches and six feet above any portion of the crown of
the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from
the point of intersection to the front and exterior side lot lines a distance
of 25 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so
established to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the
street intersection.
   (G)   An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall
not be located closer than 25 feet to the street easement line.
   (H)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-303 GROUP HOUSING PROJECTS.
   In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two or more
buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres not
subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so
subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it
impracticable to apply the requirements of this chapter to the individual
buildings in such housing project, the application of such requirements to such
housing project may be changed by the Board of Adjustment, in a manner that
will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a
density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as
required by this chapter in the district in which the proposed project is to be
located. In no case shall a use or building height or density of population be
permitted which is less than the requirement of the district in which the
housing project is to be located.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-304 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND FENCES.
   The architectural design and materials used for the construction of
accessory buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which
said building or fence is accessory.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-305 ANIMALS.
   Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with the ordinances
of the city.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-306 STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   The use of land or buildings for the commercial, wholesale or retail storage
of liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the
city and the regulations of the liquefied petroleum gas administration of the
state.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307 OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE AND VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 26-307-1 GENERAL INTENT AND APPLICATION.
   It is the intent of this chapter that adequate parking and loading
facilities be provided off the street easement for each use of land within the
city. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use.
This chapter shall apply to all uses in all districts.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307-2 OPEN SPACE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Off-street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required
space associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or encroached
upon in any manner.
   (B)   The area required for off-street parking shall be in addition to the
yard areas herein required; except, that the front yard required in a C-
1 Neighborhood Shopping District or an I-1 Restricted Manufacturing and
Warehousing District may be used for uncovered parking area; and further
provided, that the front yard required in a residential district may be used
for uncovered parking area for six or less vehicles associated with a
residential use when the area is surfaced with a sealed surface pavement
adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust with continued use, and may
be used for uncovered parking area for more than six vehicles in accordance
with the provisions of this §
26-307.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307-3 LOCATION.
   The off-street parking lot shall be located within 200 feet, exclusive of
street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have direct access to a
street or alley.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307-4 JOINT PARKING FACILITIES.
   Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building,
shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements
may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility
cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite numbers of
spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than
the sum of the individual requirements.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307-5 SIZE OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE.
   The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular
area having dimensions of not less than ten feet by 20 feet, plus adequate area
for ingress and egress.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307-6 AMOUNT OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all
districts in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   Dwelling, single-family or duplex: one parking space for each
separate dwelling unit within the structure;
      (2)   Dwelling, multi-family: the number of spaces provided shall not be
less than one and one-half times the number of units in the dwelling;
      (3)   Boarding or rooming house or hotel: one parking space for each two
guests provided overnight accommodations;
      (4)   Hospitals: one space for each four patient beds, exclusive of
bassinets, plus one space for each three employees, including nurses, plus
adequate area for the parking of emergency vehicles;
      (5)   Medical or dental clinics or offices: six spaces per doctor, plus
one space for each two employees;
      (6)   Sanatoriums, convalescent or nursing homes: one space for each six
patient beds, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space
for each two employees, including nurses;
      (7)   Community center, theater, auditorium, church sanctuary: one
parking space for each four seats, based on maximum seating capacity;
      (8)   Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement
or recreation: one parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for
assembly or recreation in the building;
      (9)   Office building: one parking space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area in the building, exclusive of the area used for storage,
utilities and building service; and
      (10)   Commercial establishments not otherwise classified: adequate area
to park all employee and customer vehicles at all times, and adequate space for
loading, unloading and storing all vehicles used incidental to or as a part of
the primary operation of the establishment.
   (B)   For all uses not covered in division (A) above, the Planning
Commission shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by
the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off-
street parking requirements for the permitted use.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-307-7 OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Whenever off-street parking lots for more than four vehicles are to be
located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions
shall apply.
   (A)   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established 15 feet back of the property line of interior and corner lots
wherever the parking lot is located in a residential district or immediately
abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all other cases, no setback
shall be required.
   (B)   All yards should be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in
good condition year round.
   (C)   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to, and shall
not exceed, 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.
   (D)   Whenever lighting is provided, the intensity of light and arrangement
of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential district uses.
   (E)   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to
guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lots.
Only nonintermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-308 MOBILE HOMES, TRAVEL, CAMPING, HOUSE TRAILERS AND TINY HOMES.
   From and after the effective date hereof mobile homes, travel trailers,
camping trailers, house trailers and tiny homes are prohibited as a residence
within the corporate limits of the city except in mobile home parks.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-6-2018)
§ 26-309 PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS AND ROLL-OFF TRASH CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to the
location and duration of use of portable storage containers and roll-off trash
containers on any property within the city. The use or placement of portable
storage containers or roll-off trash containers, as defined below, are
prohibited within the limits of the city except as hereafter set forth.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER. Any self-supporting metal container, CONEX
box, shipping or shipping container, usually metal or metal-framed, designed
and used for the storage of personal or business property of a non-hazardous
nature which is typically rented or leased to owners or occupants of property
for their temporary use and which is typically delivered and removed by truck.
      ROLL-OFF TRASH CONTAINER. Any large metal container designed and used for
the temporary storage of refuse, rubbish, trash, garbage, junk, debris, offal
or any material rejected as useless and fit only to be thrown away. Such
container is typically rented or leased to owners or occupants of property for
their temporary use, and which is typically delivered and removed by truck. The
term ROLL-OFF TRASH CONTAINER shall not be interpreted to refer to a trash
container or dumpster that is stored in a more permanent manner on the property
and is referenced or regulated by the engineering design criteria, and further
is required to be screened from public view. The term ROLL-OFF TRASH CONTAINER
shall not be interpreted to include recycling facilities.
   (C)   Condition and maintenance. All portable storage containers and roll-
off trash containers shall be delivered and maintained in good condition, free
from rodents, insects, graffiti, vulgar and/or pornographic words or pictures.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant and the
supplying company to maintain the portable storage containers or roll-off trash
containers in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Placement and duration of use.
      (1)   Placement.
         (a)   Metal storage containers may be placed in any zone, residential,
commercial or industrial, so long as they comply with the following
requirements and restrictions.
            1.   The owner of premises upon which any metal storage container
or roll-off trash container is placed for a period of time exceeding 14 days
must obtain a building permit.
            2.   No metal storage container or roll-off trash container may be
utilized as a residence or living quarters.
            3.   In no case may a metal storage container or roll-off trash be
placed into the public right-of-way, onto any portion of a sidewalk, alley or
driveway.
            4.   Notwithstanding division (D)(1)(a)3. above, metal storage
containers placed for use not exceeding 14 days may be placed upon a driveway.
            5.   No metal storage container or roll-off trash container may be
located on the front or side of a residential structure unless screening is
erected to block view of the container from the public to minimize any visual
impact from abutting streets.
            6.   Metal storage containers or roll-off trash containers may not
be stacked.
            7.   Metal storage containers or roll-off trash containers larger
than 400 square feet must be placed on a permanent foundation.
            8.   Containers must adhere to all setback requirements applicable
to where such container is located and may not be placed within any right-of-
way, utility easement or required landscape area.
            9.   Signs relating to the on-site business may not be permanently
or temporarily attached to any container that will be permanently located on a
site.
         (b)   Should existing site conditions not allow for the placement of a
metal storage container in full compliance with these provisions, exceptions
may be considered and written approval granted on a case-by-case basis by the
City Manager or his or her designee.
      (2)   Nonconforming uses. Any portable storage container or roll-off
trash container in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, which is in violation hereof shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall not in any manner be enlarged,
extended or altered except that such uses may be changed so as to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Such uses as are deemed nonconforming uses
pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be permitted to continue for 180
days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived,
unless such use is terminated for any reason whatsoever prior thereto for a
period of 30 days or more, thereafter such nonconforming use shall terminate or
come into compliance with the terms of this section.
   (E)   Penalties for violations of this section. The owner of premises upon
which a portable storage container or roll-off trash container, as defined
herein, is located found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to
a penalty of $10 per day per occurrence.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 4-2-2024)
ARTICLE 4. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES OF LAND
§ 26-401 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
§ 26-401-1 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.
   A nonconforming building or structure existing at the effective date hereof
may be continued, maintained and repaired, except as otherwise provided in this
§
26-401.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-401-2 ALTERATION OR ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in
any manner unless said building or structure, including additions and
enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in
which it is located; provided, however, that if a building or structure is
conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off-street
parking space, said building or structure may be enlarged or added to, provided
that the enlargement or addition complies with the yard and height and off-
street parking requirements of the district in which said building or structure
is located. No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or
in part to another location on the lot unless every portion of said building or
structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-401-3 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND STRUCTURES.
   Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure or
statuary, which is lawfully existing and maintained at the effective date
hereof, which does not conform with the provisions hereof, shall not be
structurally altered; and all such nonconforming advertising signs, billboards,
commercial advertising structures and statuary, and their supporting members,
shall be completely removed from the premises not later than three years from
the effective date hereof.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-401-4 BUILDING VACANCY.
   A building or structure, or portion thereof, which is nonconforming as to
use, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a
continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by use
which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-401-5 CHANGE IN USE.
   (A)   A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be
expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or
structure or changed, except to a conforming use. If such a nonconforming use,
or a portion thereof, is discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any
future use of such building, structure or portion therefor shall be in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or
structure is located. A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or
structure may be occupied for a use for which the building or structure was
designed or intended if occupied within a period of one year after the
effective date hereof, but otherwise it shall be used in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   The uses of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a
use of the same or a more restricted district classification; provided, that
the Board of Adjustment shall find that the proposed use is equally or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use and that the
relation of the structure to surrounding properties is such that adverse
effects on occupants of neighboring properties will not be greater than those
experienced as a result of the existing nonconforming use.
   (C)   In accordance with the intent of divisions (A) and (B) above, any
freestanding mobile home on a single lot or parcel which has a nonconforming or
permissive use, as of June 1978, can be replaced by another mobile home on a
one-time only basis. After the initial one-time replacement, the nonconforming
use shall cease and all setbacks and other applicable district requirements
shall be met unless a variance therefor is obtained from the Board of
Adjustment. The replacement of another mobile home must be made within one year
to come within the terms of this division (C).
   (D)   Nonconforming mobile home parks, including those sites on record as of
the date of adoption or amendment to the Zoning Code, can be continued as a
nonconforming use to be amortized within a seven-year period, not to be
expanded or enlarged unless the park complies with those mobile home park
regulations in §
26-202-6 of this chapter.
   (E)   Where the use of a nonconforming building or structure is changed to a
use of more restricted district classification, it shall not thereafter be
changed to a use of a less restricted district classification; provided,
however, that a building or structure that is nonconforming as to use at the
effective date hereof, or at any time thereafter, shall not be changed to a
wholesale or retail liquor store unless such change in use conforms to the
provisions of the district in which it is located.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-402 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent
buildings or structures is less than $1,000, existing at the time of the
effective date hereof, may be continued for a period of not more than three
years therefrom; provided, that:
   (A)   Said nonconforming use may not extend or be expanded, nor shall it
occupy, more area than was in use on the effective date hereof; and
   (B)   If said nonconforming use, or any portion thereof, is discontinued for
a period of six months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change in
use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which said
land is located.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
ARTICLE 5. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 26-501 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT AND METHODS OF APPEAL.
   There is hereby created within the city a Board of Adjustment with the
powers and duties as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-502 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall be composed of five members, citizens of
the city, each appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council for a
term of three years; provided, however, that for the first appointment under
the provisions of this chapter, one member shall be appointed for a term of one
year; two members shall be appointed for two years; and two members shall be
appointed for three years. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of
three years.
   (B)   Not less than two members shall be appointed from the membership of
the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairperson from its membership
to serve for a term of two years.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-503 PROCEDURE.
   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may
determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record.
The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance, or to effect any
variation in such ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-504 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected
by any decision of the Building Inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within 30
days from the date of the decision by filing with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and with the City Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof, and by paying a filing fee of $15 at the office of the City
Clerk at the time the notice is filed. The officer from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless
the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate of stay, in his or her opinion, would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and on the cause shown.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal, giving public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties
in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-505 POWERS.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the interpretation or endorsement of this chapter;
      (2)   Powers relative to variations: Where, by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific parcel of property at the time
of the original adoption of this chapter, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or
condition of a specific parcel of property, which condition is not generally
prevalent in the area, the strict application of this chapter would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon, the owner of such property, the Board is hereby empowered to
authorize, upon an appeal relating to such property, a variation from such
strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, and may
establish such requirements relative to such property as would carry out the
purpose and intent of this chapter; and
      (3)   Powers relative to exceptions: Upon appeal, the Board is hereby
empowered to permit the following exceptions:
         (a)   To permit the expansion of a district where the boundary line of
a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record;
         (b)   To interpret the provisions of this chapter where the street
layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map
fixing the several districts, which map is attached to, and made a part of,
this chapter;
         (c)   To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set
forth in §
26-307 of this chapter, when it is determined that the size and shape of the
lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be
complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic
congestion in the adjacent streets; and
         (d)   To review the uses listed in Article 2 of this chapter of the
specific district regulations as, “uses permitted on review.” These are so
classified because they generally more intensely dominate in the area in which
they are located than do other uses permitted and may or may not be compatible
with the surrounding land uses permitted in that district. Nevertheless, the
nature of such uses may make it desirable that they be permitted to locate
therein. The following procedure is hereby established to relate properly the
uses permitted on review with the other land uses located in such districts.
These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following
procedure:
            1.   An application shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment for
review. Said application will show the location and intended use of the site;
the names of the property owners and existing land uses within 300 feet; and
any other material, statement, document or otherwise information pertinent to
the request which the Board of Adjustment may require for consideration;
            2.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold one or more public meetings
thereon;
            3.   The Board of Adjustment, within 45 days of the date of
application, shall study the effect of such proposed building or use upon the
character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities and other
matters pertaining to the general welfare, and hold a vote of its members in
any manner it deems fair and open, the majority consensus of which shall result
in a recommendation to be submitted to the City Council as to whether a permit
authorizing the use permitted on review as requested should be granted or
denied;
            4.   Such recommendation shall be given to the City Council during
the course of a City Council meeting within two months after a vote has been
completed with notice thereof given to the applicant. Although the purpose of
the Board of Adjustment’s examination into the requested use permitted on
review is intended to allow for a more exhaustive and thorough investigation
for the overall benefit of the applicant and the city, nothing in this
provision shall be construed to limit the City Council’s inquiry into the
materials, information, reservations or reasons underlying the Board of
Adjustment’s recommendation;
            5.   With regard to any application to obtain permissive use for a
freestanding mobile home, the applicant must, in addition to all other
requirements, obtain the written consent of at least 60% of the property owners
outside the tract and within a 300-foot radius; and
            6.   The City Council shall, after receiving the recommendation
from the Board of Adjustment, by majority vote, authorize or deny the issuance
of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested by the applicant.
   (B)   In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment, in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals from rulings made
under this chapter, the Board of Adjustment, in making its findings on any
specific case, shall determine the effect of the proposed change upon the
supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion in the public
streets, upon the public safety from fire and other hazards, upon the
established property values within the surrounding area and upon other factors
relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare of
the people of the city. Every ruling made upon any appeal to the Board shall be
accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the testimony received at
the hearing afforded by the Board of Adjustment, and shall specify the reason
for granting or denying the appeal.
(Ord. passed 7-2001; Ord. 23-003, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 26-506 APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT.
   (A)   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the
Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or
severally, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
city to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the City Clerk and
with the Board of Adjustment within ten days from the filing of the decision of
the Board of Adjustment, which notice shall specify the ground of such appeal.
Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, said Board of
Adjustment shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk of the county the
original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the
case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   An appeal to the district court from the Board of Adjustment stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Chairperson of the
Board of Adjustment, from which the appeal is taken, certifies to the court
clerk, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay, in his or her opinion, would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the district
court upon application of the terms and provisions of this chapter, and upon
notice to the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment from which the appeal is
taken; and, upon due cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify, the decision brought up for review.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
ARTICLE 6. ADMINISTRATION
§ 26-601 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $20 for each offense.
   (B)   Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-602 AMENDMENTS; HEARING.
   The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition,
amend the regulations and districts herein established. Every petition for
amendment shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for investigation and
reported to the City Council. At least 15 days’ notice shall be published in
the newspaper of general circulation in the city to advise of the time and
place of the public hearing to be held on such proposed amendment before the
City Council. In case of a protest against such proposed amendment signed by
owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed
change, or by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots immediately
abutting either side of the territory included in such proposed change, or
separated therefrom only by an alley or street. Such amendment shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City
Council.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-603 VACATION OF PUBLIC EASEMENTS.
   Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the portion
vacated shall have the same district classification as the land to which the
vacated portion accrues.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
§ 26-604 INVALIDITY OF PART.
   In case any portion of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the remainder of the ordinance shall not thereby be invalid,
but shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 7-2001)
CHAPTER 27: SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Section
Article 1. General Provisions
27-101 Purpose
27-102 Authority
27-103 Application to types of subdividing
27-104 Definitions
27-105 General procedure
27-105-1 Plat approval
27-105-2 Official recording
27-105-3 Agenda
27-105-4 Filing fee
27-105-5 Exemptions for lot splits
Article 2. Design
27-201 Urban design principles
27-202 Subdivision design standards
27-202-1 Streets
27-202-2 Alleys
27-202-3 Easements
27-202-4 Public areas and open spaces
27-202-5 Blocks
27-202-6 Lots
27-202-7 Building lines
27-202-8 Planned unit development
Article 3. Improvements
27-301 General provisions
27-302 Plan preparation
27-303 Surety bond
27-304 Permanent markers
27-305 Street improvements
27-306 Sidewalks
27-307 Water lines
27-308 Sanitary sewers
27-309 Storm sewers and drainage
27-310 Maintenance and supervision
Article 4. Plat Preparation and Approval Procedure
27-401 Preliminary plat
27-401-1 General
27-401-2 Certification of design
27-401-3 Contents of preliminary plat
27-401-4 Planning Commission action
27-402 Final plat
27-402-1 General
27-402-2 Time of submission
27-402-3 Drafting
27-402-4 Contents of final plat
27-402-5 Planning Commission action
27-402-6 City Council action
27-402-7 Recording of plat
Article 5. Administration and Amendment
27-501 Variations and exceptions
27-502 Administration and amendment
27-503 Validity
27-504 Repeal
27-505 Violation and penalty
Article 6. Appendix
27-601 Forms for certificates
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 27-101 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban
development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential,
commercial and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and
other public purposes will determine to a large degree the conditions of
health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality
of these conditions is of public interest. These regulations and standards for
the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make provision for
adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities
and other needs, to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy,
attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and
protection of its human and natural resources.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are designed, intended and should be
administered in a manner to:
      (1)   Implement the general plan;
      (2)   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight;
      (3)   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land
to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
      (4)   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community be borne by the whole community;
      (5)   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
      (6)   Reconcile any differences of interest; and
      (7)   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-102 AUTHORITY.
   These subdivision regulations and minimum standards for land development are
adopted by ordinance passed by the City Council under the authority granted by
11 O.S. §§ 45-104 and 47-114.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-103 APPLICATION TO TYPES OF SUBDIVIDING.
   These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following
forms of land subdivision:
   (A)   The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels,
any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than ten acres in area;
   (B)   The division of land, previously subdivided or platted into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels of less than ten acres in area;
   (C)   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
   (D)   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of
land regardless of the area involved.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-104 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street and which may be used for public utility purposes.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public
walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination
thereof.
   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. A line or lines designating the area outside
of which buildings may not be erected.
   CITY. The City of Lexington, Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL. The Lexington City Council.
   COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The comprehensive physical
development for the city which has been officially adopted to provide long
range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the
foreseeable future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land
use, land subdivision, circulation and community facilities.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or
persons of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
   LOT. A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of, and abutting on, two or
more streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more streets.
   LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE. A double frontage lot which is to be developed with
the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress
provided on a minor street.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Lexington Planning Commission.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of proposed land subdivision showing the character
and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
   STREET. Any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means
of access to abutting property.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A minor street which collects traffic from other minor
streets and serves as the most direct route to a major street or a community
facility.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic
and having one closed end terminated by a turnaround.
   STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the
side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas,
and for control of access.
   STREET, MAJOR. An arterial street which is designated on the major street
plan.
   STREET, MINOR. A street whose primary purpose is to provide access to
adjacent properties and which is designed so that its use by arterial traffic
will be discouraged.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity,
acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of land into two or more lots,
tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way
easement.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-105 GENERAL PROCEDURE.
§ 27-105-1 PLAT APPROVAL.
   For all cases of subdividing within the scope of this chapter, a plat of
land in question shall be drawn and submitted to the Planning Commission and
City Council for their approval or disapproval, as provided hereafter in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-105-2 OFFICIAL RECORDING.
   No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be filed in the office of
the County Clerk until it shall have been approved by the Planning Commission
and by the City Council as hereinafter set forth. All final plats shall be
filed within two years of date of approval by the Planning Commission, and no
lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded. Failure to record the plat
within two years of the date of Planning Commission or City Council approval,
whichever is the later, shall void all approvals thereto.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-105-3 AGENDA.
   Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be placed on the
agenda of the Planning Commission only after fulfilling the appropriate
requirements of this chapter. However, a plat not meeting all of the
requirements may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a
written request for specific exceptions and explains the reasons therefor.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-105-4 FILING FEE.
   To defray partially the costs of notification and administration procedures,
there shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time of submission of the
preliminary plat a fee in the following amount: $5, plus $1 per lot for the
first 50 lots, plus $0.10 for each additional lot. Where only a portion of an
approved preliminary plat is submitted for final approval, a final plat of the
remaining area may be submitted at any time within two years of the date of
preliminary approval without payment of an additional filing fee by the
subdivider, if the final plat for the additional area conforms substantially
with the approved preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-105-5 EXEMPTIONS FOR LOT SPLITS.
   Whenever there is a tract or previously subdivided parcel under single
ownership which is to be resubdivided into three or fewer lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved, the proposed subdivision may be exempt
from the procedural provisions of this chapter, and a preliminary and final
plat may not be required, but this shall not constitute an exemption from any
of the design or improvement requirements herein contained. Exemptions which
shall be designated as “lot splits” shall be permitted under the following
procedures.
   (A)   An accurate survey, prepared by an engineer registered in the state,
of the proposed tract and the resubdivision thereof shall be submitted to the
City Engineer, or his or her designated representative.
   (B)   The City Engineering and planning staff shall review the proposed lot
split to ensure compliance with all design and improvement requirements of this
chapter and shall prepare a written report thereon, which shall be forwarded to
the Planning Commission in not more than seven days after receipt of the
application for a lot split, for consideration at the next regular meeting of
the Planning Commission. If the application is approved by the Planning
Commission, it shall be certified by the signature of the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission and attested by the secretary-member. If the applicant is
denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing, with reference made
to the express provision of this chapter to which the proposed lot split does
not conform, and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
ARTICLE 2. DESIGN
§ 27-201 URBAN DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
   The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of
design of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design
requires the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of
land within the urban area. Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be
prepared in accordance with the principles established by the general plan for
land use, circulation, community facilities and public utility services, and in
accordance with the following general principles.
   (A)   It is intended that the city’s urban area should be designed as a
group of integrated residential neighborhoods and areas and appropriate
commercial and industrial and public facilities. The neighborhood, as a
planning unit, is intended as an area principally for residential use. Space
for religious, recreational, educational and shopping facilities to serve the
residents of the area should be planned as an integral part of each
neighborhood and using a design and arrangement that will not adversely affect
other uses in the area.
   (B)   The size of lots and blocks and other areas for residential,
commercial, industrial and public uses should be designed to provide adequate
air, light, open space, landscaping and off-street parking and loading
facilities.
   (C)   The arrangements of lots and blocks and the street system should be
designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical
features. Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The
system of sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take
advantage of the visual qualities of the area.
   (D)   Circulation within the urban area shall be provided in accordance with
the following design criteria.
      (1)   Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all arterial
streets and highways as shown on the comprehensive physical development plan.
Arterial streets should be located on the perimeter of the residential
neighborhood.
      (2)   Minor streets should be designed to provide access to each parcel
of land within the residential neighborhood and within industrial areas, and in
a manner that will discourage use by through traffic. They should be planned so
that future urban expansion will not require the conversion of minor streets to
arterial routes.
      (3)   Collector streets should be designed to provide a direct route from
other minor streets to the major street system.
      (4)   Ingress and egress to residential properties should be provided
only on minor streets.
      (5)   Pedestrianways should be separated from roadways used by vehicular
traffic. Sidewalks should be designed to provide all residential building sites
with direct access to all neighborhood facilities, including the elementary
school, parks and playgrounds, churches and shopping centers.
   (E)   (1)   Minimum standards for development are contained in the zoning
ordinance and in this chapter.
      (2)   However, the comprehensive physical development plan expresses
policies which are intended to achieve optimum quality of development in the
urban area. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the
various ordinances regulating land development, a standardization of
development will occur, which will tend to provide a monotonous urban setting.
      (3)   Subdivision design should be of a quality to carry out the purpose
and spirit of the policies expressed in the comprehensive physical development
plan and in this chapter rather than be limited to the minimum standards
required herein.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 27-202-1 STREETS.
   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to all of the elements of the comprehensive physical development
plan and shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions.
   (A)   Major streets shall be planned to conform with the major street plan.
   (B)   Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the Planning Commission may require service streets, reverse frontage
with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear
property line, deep lots or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
arterial and local traffic.
   (C)   Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by arterial traffic
will be discouraged.
   (D)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require a
street approximately parallel to, and on each side of, such right-of-way at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such
distances also shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separation structures.
   (E)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is placed in the city under conditions approved by
the Planning Commission.
   (F)   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned
or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future tract system for the unsubdivided portion may be required by the
subdivider.
   (G)   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be arranged to permit the logical location
and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for
adequate utility easement.
   (H)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet should be
avoided.
   (I)   Street right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with the
comprehensive physical development plan and, where not designated therein,
shall be not less than the following.
 
Major streets Primary    100 feet
              Secondary  80 feet
              Collector  60 feet
Minor streets Cul-de-sac 60 feet
              Minor      60 feet
 
   (J)   The paved width of all streets shall be adequate to serve the existing
and future estimated traffic load for the facility. Lane widths of all streets
shall be as follows:
      (1)   All major streets shall have lanes for traffic movement of 12 feet
in width, and lanes for parallel parking or emergency stopping of not less than
ten feet in width;
      (2)   All minor streets shall have lanes for traffic movement of not less
than ten feet nor more than 12 feet in width and a lane for parallel parking of
not less than eight feet in width. Streets should be developed in accordance
with the general street standards established by the city.
   (K)   A cul-de-sac should not exceed 500 feet in length, measured from the
entrance to the center of the turnaround, and if more than 150 feet in length
shall be provided with a turnaround having a radius of not less than 50 feet at
the property line and not less than 40 feet at the curb line. There shall be
provided in the center of the turnaround an unpaved island, improved with grass
and landscaping that will not interfere with sight distance, which has a radius
of not less than 12 feet nor more than 16 feet.
   (L)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this chapter; and provided, that the Planning Commission finds
it will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street
easement when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
platted within such tract.
   (M)   The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in
the subdividing of adjacent properties. The Planning Commission may require the
dedication of street rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining
properties.
   (N)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-2 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking consistent with, and adequate for, the uses
proposed.
   (B)   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be less than
30 feet in width.
   (C)   Alleys are not required for residential areas, but, when provided,
shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
   (D)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided,
but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   (E)   Dead end alleys should be avoided, but, if necessary, shall be
provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-3 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than ten feet wide
shall be provided along each rear lot line, and alongside lot lines where
necessary, for use by public and private facilities. The Planning Commission
may require aerial easements and easements of greater width for the extension
of main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where it is deemed
necessary.
   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel or
stream which drains 160 acres or more of land, there shall be provided a right-
of-way for drainage and public parks and public utility purposes adequate to
contain all of the runoff from a 100-year maximum flood. The right-of-way shall
include all of the land within the subdivision that has an elevation below the
100-year maximum flood elevation based on the determinations made by the County
Soil Conservation Service and/or the City Engineer.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-4 PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACES.
   Public parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public areas and open
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards set
forth in the comprehensive physical development plan and in the ordinances
relating thereto.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-5 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard for the following:
      (1)   Provision for adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than 1,200 feet,
measured along the centerline of the block. When a block exceeds 600 feet in
length, the Planning Commission may require a dedicated easement not less than
15 feet in width and a paved crosswalk not less than four feet in width to
provide pedestrian access across the block.
   (C)   Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width to
allow for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business
and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due
allowance for off-street parking and loading facilities.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-6 LOTS.
   (A)   Residential lots shall be not less than 50 feet in width at the front
building line and shall abut a street a distance of not less than 35 feet;
except that a corner lot shall be not less than 60 feet in width at the front
building line.
   (B)   Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   (C)   The depth of residential lots should be not less than 120 feet.
   (D)   The area of residential lots should be not less than 6,000 square
feet.
   (E)   In residential subdivisions where septic tank or individual sewage
disposal devices are to be installed, the rear of the lot shall be not less
than 20,000 square feet and the width of the lot at the front building line
shall be not less than 100 feet.
   (F)   Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial and industrial
use, but, when provided, should be of appropriate size and arrangement to
provide for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities based on the
intended use.
   (G)   (1)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided
except where they are needed to provide for the separation of development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 20 feet shall be provided
along the portion of the lots abutting such traffic artery or other use where
screening is required.
      (2)   There shall be no right of access across a planting screen
easement.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-7 BUILDING LINES.
   Building lines shall be provided for all residential subdivisions as
follows.
   (A)   A front building line shall be located not less than 25 feet back from
the street right-of-way line.
   (B)   A side yard building line on the side of a corner lot abutting the
street shall be located not less than 15 feet back of the street right-of-way
when such lot is back to back with another corner lot and not less than 20 feet
back of the street right-of-way line in every other case.
   (C)   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet
back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side of a lot abutting a midblock
crosswalk.
   (D)   Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building
lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate
recorded instrument.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-202-8 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a subdivision is developed as a planned unit wherein adequate
park or playground area is provided, through traffic is cared for adequately
and the majority of the minor streets are of the cul-de-sac or loop type, the
Planning Commission may vary the requirements of this article in order to allow
the subdivider more freedom in the arrangement of streets and lots, but at the
same time protect the convenience, health, safety and welfare of the probable
future residents of the subdivision as well as the character of the entire
community.
   (B)   However, in no case shall the lot area be less than 6,000 square feet
for detached single-family dwellings, or be designed to provide less area than
required by each use under the provisions of the city’s zoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
ARTICLE 3. IMPROVEMENTS
§ 27-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
elements of the comprehensive physical development plan and shall meet the
minimum standards established by the ordinances and regulations relating
thereto.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-302 PLAN PREPARATION.
   Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by a qualified
engineer, registered in the state. Two sets of prints of the proposed plans and
specifications for all improvements shall be filed with the City Clerk at the
time of submission of the final plat. One set of as built plans and
specifications, certified and signed by an engineer registered in the state,
shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to the acceptance by the City Council
of any improvement installed by the subdivider.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-303 SURETY BOND.
   In lieu of completion of the improvements required herein, the City Council
may require the subdivider to file a surety bond with the City Clerk to ensure
the actual construction of such improvements according to the plans and
specifications approved by the Planning Commission within a period of time not
to exceed two years from the date of approval of the final plat. Such bond
shall be in the amount of 100% of the estimated cost of the improvement as
determined by the Planning Commission and with surety and conditions
satisfactory to the City Council. In any case where the City Council does not
require a bond for the improvements required herein, no building shall be
permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed
construction will produce runoff or require utility services that affect other
areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision, unless a bond, in the
amount of 100% of the estimated cost, is posted for the portion of the drainage
or utility improvements that will protect the affected area.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-304 PERMANENT MARKERS.
   Each lot and block corner and subdivision corner shall be marked with iron
pipes or pins not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than 18
inches long and placed one inch below finished grade.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-305 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes shall lay out, grade and otherwise
improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly
serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the city and in
accordance with the following provisions.
   (A)   The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with
an existing state or federal highway shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the State Highway Department, but in no case shall the
standard be less than the applicable specifications of the city.
   (B)   Whenever a subdivision contains a major street that requires a street
facility that is more costly than is required to serve the future occupants of
the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of
the cost of the major street that would equal the cost of an improvement
required to serve only the subdivisions, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   All driveways which connect with public streets shall be constructed
in accordance with “Standard Design of Driveway Entrances for Oklahoma
Highways,” revised September 1960, and subsequent amendments thereto, as
prepared by the State Highway Department.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-306 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   A plan for a system of sidewalks and walkways shall be prepared that
will provide every lot within a residential or commercial subdivision, or
portion thereof, with a direct sidewalk connection with the community
facilities and commercial enterprises located within or adjacent to the
subdivision, and in a manner that will provide convenient pedestrian
circulation throughout the neighborhood or area in which the subdivision is
located.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require the construction of sidewalks to
connect with existing or future proposed sidewalks in areas adjacent to the
subdivision where such sidewalks are needed for pedestrian circulation.
Sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed in the subdivision in accordance
with the specifications governing sidewalk and walkway construction.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-307 WATER LINES.
   The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants, and installation
shall be in accordance with the specifications governing water line
construction.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-308 SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   (1)   The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a sanitary
sewer is reasonably accessible as determined by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the
specifications governing sanitary sewer construction.
   (B)   Whenever a sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible as determined
by the City Council, septic tanks or other unit disposal systems may be used in
accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   A lot for residential use on which a unit disposal system is
located shall be not less than 20,000 square feet in area.
      (2)   No portion of any unit disposal system shall be located closer than
20 feet to the lot line of the lot on which the system is located.
      (3)   All unit disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of the
State and County Health Departments.
   (C)   When subdivisions contain five acres or more, the City Council may
require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers and a disposal system that is
adequate to serve all of the lots within the subdivision.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-309 STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE.
   Storm sewers and drainage shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications contained in the ordinances and regulations relating thereto.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-310 MAINTENANCE AND SUPERVISION.
   Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of
the area, or that are of common use or benefit which are not or cannot be
satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made
which is acceptable to the agency having jurisdiction over the location and
maintenance of such facilities for the proper and continuous operation,
maintenance and supervision of such facilities.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
ARTICLE 4. PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
§ 27-401 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
§ 27-401-1 GENERAL.
   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for submission to the
Planning Commission. Four copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to
the office of the City Clerk not less than seven days prior to the meeting at
which it is to be considered.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-401-2 CERTIFICATION OF DESIGN.
   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the
registered engineer preparing the plat certifying that he or she has, to the
best of his or her ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with the
comprehensive physical development plan with which he or she is completely
familiar, and in accordance with the ordinances and regulations governing the
subdivision of land, except where an exception is requested in writing and the
reasons for which are clearly stated.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-401-3 CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
   (A)   The scale, north point and date;
   (B)   The proposed name of the subdivision;
   (C)   The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider and the
registered engineer preparing the plat;
   (D)   A key map showing the locations of the proposed subdivision references
to existing or proposed major streets and to government section lines, and
including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area to which the
proposed subdivision is a part;
   (E)   The names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of adjoining
subdivisions, and the location of city limits, if falling within or immediately
adjoining the tract;
   (F)   The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two feet
referenced to a United States geological survey or coast and geodetic survey
bench mark or monument;
   (G)   The location of existing buildings, water, watercourses and the
location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision; provided, however, that actual
measures of distances shall not be required;
   (H)   The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest
foot, and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, easements and
setback lines, and the approximate lot dimensions;
   (I)   The location, approximate size and type of sanitary and storm sewers,
water mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface and
subsurface structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to
the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout, type and proposed size of
the following structures and utilities:
      (1)   Water mains;
      (2)   Sanitary sewer mains, submains and lateral;
      (3)   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; and
      (4)   Street improvements.
   (J)   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements
relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed
plat; and
   (K)   The classification of every street within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the
proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term, primary
thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, collector or minor street in parenthesis,
directly on each street.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-401-4 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Water Superintendent and
the Fire Chief of the city, the County Sanitarian, the conservationist of the
Soil Conservation Service which serves the county, and such other technical and
professional personnel as may be designated by the Planning Commission, each of
which shall make a written or verbal report to the Planning Commission, or a
representative thereof, concerning the proposed subdivision as it relates to
the area of concern for which each is responsible. The Planning Commission
shall review the proposed preliminary plat and may require changes and
modifications which are necessary to conform with the purpose and spirit of the
comprehensive physical development plan, the provisions of this chapter, and
the applicable ordinances of the city relating thereto.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall approve, approve conditionally or
disapprove the plat within 60 days of the date of its submission by the
applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved conditionally,
the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall
be signed by the Planning Commission Chairperson and shall be attached to one
copy of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider. Unless stipulation for
additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, if no action be taken by the
Planning Commission at the end of 60 days after submission, the plat shall be
deemed to have been approved. The reasons for disapproval or conditional
approval shall refer specifically to those parts of the comprehensive physical
development plan or specific regulations or ordinances with which the plat does
not conform. Upon conditionally approving a plat, the Planning Commission may
require submission of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all
of the standards or after the applicant and Planning Commission agree upon any
revision which shall be filed with the Planning Commission on a revised copy,
the subdivider may proceed with the laying out of streets and roads, the
preparation of utility plans and with the preparation of a final plat.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402 FINAL PLAT.
§ 27-402-1 GENERAL.
   A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on tracing cloth, and three dark line
prints thereof, shall be submitted to the office of the City Clerk not less
than five days before the Planning Commission meeting at which it is to be
considered for final approval. At the same time, there shall be submitted two
sets of the proposed plans and specifications for all improvements and the
proposed restrictions in final form; provided, however, that the final plat may
be approved subject to later submission of final improvement plans and
specifications.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402-2 TIME OF SUBMISSION.
   The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission and the City Council for final approval within one year of
the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final
approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be considered as having
been disapproved unless the Planning Commission agrees to an extension of time.
The final plat shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk within two
years after approval by the City Council and Planning Commission, or, if not
filed within such time, said approval shall be considered as having been
voided.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402-3 DRAFTING.
   The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet from an
accurate survey and on sheets whose dimensions are 21 inches by 33.5 inches
between border lines. On the first sheet of every plat, there shall be a key
map showing the location of the subdivision references to government survey
section lines and major streets. If more than two sheets are required for the
plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheet for each area. A border of
one-half inch surrounding the sheet shall be left blank at the top, bottom and
right-hand side, and a margin of two inches at the left side for binding
purposes.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402-4 CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat shall show:
   (A)   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision
shall be referenced;
   (B)   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified;
   (C)   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names. Material which is not
a part of the subdivision shall be shown in dashed or dotted lines;
   (D)   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles;
   (E)   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length and/or direction of
an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines,
the length and/or bearing shall be given;
   (F)   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located;
   (G)   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted;
   (H)   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to public
use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the area marked “public”;
   (I)   The lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to
be excluded from platting marked “reserved” or “not a part”;
   (J)   The location of all building lines, setback lines and easements for
public services or utilities with dimensions showing their locations;
   (K)   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and
central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns;
   (L)   The proper acknowledgments of owners and the consent by the mortgagee
to plat restrictions;
   (M)   The following, which shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing:
      (1)   Owner’s certificate and dedication, signed;
      (2)   Engineer’s certificate of survey, signed and his or her seal;
      (3)   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public;
      (4)   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the County Clerk which directly affect the
land being subdivided;
      (5)   Certificate of Planning Commission approval;
      (6)   Certificate of City Council acceptance of ways, easements and
public land dedications;
      (7)   Treasurer’s certificate; and
      (8)   Certificate of City Clerk related to special easements.
   (N)   A title which shall include:
      (1)   Name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Name of the city, county and state; and
      (3)   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to section,
range and cityship.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402-5 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Planning Commission shall act upon the final plat within 45
days after it has been submitted for final approval.
      (2)   This approval and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over
the signature of the Planning Commission Chairperson or secretary-member.
      (3)   Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the
subdivider, and if no action is taken by the Planning Commission at the end of
45 days after submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved.
      (4)   A certification by the City Clerk as to date of submission of plat
for final approval and failure of Planning Commission to act thereon within
such time shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval.
   (B)   If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted with the tracing and
prints to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically
to those parts of the comprehensive physical development plan or ordinance or
regulation with which the plat does not apply.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402-6 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the City Council
for approval and for acceptance of public ways and service and utility
easements and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat shall be
shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk or his
or her deputy. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the City Council shall be
deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-402-7 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required
signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the City Clerk
with two dark line prints thereon, and one contact reproducible linen or Mylar
tracing.
   (B)   The applicant, accompanied by a representative of the City Clerk’s
office, shall file the original tracing, one dark line print on cloth and one
contact reproducible cloth tracing or film with the County Clerk.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
ARTICLE 5. ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
§ 27-501 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the Planning Commission may vary or modify,
except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of
procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his or her
property in a reasonable manner, but so, at the same time, the public welfare
and interests of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of
this chapter preserved. Such modifications may be granted upon written request
of the subdivider stating the reason(s) for each modification and may be waived
by three-fourths vote of the regular membership of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-502 ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The City Council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public
rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter to the end that
the public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited.
   (B)   This chapter may be enlarged or amended by the City Council after
public hearing, due notice of which shall be given as required by law.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-503 VALIDITY.
   If any section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of this chapter
shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause,
paragraph, provision or portion of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-504 REPEAL.
   All ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
§ 27-505 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which
does not comply with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$5 nor more than $20, including costs for each offense. Each day a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
ARTICLE 6. APPENDIX
§ 27-601 FORMS FOR CERTIFICATES.
   The various forms for the required certificates, as listed in §
27-402-4(M), shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed - -1978)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
O.S. Cites Code Section
O.S. Cites                    Code Section
10 O.S.                       15-905
10A O.S. 2-2-102              15-904
11 O.S. 8-101                 1-502
11 O.S. 8-103                 1-507
11 O.S. 8-106                 1-503;
                              1-515
11 O.S. 10-106(1)             1-318
11 O.S. 10-113                1-318
11 O.S. 14-107                19-704
11 O.S. 14-107(A)             1-213
11 O.S. 15 et seq.            1-501
11 O.S. 22.101.0              1-414
11 O.S. 29-201 to 29-205      10-101
11 O.S. 34-104                1-305;
                              2-114
11 O.S. 36-401 through 36-410 26-101
11 O.S. 45-104                6-111;
                              27-102
11 O.S. 47-114                27-102
11 O.S. 49-101 et seq.        2-301
11 O.S. 49-103 et seq.        1-315
21 O.S. 540                   22-2301
21 O.S. 540(A)                22-2301
21 O.S. 856                   22-2301
21 O.S. 1021.1(A)             22-2301
21 O.S. 1705                  22-2301
21 O.S. 1737                  22-2301
21 O.S. 1753.3                22-2301
21 O.S. 1835                  22-2301
25 O.S. 301 et seq.           10-402;
                              19-708
29 O.S. 4-108                 5-301
34 O.S. 1 et seq.             1-501
37A O.S. 1-101                4-101
                              4-101;
                              4-102;
37A O.S. 1-101 through 1-168  4-205;
                              4-207;
                              4-208;
                              4-402
37A O.S. 1-103                4-301
37A O.S. 1-104                4-202
37A O.S. 1-105                4-202
37A O.S. 2-101v1              4-201
37A O.S. 2-101v2              4-201
                              4-204;
37A O.S. 3-124                4-304;
                              4-306
37A O.S. 4-104                4-205
37A O.S. 5-115                4-208
37A O.S. 6-102                4-307
40 O.S. 141.1 through 141.18  6-514
47 O.S. 4-107                 22-2301
47 O.S. 4-107(D)              22-2301
47 O.S. 6-101(D)              22-2301
47 O.S. 6-112                 22-2301
47 O.S. 6-115                 22-2301
47 O.S. 6-303(B)              22-2301
47 O.S. 7-606                 22-1906
47 O.S. 10-103                22-2301
47 O.S. 10-105                22-2301
47 O.S. 11-312                22-2301
47 O.S. 11-405                22-2301
47 O.S. 11-705(A)             22-2301
47 O.S. 11-806.1              22-2301
47 O.S. 11-901(B)             22-2301
47 O.S. 11-1003(A)            22-2301
47 O.S. 11-1007               22-2301
47 O.S. 11-1102               22-2301
47 O.S. 11-1112               22-2301
47 O.S. 12-101(A)             22-2301
47 O.S. 12-201                22-2301
47 O.S. 12-203.2              22-2301
47 O.S. 12-217(D)             22-2301
47 O.S. 12-227(D)             22-2301
47 O.S. 12-402                22-2301
47 O.S. 12-417(A)             22-2301
47 O.S. 12-422(A)             22-2301
47 O.S. 12-609(B)             22-2301
47 O.S. 14-105(B)             22-2301
47 O.S. 14-113                22-2301
47 O.S. 47-1151(E)            22-2301
47 O.S. 761                   22-2301
47 O.S. 1101                  22-1906
47 O.S. 1102                  6-514
47 O.S. 1137.1(E)             22-2301
47 O.S. 1151(A)(5)            22-2301
51 O.S. 24A.1                 1-302;
                              10-402
51 O.S. 24A.1 et seq.         1-511
51 O.S. 151 through 200       10-501
53 O.S. 351 through 355       18-803
59 O.S. 1010                  6-205
59 O.S. 1680 through 1696     6-301;
                              6-314
59 O.S. 1850.1 through 1860   6-509
59 O.S. 1850.1 et seq.        6-509
59 O.S. 1850.9(B)             6-509
60 O.S. 175.1 through 175.57  19-1001
60 O.S. 176 through 180       19-1001
60 O.S. 180                   19-1001
62 O.S. 310.1 et seq.         3-307
63 O.S.                       4-402
63 O.S. 2-405(B)              22-2301
63 O.S. 2855 et seq.          3-308
68 O.S. 205                   2-423;
                              2-913
68 O.S. 205.1                 2-423
68 O.S. 217                   2-419;
                              2-909
68 O.S. 220                   2-420;
                              2-910
68 O.S. 227                   2-421;
                              2-911
68 O.S. 1401                  2-916
68 O.S. 1408                  2-907
68 O.S. 2601 through 2605     2-1001
82 O.S. 1601 through 1618     18-501;
                              18-514
                              
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      27-101 -
                      27-104;
                      27-105-1 
                      27-105-5;
                      27-201;
                      27-202-1 
                      27-202-8;
-         - -1978     27-301 -
                      27-310;
                      27-401-1 -
                      27-401-4;
                      27-402-1 
                      27-402-7;
                      27-501 -
                      27-505;
                      27-601
                      26-101 -
                      26-108;
                      26-201-1 -
                      26-201-4;
                      26-202-1;
                      26-202-2;
                      26-202-4 -
                      26-202-6;
                      26-203-1 -
                      26-203-6;
                      26-204-2 -
                      26-204-4;
-         7-2001      26-205-1 -
                      26-205-4;
                      26-206-1 -
                      26-206-4;
                      26-207-1 -
                      26-207-5;
                      26-301 -
                      26-306; 26-307-1 - 26-307-7; 26-401-1 - 26-401-5;
                      26-402;
                      26-501 
                      26-506;
                      26-601 -
                      26-604
2002-03   7-2-2002    19-501
2003-05   11-4-2003   13-321
                      19-118;
2003-06 A 11-4-2003   19-202;
                      19-304
                      6-106;
                      6-117;
2003-06   12-2-2003   6-203;
                      6-321;
                      6-405;
                      6-513
2003-07   12-2-2003   26-107
04-1      2-3-2004    15-1001 -
                      15-1004
2005-02   9-6-2005    4-501;
                      4-502
2006-02   6-6-2006    10-401;
                      10-402
2006-05   12-5-2006   3-308
2007-03   4-3-2007    18-901
2008-02   8-25-2008   18-501 -
                      18-522
2008-4    11-4-2008   19-1201 -
                      19-1211
2009-04   11-3-2009   20-401 -
                      20-403
2010-01   2-2-2010    15-308
2010-3    11-2-2010   19-506
                      5-101 -
                      5-109;
                      5-201 -
                      5-204;
                      5-205-1 -
                      5-205-3;
                      5-301 -
                      5-304;
                      5-401 -
                      5-404;
2012-01   7-10-2012   5-501;
                      5-502;
                      5-601 -
                      5-610;
                      5-701;
                      5-702;
                      5-703-1 -
                      5-703-6;
                      5-801 -
                      5-813;
                      5-901 -
                      5-903
                      4-101;
                      4-102;
                      4-201—
                      4-208;
                      4-301—
                      4-307;
                      4-401;
                      4-402;
                      4-601—
                      4-604;
                      13-101;
                      13-102;
                      13-201;
                      13-301—
                      13-320;
                      13-401;
                      13-402;
                      14-101—
                      14-107;
                      14-201—
                      14-205;
                      14-301;
                      15-101—
                      15-103;
                      15-201—
                      15-215;
                      15-301—
                      15-307;
                      15-401;
                      15-501—
                      15-508;
                      15-601—
                      15-609;
                      15-701;
                      15-801;
                      15-802;
                      15-901—
                      15-905;
                      22-101;
2012-02   7-10-2012   22-201—
                      22-212;
                      22-301—
                      22-306;
                      22-401—
                      22-414;
                      22-501—
                      22-510;
                      22-601;
                      22-701—
                      22-706;
                      22-801—
                      22-808;
                      22-901;
                      22-902;
                      22-1001—
                      22-1013;
                      22-1101—
                      22-1121;
                      22-1201—
                      22-1210;
                      22-1301—
                      22-1312;
                      22-1401—
                      22-1407;
                      22-1501—
                      22-1507;
                      22-1601—
                      22-1607;
                      22-1701;
                      22-1801;
                      22-1901—
                      22-1905;
                      22-2001;
                      22-2101—
                      22-2103;
                      22-2201—
                      22-2204;
                      22-2501;
                      22-2502
2012-09   12-4-2012   22-2401
2012-03   2-5-2013    6-601
2012-04   2-5-2013    6-401
2012-05   2-5-2013    6-701
2012-06   2-5-2013    6-901
2012-07   2-5-2013    6-801
2012-08   2-5-2013    6-502
2012-10   2-5-2013    6-201
2013-01   4-2-2013    22-1906
2014-01   2-4-2014    15-1005
2014-03   8-5-2014    19-306
2014-05   10-7-2014   2-404;
                      2-405
2014-06   12-2-2014   15-309
2015-01   11-3-2015   22-1122
2016-02   4-5-2016    26-202-3
2016-04   8-2-2016    13-403
2016-05   8-2-2016    22-2502
2016-06   8-2-2016    11-106
2017-01   2-7-2017    20-205
2017-02   2-7-2017    6-1001
2017-03   10-3-2017   22-2301
2018-01   3-6-2018    26-105;
                      26-308
2018-03   5-1-2018    10-201
2018-05   7-16-2018   22-601
2018-06   9-4-2018    7-401 -
                      7-409
2018-07   10-2-2018   22-307
2018-08   10-2-2018   14-104
2019-01   1-2-2019    7-401 -
                      7-409
19-03     11-5-2019   3-309
20-01     2-4-2020    12-801 -
                      12-806
2020-02   2-4-2020    16-206
2020-03   9-1-2020    11-106
2020-04   12-1-2020   26-201-2
2021-01   4-6-2021    1-309
2021-02   4-6-2021    26-203-6
2021-04   5-4-2021    1-201
2021-05   10-5-2021   5-405
2022-002  6-7-2022    15-801
2022-003  6-7-2022    5-101;
                      5-305
                      10-102;
2022-004  6-7-2022    10-501—
                      10-504
2022-005  11-1-2022   1-309
2022-06   11-1-2022   1-515
2022-07   12-6-2022   6-106
2023-001  2-7-2023    1-515
                      4-102;
                      4-301;
23-002    5-2-2023    4-303;
                      4-305—
                      4-307;
                      4-501
23-003    5-2-2023    26-505
23-004    6-6-2023    15-509
                      15-802;
23-005    9-5-2023    15-803;
                      15-805—
                      15-807
23-007    10-3-2023   5-10-01
23-008    11-7-2023   6-101;
                      6-102
                      7-101;
23-010    11-7-2023   7-102;
                      7-105—
                      7-111
23-011    11-7-2023   26-203-6
23-013    11-7-2023   20-201
23-014    11-7-2023   2-404;
                      2-405
23-015    12-5-2023   1-303
24-002    2-6-2024    18-604
24-003    4-2-2024    26-309
24-004    4-2-2024    6-106
24-006    4-15-2024   5-703-2
24-007    5-7-2024    5-703-1
24-008    5-7-2024    7-501 -
                      7-509
24-009    5-7-2024    26-203-6
24-010    7-2-2024    1-318
24-011    7-2-2024    1-308 -
                      1-311
                     
 
 
