CITY CODE
of
McLOUD, OKLAHOMA
2004
Code current through:
Ord. 2026-04, passed 11-7-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of McLoud, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 2026-04, passed November 7, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2014-15
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A COMPILATION AND GENERAL CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY
OF MCLOUD, OKLAHOMA, TO BE KNOWN AS THE "MCLOUD CITY CODE", INCLUDING
ORDINANCES DEFINING OFFENSES AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE
SAME; REPEALING PREVIOUS CODIFICATIONS AND ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT WITH THE
MCLOUD CITY CODE, EXCEPT CERTAIN ORDINANCES HEREIN EXCEPTED; PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE; SAVING ALL PENDING PROCEEDINGS AND
EXISTING RIGHTS AND REMEDIES; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MCLOUD, OKLAHOMA:
SECTION 1. ADOPTION OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE
The ordinances and codes of a general, permanent and continuing character
affecting the public at-large of the city of McLoud ("city"), except for those
designated in this ordinance, have been compiled and codified under the
authority of the McLoud city council pursuant to the terms entered into by and
between the city and Sterling Codifiers Inc. of Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, are
hereby approved, adopted and ordained to be the code of ordinances of the city
upon the subjects set out in the code. This code of ordinances shall be in full
force and effect from and after the date or dates specified in this ordinance.
The code of ordinances, consisting of titles one (1) through twelve (12), each
inclusive, and all ordinances up to and including ordinance no. 2014-14,
adopted November 20, 2014, are hereby adopted and enacted as the "McLoud city
code", which code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the
city adopted on or before December 1, 2014 to the extent provided in this
ordinance.
SECTION 2. SUPPLEMENTAL ORDINANCES
Any ordinances amending the McLoud city code, adopted after December 1, 2014,
shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the 2014
McLoud city code. Any and all supplements, additions and amendments to the
McLoud city code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the
city council to make the same a part of the 2014 McLoud city code, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into the McLoud city code, so that reference to the
2014 McLoud city code shall be understood and intended to include such
supplements, additions and amendments as part of the 2014 McLoud city code.
SECTION 3. EXCEPTIONS
All ordinances enacted subsequent to ordinance no. 2014-14, which was adopted
November 20, 2014, are not included in the codified publication as of the
effective date of this ordinance and it is hereby provided that all such
ordinances shall continue in full force and effect from and after this date
until repealed.
SECTION 4. REPEAL
All prior codified city ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted on
or before December 1, 2014, and not included in the 2014 McLoud city code or
recognized and continued in force by reference in this ordinance are hereby
repealed. In addition, all prior uncodified city ordinances or parts of
ordinances of a general and permanent nature and enacted prior to December 1,
2014, that conflict with the provisions of the 2014 McLoud city code are hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 5. DIRECTIONS TO CITY CLERK
The city clerk, upon passage of this ordinance, are directed to take all
actions necessary to comply with the provisions of article XIV of title 11 of
Oklahoma's Statutes concerning the codification of the ordinances of the city.
SECTION 6. SUMMARY OF CONTENTS OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE
As required by title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, sections 14-108(C), 14-107(A) and
14-106, the contents of the McLoud city code are summarized as reflected in
exhibit "A", which is attached to this ordinance and incorporated here by
reference.
SECTION 7. SAVING CLAUSE
Neither the repeal of any of said ordinances nor any of the provisions
contained herein shall be deemed or construed to impair, modify, alter, or
affect any rights, right of action or cause of action, whether now pending in
any court or not, which are now existing or which may arise or come into
existence, before the date when the McLoud city code described above shall take
effect.
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or any part
thereof is for any reason found to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of
this ordinance or any part thereof.
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE
The 2014 McLoud city code shall be deemed to be in effect, in full force and
operation as of twelve and one second (12:00:01) A.M. on January 1, 2015,
provided that ordinances enacted subsequent to ordinance no. 2014-14, which was
enacted November 20, 2014 shall be deemed effective on the dates provided in
such ordinances.
SECTION 10. EMERGENCY CLAUSE
That an emergency is hereby declared to exist for the preservation of the
public peace, health and safety, and more particularly to provide for the
orderly continuation of the necessary functions, operations and government of
the city of McLoud, by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect
immediately from and after its passage and approval.
ADOPTED by the council: December 18, 2014.
ADOPTED as an emergency measure voted upon separately and approved by an
affirmative vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of the city council: December
18, 2014.
Approved: Phil Solinger, Mayor
Attest: A Kay Heinz, City Clerk/Treasurer
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-04
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A COMPILATION AND GENERAL CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY
OF MCLOUD, OKLAHOMA, TO BE KNOWN AS THE "MCLOUD CITY CODE," INCLUDING
ORDINANCES DEFINING OFFENSES AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE
SAME; REPEALING PREVIOUS CODIFICATIONS AND ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT WITH THE
MCLOUD CITY CODE, EXCEPT CERTAIN ORDINANCES HEREIN EXCEPTED; PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE; SAVING ALL PENDING PROCEEDINGS AND
EXISTING RIGHTS AND REMEDIES, PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MCLOUD, OKLAHOMA;
SECTION 1. ADOPTION OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE
The ordinances and codes of a general, permanent and continuing character
affecting the public at large of the City of McLoud ("City"), except for those
designated in this ordinance, have been compiled and codified under the
authority of the McLoud City Council pursuant to the terms entered into by and
between the City and American Legal are hereby approved, adopted and ordained
to be the code of ordinances of the City upon the _subjects set out in the
code. This code of ordinances shall be in full force and effect from and after
the date or dates specified in this ordinance. The code of ordinances,
consisting of titles One (1) through Twelve (12), each inclusive, and all
ordinances up to and including ordinance no. 2025-06, adopted January 23, 2025,
2025, are hereby adopted and enacted as the "McLoud City Code," which code
shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or
before November 7, 2025 to the extent provided in this ordinance.
SECTION 2. SUPPLEMENTAL ORDINANCES
Any ordinances amending the McLoud City Code, adopted after November 7, 2025,
shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the 2025
McLoud City Code. Any and all supplements, additions and amendments to the
McLoud City Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the
city council to make the same a part of the 2025 McLoud City Code, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into the McLoud City Code, so that reference to the
2025 McLoud City Code shall be understood and intended to include such
supplements, additions and amendments as part of the 2025 McLoud City Code.
SECTION 3. EXCEPTIONS
All ordinances enacted subsequent to ordinance 2025-06, adopted January 23,
2025, are not included in the codified publication as of the effective date of
this ordinance and it is hereby provided that all such ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect from and after this date until repealed.
SECTION 4. REPEAL
All prior codified city ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted on
or before November 7, 2025, and not included in the 2025 McLoud City Code or
recognized and continued in force by reference in this ordinance are hereby
repealed. In addition, all prior uncodified city ordinances or parts of
ordinances of a general and permanent nature and enacted prior to November 7,
2025, that conflict with the provisions of the 2025 McLoud City Code are hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 5. DIRECTIONS TO CITY CLERK
The city clerk, upon passage of this ordinance, is directed to take all actions
necessary to comply with the provisions of Article XIV of Title 11 of
Oklahoma's Statutes concerning the codification of the ordinances of the City.
SECTION 6. SUMMARY OF CONTENTS OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE
As required by title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, Sections 14-107, the contents of the
McLoud City Code are summarized as reflected in Exhibit "A," which is attached
to this ordinance and incorporated here by reference.
SECTION 7. SAVING CLAUSE
Neither the repeal of any of said ordinances nor any of the provisions
contained herein shall be deemed or construed to impair, modify, alter, or
affect any rights, right of action or cause of action, whether now pending in
any court or not, which are now existing or which may arise or come into
existence, before the date when the McLoud City Code described above shall take
effect.
SECTION 8. SEVERABILITY
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance or any part there
is for any reason found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance
or any part thereof.
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE MCLOUD CITY CODE
The 2025 McLoud City Code shall be deemed to be in effect, in full force and
operation as of twelve and one second (12:00:01) A.M. on December 1, 2025,
provided that ordinances enacted subsequent to ordinance No. 2025-06, adopted
January 23, 2025 shall be deemed effective on the dates provided in such
ordinances.
SECTION 10. EMERGENCY CLAUSE
That an emergency is hereby declared to exist for the preservation of the
public peace, health and safety, and more particularly to provide for the
orderly continuation of the necessary functions, operations and government of
the City of McLoud, by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect
immediately from and after its passage and approval.
ADOPTED by the council: November 7th, 2025.
ADOPTED as an emergency measure voted upon separately and approved by an
affirmative cote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of the city council: November 7,
2025.
Approved: Daniel McClure, Mayor
Attest: Cynthia Wayman, City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Ordinances In Effect In Outlying City Property
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-6: Ward Boundaries
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official code of McLoud. This code of ordinances
shall be known and cited as the McLOUD CITY CODE and is hereby published by
authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most
recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2004 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2004 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Numbering System: All ordinances passed subsequent to this code of
ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered
in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection
or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages.
   B.   Ordaining Language: Amendments to any of the provisions of this code
may be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of
this code in substantially the following language: "Be it ordained by the city
council of the city of McLoud, Oklahoma, that section            of the city
code of the city of McLoud, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows:"
(set out new provisions in full).
   C.   New Provisions: When the city council desires to enact an ordinance of
a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the
code, which the council desires to incorporate into the code, a section in
substantially the following language may be made part of the ordinance:
Section           . Be it ordained by the city council of the city of McLoud,
Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part
of the city code of the city of McLoud, Oklahoma, and the sections of this
ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish this intention.
   D.   Provisions Repealed: All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of
this code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or
chapter number, as the case may be. (1987 Code § 1-106)
   E.   Codification: All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall
be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each
such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in
each individual copy of the code. (2004 Code)
1-1-4: ORDINANCES IN EFFECT IN OUTLYING CITY PROPERTY:
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to
all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the
corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in
the future shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of,
all said outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words
in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is
limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include
also the outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the
city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1984 Code § 1-110)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2004 Code)
1-1-6: WARD BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Ward 1: Beginning at the most northerly point of an area of land in
District 1, thence easterly 0.17 miles along Unnamed Boundary, thence
southeasterly 2.41 miles along North Canadian River, thence southerly 1.08
miles along Unnamed Boundary, thence southerly 0.17 miles along Stevens Road,
thence northeasterly 0.91 miles along Unnamed Boundary, thence southeasterly
0.12 miles along State Hwy 270, thence westerly 0.87 miles along Garretts Lake
Road, thence southerly 0.30 miles along Stevens Road, thence southerly 0.69
miles along Unnamed Boundary, thence westerly 2.19 miles along SE 74th St,
thence northerly 0.44 miles along Parkwood Terrace, thence easterly 0.19 miles
along Parkway Drive, thence northerly 0.33 miles along Arena Road, thence
easterly 0.61 miles along Unnamed Line, thence easterly 0.38 miles along North
Deer Creek, thence northerly 0.93 miles along S McLoud Road, thence westerly
0.38 miles along Zelda Lane, thence northerly 0.38 miles along Kimberly Drive,
thence easterly 0.43 miles along Redskin Road, thence northerly 0.61 miles
along S McLoud Road, thence northwesterly 0.14 miles along S 4th St, thence
westerly 0.07 miles along E Forest Blvd, thence northerly 0.22 miles along S
Main St, thence westerly 0.14 miles along E Park St, thence northerly 0.07
miles along S 6th St, thence westerly 0.14 miles along Oklahoma St, thence
northerly 0.09 miles along S 8th St, thence easterly 0.07 miles along W
Broadway Ave, thence northerly 0.04 miles along N 7th St, thence northeasterly
0.09 miles along Unnamed Local Road, thence easterly 0.07 miles along W
Hinchley St, thence northerly 0.07 miles along Unnamed Local Road, thence
easterly 0.09 miles along W Pitman Ave, thence northerly 0.10 miles along N
Main St, thence northwesterly 0.95 miles along Chicago Rock Island and Pacific
RR to the aforementioned point of beginning.
Beginning at the most northerly point of an area of land in District l, thence
easterly 0.58 miles along I- 40, thence southerly 0.01 miles along Unnamed
Boundary, thence westerly 0.58 miles along I- 40, thence northerly 0.01 miles
along Unnamed Boundary to the aforementioned point of beginning.
   B.   Ward 2: Beginning at the most northerly point of District 2, thence
southeasterly 0.95 miles along Chicago Rock Island and Pacific RR, thence
southerly 0.10 miles along N Main St, thence westerly 0.09 miles along W Pitman
Ave, thence southerly 0.07 miles along Unnamed Local Road, thence westerly 0.07
miles along W Hinchley St, thence southwesterly 0.09 miles along Unnamed Local
Road, thence southerly 0.04 miles along N 7th St, thence westerly 0.07 miles
along W Broadway Ave, thence southerly 0.09 miles along S 8th St, thence
westerly 0.08 miles along W Oklahoma St, thence westerly 0.03 miles along
Oklahoma St, thence southerly 0.32 miles along Folsom Drive, thence southerly
0.08 miles along Harris Drive, thence southerly 0.12 miles along E Heritage
Park Road, thence westerly 0.46 miles along W Seikel Blvd, thence northerly
1.45 miles along N3310 Road, thence northwesterly 0.12 miles along Kickapoo
Road, thence easterly 0.28 miles along Unnamed Boundary to the aforementioned
point of beginning.
   C.   Ward 3: Beginning at the most northerly point of District 3, thence
easterly 0.25 miles along Kickapoo Road, thence southeasterly 0.55 miles along
Unnamed Boundary, thence easterly 0.06 miles along Unnamed Property Line,
thence northerly 0.23 miles along SE 15th St, thence easterly 1.02 miles along
Kickapoo Road, thence southerly 1.45 miles along N3310 Road, thence easterly
0.46 miles along W Seikel Blvd, thence northerly 0.12 miles along E Heritage
Park Road, thence northerly 0.08 miles along Harris Drive, thence northerly
0.32 miles along Folsom Drive, thence easterly 0.03 miles along Oklahoma St,
thence easterly 0.08 miles along W Oklahoma St, thence easterly 0.14 miles
along Oklahoma St, thence southerly 0.07 miles along S 6th St, thence easterly
0.14 miles along E Park St, thence southerly 0.22 miles along S Main St, thence
easterly 0.07 miles along E Forest Blvd, thence southeasterly 0.14 miles along
S 4th St, thence southerly 0.61 miles along S McLoud Road, thence westerly 1.98
miles along Redskin Road, thence northerly 1.49 miles along SE 15th St, thence
westerly 0.06 miles along Unnamed Property Line, thence northwesterly 0.96
miles along Unnamed Boundary to the aforementioned point of beginning.
Excepting the following: Beginning at the most northerly point of this excepted
area, thence northerly 0.81 miles along Unnamed Local Road to the
aforementioned point of beginning.
   D.   Ward 4: Beginning at the most northerly point of District 4, thence
easterly 2.51 miles along Redskin Road, thence southerly 0.38 miles along
Kimberly Drive, thence easterly 0.38 miles along Zelda Lane, thence southerly
0.93 miles along S McLoud Road, thence westerly 0.38 miles along North Deer
Creek, thence westerly 0.61 miles along Unnamed Line, thence southerly 0.33
miles along Arena Road, thence westerly 0.19 miles along Parkway Drive, thence
southerly 0.44 miles along Parkwood Terrace, thence easterly 3.18 miles along
SE 74th St, thence southerly 0.50 miles along Highway Drive, thence
southeasterly 1.01 miles along Unnamed Boundary, thence westerly 0.58 miles
along I- 40, thence southerly 0.01 miles along Unnamed Boundary, thence
easterly 0.58 miles along I- 40, thence westerly 6.40 miles along Unnamed
Boundary, thence northerly 0.04 miles along Pottawatomie Road, thence easterly
1.47 miles along Ew County Road 113, thence northerly 0.49 miles along Unnamed
Boundary, thence westerly 0.50 miles along I- 40, thence northerly 0.51 miles
along N3300 Road, thence westerly 0.97 miles along SE 74th St, thence northerly
0.43 miles along S Pottawatomie Road, thence northerly 0.60 miles along Unnamed
Boundary, thence northerly 0.97 miles along S Countyline Road to the
aforementioned point of beginning.
(Ord. 2014-17, 12-18-2014; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances; Effect Of Repeal
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; EFFECT OF REPEAL:
   A.   Repeal; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior to
the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in
this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2004 Code)
   B.   Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinances:
      1.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
      2.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under
the ordinance repealed. (1987 Code § 1-104)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2004 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2004 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any
codes or portions of codes adopted herein is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted
by reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words; Interpretations
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines Of Sections; Citations
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS; INTERPRETATIONS:
   A.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words
used in the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary
intention plainly appears.
   B.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   C.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases which are not
specifically defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted
usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
   D.   Or; And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the
sense requires it.
   E.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1987 Code §
1-102; amd. 2004 Code)
   F.   City: All references in this code to the town of McLoud are hereby
amended to refer to the city of McLoud. (Ord. 2009-03, 2-26-2009)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CLEET: Council on law enforcement and education training.
CITY: The city of McLoud, Pottawatomie County, state of Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The city council of the city of McLoud.
CODE: The city code of the city of McLoud.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be
done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the
time but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted.
COUNTY OR THIS COUNTY: The county of Pottawatomie, state of Oklahoma.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
McLoud".
GENDER: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other
genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving "joint authority" to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
LAW: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and
statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city of McLoud.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OS: Oklahoma Statutes.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
ORDINANCE: The formal legislative act of the city council which has the force
and effect of a continuing regulation and a permanent rule of conduct or
government for the city.
OTHER OFFICIALS OR OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made to officers, agencies
or departments by title only, i.e., "clerk", "city clerk", "city attorney",
"fire chief", "chief of police", etc., they shall mean the officers, agencies
or departments of the city of McLoud.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and
corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
RESOLUTION: A special or temporary act of the city council which is declaratory
of the will or opinion of the city in a given manner, and is in the nature of a
ministerial or administrative act. A resolution is not a law and does not
prescribe rule or conduct of government.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THIS STATE: Shall be construed to mean the state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as they
now are or as they may be amended to be.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other
public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
WHOLESALER, WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1987 Code § 1-102; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 2009-03, 2-26-
2009)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS; CITATIONS:
The catchlines of sections in this code and citations included at the end of
sections are intended to indicate the contents of the section and original
historical source respectively, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles
and official sources of such sections; nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections,
including the catchlines, or citations, are amended or reenacted. (1987 Code §
1-103; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Fines Recoverable By Civil Action
1-4-3: Application Of Provisions
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in
this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this
code or an ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor,
the violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00), except for traffic and parking violations; or a requirement of not
more than eighty (80) hours of community service work. (1987 Code § 1-108; amd.
2004 Code)
   B.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by state statute for the same offense. (2004 Code)
   C.   Aiding And Abetting Violation: Any person who shall aid, abet or assist
in the violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as
provided in this section.
   D.   Separate Offense For Each Day: Each day or any portion of a day during
which any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (1987 Code § 1-108)
1-4-2: FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION:
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. (1984 Code § 1-
109)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2004 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2004
Code)
CHAPTER 5
CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Membership; Terms
1-5-2: General Powers
1-5-3: Mayor
1-5-4: Vice Mayor
1-5-5: Acting Mayor
1-5-6: Meetings
1-5-7: Rules Of Order And Procedure
1-5-8: Designation Of Duties For Council Members
1-5-1: ELECTION; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Election: The city council shall consist of five (5) council members,
who are nominated and elected at large. (Ord. 1991-04, 4-11-1991)
   B.   Terms: The term of office for a council member shall be four (4) years
beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the second Monday following the
general municipal election. The council member shall serve until his successor
is elected and qualified.
      1.   The terms of the council members shall be staggered so that at the
general municipal election in 1987, the following council members shall be
elected for four (4) year terms:
         a.   Council members for positions one, three (3) and five (5).
      2.   At the general municipal election in 1989, the following officers
shall be elected for four (4) year terms:
         a.   Council members for positions two (2) and four (4). (1987 Code §
2-102)
1-5-2: GENERAL POWERS:
   A.   Pursuant to the provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 12-101 et
seq., the city shall have all the powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises and immunities granted, or which may be granted to cities governed
by the statutory city council form of government. These powers shall be
exercised as provided by law applicable to cities under the city council form
of government, or, if the manner is not prescribed, then in such manner as the
city council may prescribe.
   B.   The powers, rights and authorities of the city, including the
determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in, and exercised by, the
city council. (1987 Code § 2-101)
1-5-3: MAYOR:
   A.   Elected From Council Members: The city council shall elect from among
its members a mayor. The mayor shall be elected in each odd numbered year at
the first city council meeting held after council member terms begin, or as
soon thereafter as practicable. The mayor shall serve until his successor has
been elected and qualified.
   B.   Duties: The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by
it. He shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial
purposes and shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance. The mayor shall have all the powers, rights,
duties and responsibilities of a council member, including the right to vote on
questions.
   C.   Vacancy: When a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the council
shall elect another mayor from among its members to serve for the duration of
the unexpired term. (1987 Code § 2-201)
1-5-4: VICE MAYOR:
   A.   Elected From Council Members: The city council shall elect from among
its members a vice mayor. The vice mayor shall be elected in each odd numbered
year at the first city council meeting held after council member terms begin,
or as soon thereafter as practicable. The vice mayor shall serve until his
successor has been elected and qualified.
   B.   Duties: During the absence, disability or suspension of the mayor, the
vice mayor shall act on the mayor's behalf, shall serve in the capacity as
acting mayor, and shall have all the duties, powers, rights and
responsibilities of the mayor. The vice mayor shall have all the powers,
rights, duties and responsibilities of a council member, including the right to
vote on questions. (1987 Code § 2-202)
1-5-5: ACTING MAYOR:
During the absence of both the mayor and vice mayor, the council shall elect
from among its members an acting mayor. (1987 Code § 2-202)
1-5-6: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular: The city council shall meet regularly on the fourth Thursday
of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and at such other times as it may
prescribe by ordinance, resolution or otherwise. When the day for a meeting
falls upon a designated state, federal or city legal holiday the meeting shall
be held on the preceding Tuesday, or such other day as designated by the city
council. (Ord. 2015-04, 5-26-2015)
   B.   Special: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any three (3)
council members. (Ord. 1997-06, 6-12-1997; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Quorum: A majority of all the members of the council shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. (Ord.
1997-06, 6-12-1997)
   D.   Place For Holding Meetings:
      1.   The meetings of the council shall be held at the Shannon Fredman
Building, or at such other locations as shall be designated by motion or
resolution of the city council.
      2.   An adjourned meeting may be held at any place designated by motion
or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2015-04, 5-26-2015)
1-5-7: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Determination Of Rules: The council may determine its own rules, and
may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and under penalties
as the council may prescribe.
   B.   Absence From Meetings: Whenever a council member is absent from more
than one-half (1/2) of all meetings of the council, regular and special, held
within any period of four (4) consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to
hold office.
   C.   Parliamentary Procedure: "Robert's Rules Of Order, Revised", shall
govern parliamentary procedure of the city council unless otherwise provided by
this code or city council.
   D.   Order Of Business: The order of business for each meeting of the
council shall be in accordance with the open meeting act 1 . (1987 Code § 2-
104)
 
Notes
1 1. 25 OS §§ 301 – 314.
1-5-8: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The city council may designate various ones of its members or a committee of
its members to have supervision of various personnel and activities of the city
(for example, those working on the streets, those working in the water system)
and may give each such council member or committee designated an appropriate
title. Each such council member or committee so designated shall be subordinate
to the council. (1987 Code § 2-105)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Bond
1-6-2: Oath
1-6-3: Salaries
1-6-4: Continuation In Office
1-6-5: Social Security
1-6-6: Employee Retirement System
1-6-7: Firefighters Pension And Retirement Fund
1-6-8: Authorization To Carry Concealed Firearms For Self-Defense
1-6-1: BOND:
   A.   Requirement: The council shall require the city treasurer, the city
clerk, the chief of police, and any other officers and employees as it may
designate by ordinance or otherwise to give bond for the faithful performance
of duties in such amount and form as the council shall prescribe.
   B.   Premiums Paid By City: The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
   C.   Bonds Filed With Council: The bonds shall be filed and approved by the
city council. (1987 Code § 2-326)
1-6-2: OATH:
All officers of the city, elective and appointive, including salaried
employees, shall, within thirty (30) days after their election or appointment,
and before entering upon the duties of the respective offices, take and
subscribe to the oath of office required by law before some person authorized
to administer the same. (1987 Code § 2-328)
1-6-3: SALARIES:
   A.   Salaries Set By Ordinance: The compensation of all officers and
employees, excepting those whose compensation the law requires to be set by
ordinance, may be determined by motion or resolution adopted by the city
council, and may be changed at any time in the same manner.
   B.   Number And Classes Of Officers: Except as the law provides otherwise,
the city council may determine or regulate the number and classes of officers
and employees.
   C.   Elected Officials:
      1.   Salaries of elected officers shall be fixed by ordinance. (1987 Code
§ 2-327)
      2.   The salaries of the elected clerk and elected treasurer shall be
exclusive of the cost to the employer in a municipal retirement system at such
time as the city elects to participate in such a retirement system by action of
the city council for the city's employees. (Ord. 1991-01, 1-24-1991)
   D.   Salaries Of Specific Elected Officers:
      1.   The mayor and each council member, twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
month, to be effective beginning the next elected term of each named official.
(Ord. 2011-01, 1-27-2011)
      2.   Clerk-treasurer, three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month,
beginning next term. (Ord. 2003-04, 1-23-2003)
1-6-4: CONTINUATION IN OFFICE:
Every officer who is elected or appointed for a definite term shall continue to
serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed and qualifies,
unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation, disqualification,
removal, death, abolition of the office, or other legal matter. (1987 Code § 2-
329)
1-6-5: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy: It is hereby declared to be the policy and
purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the eligible employees
and officials of the city the benefits of the system of federal old age and
survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and all
amendments thereto, and 51 Oklahoma Statutes section 121 et seq. In pursuance
of this policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (1987
Code § 2-401)
   B.   Execution Of Agreement With State Agency: The mayor is authorized and
directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the state
department of human services to accomplish the provisions of subsection A of
this section. (1987 Code § 2-402)
   C.   Withholdings: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and
officials for the purposes provided in subsection A of this section are hereby
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state or federal agency designated by the laws and regulations. (1987 Code § 2-
403)
   D.   Contributions: Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts
appropriated for these purposes from available funds to the designated state or
federal agency in accordance with applicable state or federal laws or
regulations. (1987 Code § 2-404)
   E.   Records And Reports: The city clerk shall keep such records and submit
such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations. (1987 Code § 2-405)
   F.   Exclusions: Excluded from this section authorizing the extension of
social security benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
      1.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
      2.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations. (1987 Code § 2-406)
1-6-6: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though set forth herein in its
entirety, an employee retirement system for the city. A copy of said retirement
system, and amending ordinances, shall be on file and available for inspection
in the office of the city clerk.
(2004 Code; amd. Ord. 2022-09, 4-28-2022)
1-6-7: FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT FUND 1 :
   A.   System Adopted: The city hereby adopts the provisions of state law
governing the Oklahoma firefighters pension and retirement system and
amendments thereto for the purpose of providing firefighters of the city with a
retirement program. (1987 Code § 2-501; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Fund Operated In Accordance With Law: The firefighters pension and
retirement fund shall be operated in accordance with state law relating to the
fund, and pensions and other benefits shall be paid as provided by state law.
(1987 Code § 2-502; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Contributions To Fund:
      1.   The clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid
member of the fire department the appropriate amounts of monies as established
and required by state law as contribution to the firefighters pension and
retirement fund. However, if the members of the fire department, by a majority
vote of its paid members, vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the
amounts authorized by this subsection shall be increased to reflect the amounts
approved by the majority vote. The treasurer of the city shall deposit monthly
with the Oklahoma firefighters pension and retirement board the amounts
deducted pursuant to this subsection. Any amounts deducted from the salary or
wages of a fire department member shall be made at the time of each payroll.
The deductions shall be set forth in the payroll so that each member may be
able to ascertain the exact amount which he is contributing. (1987 Code § 2-
503; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   The city treasurer shall deposit monthly with the Oklahoma
firefighters pension and retirement board the amounts of monies as established
and required by state law for each paid member of the fire department.
      3.   For each volunteer member of the fire department, the city treasurer
shall deposit yearly with the Oklahoma firefighters pension and retirement
board the amounts of monies as established and required by state law. These
amounts may be revised according to actual studies and amounts as set by the
Oklahoma firefighters pension and retirement board.
      4.   All assets of the city firefighters pension and retirement fund
shall be transferred to the Oklahoma firefighters pension and retirement board.
Assets shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities and such
other specific assets as permitted by the state board. (1987 Code § 2-503)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 2 of this code for fire department.
1-6-8: AUTHORIZATION TO CARRY CONCEALED FIREARMS FOR SELF-DEFENSE:
   A.   Authorization To Carry Concealed Firearms. Pursuant to the Municipal
Carry Act and subject to the limitations set forth herein, municipal elected
officials and City employees who have obtained a valid Oklahoma Concealed Carry
License under the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act (21 O.S. § 1290.1 et seq.) are
hereby authorized to carry concealed firearms on City property and during the
performance of their official duties for the purpose of lawful self-defense.
   B.   Amendment To 21 O.S. 2021, Section 1277. This section shall operate as
a local amendment consistent with the authority granted under 21 O.S. § 1277,
which permits municipalities to authorize the carrying of concealed firearms by
elected officials and employees on municipal property. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to conflict with state law or to authorize the carrying of
firearms in locations prohibited by federal or state statute.
   C.   Limitations And Conditions.
      1.   This authorization applies only to individuals who: (1) Are
currently serving as elected officials of the City or are employed by the City;
(2) Hold a valid and current Oklahoma Concealed Carry License; and (3) Are not
prohibited from possessing firearms under state or federal law.
      2.   Concealed firearms may not be carried in any building or facility
where carrying is prohibited by state or federal law.
      3.   The City Manager may establish administrative policies for
notification procedures between the City and employees or elected officials for
the purposes of including but not limited to locations where carrying a firearm
is unlawful pursuant to state law, recordkeeping, and training related to this
section. (Ord. 2026-03, 9-25-2025)
ARTICLE A. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Administrative Powers
1-6A-2: Appointment; Qualifications; Term
1-6A-3: Powers And Duties
1-6A-4: Acting City Administrator
1-6A-5: Compensation
1-6A-6: Vacancy
1-6A-1: ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS:
The city administrator shall serve as the administrative head of the municipal
government in accordance with the policies determined by the city council and
shall be granted the responsibilities as provided for in this article. (Ord.
1998-06, 6-11-1998)
1-6A-2: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
   A.   Office Established; Appointment: There shall be a city administrator
who shall be appointed by the city council for an indefinite term, by a vote of
the majority of all its members.
   B.   Qualifications: The city council shall choose the city administrator
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with
special reference to actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice
in respect to the duties of the office.
   C.   Appointment From City Council Prohibited: Neither the mayor nor any
member of the city council shall be appointed city administrator during the
terms for which the council member shall have been elected or appointed, nor
within one year after the expiration of the council member's term.
   D.   Removal: The city council may suspend or remove the city administrator
for the good of the service by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its
members. (Ord. 1998-06, 6-11-1998)
1-6A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall be the chief executive officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. The city administrator shall
execute the laws and administer the government of the city, and shall be
responsible therefor to the city council. The city administrator shall:
   A.   Conduct and have responsibility for all phases of the disciplinary
action process. This excludes the termination of an employee, unless city
council approval is obtained with regard thereto.
   B.   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and
agencies.
   C.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the city council and be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which the city administrator
deems necessary.
   D.   Submit to the city council a report after the end of the year of the
finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year.
   E.   Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the city, and make recommendations as necessary.
   F.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
(Ord. 1998-06, 6-11-1998)
1-6A-4: ACTING CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Designation; Letter Filed With Clerk: By letter filed with the city
clerk, the city administrator may designate, subject to city council approval,
a qualified city administrative officer to be acting city administrator during
his temporary absences or disabilities.
   B.   Revocation Of Designation: The city administrator or the city council
may revoke such designation at any time and another person may be designated
acting city administrator to serve during such time.
   C.   Appointment By Council: If the city administrator fails to make such
designation, the city council may appoint an acting city administrator to serve
during such time.
   D.   Removal: The city council may remove an acting city administrator at
any time. (Ord. 1998-06, 6-11-1998)
1-6A-5: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the city council
shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 1998-06, 6-11-
1998)
1-6A-6: VACANCY:
Any vacancy in the office of the city administrator shall be filled within
sixty (60) days after the effective date of such vacancy. (Ord. 1998-06, 6-11-
1998)
ARTICLE B. CITY CLERK-TREASURER
SECTION:
1-6B-1: City Clerk Duties
1-6B-2: Offices Combined
1-6B-3: Duties Of Clerk-Treasurer
1-6B-1: CITY CLERK DUTIES:
   A.   Duties: The city clerk shall:
      1.   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the council;
      2.   Enroll in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances and
resolutions passed by the council;
      3.   Have custody of documents, records and archives as may be provided
by law or ordinance and have custody of the city seal;
      4.   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by
law or ordinance;
      5.   Countersign warrants as required by state law; and
      6.   Have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
law or ordinance or by the council.
   B.   Additional Duties; Position Created:
      1.   Position Created For Performance Of Additional Duties: In addition
to the clerk's performance of the statutory duties of the office, there is also
created a position for the performance of such duties relating to the
maintenance of the books and records and office operations of the city as the
city council shall prescribe. The position shall include, but not be limited
to, acting in the capacity of purchasing agent, utility clerk, and planning
commission secretary, and such other responsibilities as may be assigned from
time to time.
      2.   Filling Position: The position shall be filled by the person serving
as the city clerk or as otherwise provided by the city council. The person
shall be an employee of the city and shall serve at the pleasure of the city
council.
      3.   Salary And Benefits: The salary and pay period for such position
shall be as set by the city council. Benefits, holidays and sick leave for such
position shall be provided in accordance with any personnel policy or other
policy of the city. The salary of this position shall not be subject to
constitutional restrictions. (1987 Code § 2-321; amd. Res. 2108, 8-10-2006)
1-6B-2: OFFICES COMBINED:
The offices of city clerk and city treasurer are hereby consolidated as deemed
necessary and convenient for the administration of the affairs or government of
the city. The consolidation of these offices shall go into effect at the end of
the term of those officers or when a vacancy exists in either office. (Ord.
2001-06, 6-28-2001)
1-6B-3: DUTIES OF CLERK-TREASURER:
   A.   Duties: The duties of the clerk-treasurer shall include the following:
      1.   Maintain accounts and books to show where and from what source all
monies paid to him/her have been derived and to whom and when any monies have
been paid;
      2.   Deposit daily funds received for the city in depositories as the
council may designate;
      3.   Disburse funds as provided by law; and
      4.   Have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed
by law or ordinance.
   B.   Additional Duties; Position Created:
      1.   Position Created For Performance Of Additional Duties: In addition
to the clerk-treasurer's performance of the statutory duties of the office,
this position may require the performance of such duties relating to the
financial maintenance of the books and records of the city as the city council
shall prescribe. The position may also include, but not be limited to, acting
in the capacity of finance director, administrative assistant, grant
administrator, and such other responsibilities as may be assigned from time to
time.
      2.   Filling Position: This position shall be filled by the person
serving as the city clerk-treasurer or as otherwise provided by motion or other
action of the city council. The person shall be an employee of the city and
shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.
      3.   Salary And Benefits: The salary and pay period for such position
shall be as set by the city council. Benefits, holidays, and sick leave for
such position shall be provided in accordance with any personnel policy or
other policy of the city. The salary of the position shall not be subject to
constitutional restrictions. (Ord. 2001-06, 6-28-2001)
ARTICLE C. OTHER PERSONNEL AND DUTIES
SECTION:
1-6C-1: City Attorney
1-6C-2: Health Officer
1-6C-3: Other Personnel, Additional Duties
1-6C-1: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment; Qualifications:
      1.   The city council may appoint a city attorney or may secure the
services of an attorney or attorneys on a contractual basis when needed.
      2.   The city attorney shall be a person of good moral character and a
member in good standing of the Oklahoma bar association.
      3.   The city attorney, when and if appointed, shall serve at the
pleasure of the council and shall be the legal adviser of the council, all
officers, departments and agencies of the city government in matters relating
to their official powers and duties.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   The city attorney may represent the city in proceedings in the
courts.
      2.   He shall perform all services incident to his position which may be
required by law or ordinance. (1987 Code § 2-323)
1-6C-2: HEALTH OFFICER 1 :
The city council may appoint a city health officer. The county health officer
or any qualified personnel of the state department of health may perform the
duties and functions of a city health officer. (1987 Code § 2-324)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  4-1-1 of this code.
1-6C-3: OTHER PERSONNEL, ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
   A.   Appointment Or Removal: The city council may appoint such other
officers and employees as it deems desirable, to work for the city and to
perform other appropriate duties and functions, and may demote, suspend, lay
off, or remove all such personnel for the good of the city.
   B.   Functions And Responsibilities: The city council may, by motion or
resolution, assign different functions and responsibilities to the various
officers of the city over and above their regular duties and to determine the
compensation to be paid for such duties or services. The authority provided for
herein extends to all the officers and employees of the city. (1987 Code § 2-
325)
CHAPTER 7
CITY RECORDS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Title
1-7-2: Purpose
1-7-3: Definitions
1-7-4: Open Public Records; Exceptions
1-7-5: Fees
1-7-6: Record Custodians
1-7-7: Confidential Personnel Records
1-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the McLOUD PUBLIC RECORDS ORDINANCE. (1987 Code
§ 2-601)
1-7-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable fees and charges for
the provision of access to, or copies of, open public records in the possession
of the city, to avoid the necessity of using general public funds of the city
to subsidize special services and benefits to a record requester. (1987 Code §
2-602)
1-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the terms "record", "public body", "public office", "public
official", and "law enforcement agency" shall carry the same meanings as those
terms or words are defined in the statutes of the state. (1987 Code § 2-603)
1-7-4: OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS; EXCEPTIONS:
All records of the city shall be open to any person for inspection, copying, or
mechanical reproduction during regular business hours, subject to the following
limitations. This chapter does not apply to records specifically required by
law to be kept confidential, including:
   A.   Records not discoverable under state law;
   B.   Records protected by a state evidentiary privilege such as the identity
of informer privileges; or
   C.   Records of what transpired during meetings of the city council during
executive sessions authorized under the state's open meetings act 1 . (1987
Code § 604)
 
Notes
1 1. 25 OS § 301 et seq.
1-7-5: FEES:
   A.   Imposition Of Fees: A reasonable fee for the recovery of the cost of
document copying or mechanical reproduction shall be charged. In those
instances where the request is made solely for commercial purposes or clearly
would cause excessive disruption of essential functions of any department, a
fee shall also be assessed to recover the direct cost of document search. A
schedule of the fees shall be as set by the city council for the document
copying and document search per copy for law enforcement records and for other
municipal records. Such fees shall be payable to the city clerk for receipt
into the general fund. The fees schedule shall be posted with the city clerk
and with the county clerk.
   B.   Exception To Fee Charge: In no case shall a search fee be charged when
the release of the documents is made to the news media, scholars, authors and
taxpayers seeking to determine whether those entrusted with the affairs of the
city are honestly, faithfully, and competently performing their duties.
   C.   False Claims: Any person, firm or entity who attempts to avoid the fees
established by this chapter for copying, reproduction or search, by falsely
claiming to be exempt, as set out above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1987 Code § 2-605)
1-7-6: RECORD CUSTODIANS:
   A.   Designation: The following city officers are hereby designated as
official custodians for the records of the city:
      1.   City clerk;
      2.   City treasurer;
      3.   City administrator;
      4.   City attorney;
      5.   Fire chief;
      6.   Police chief; and
      7.   Court clerk.
   B.   Subordinate Officers Or Employees: Each of the official custodians
appointed herein are hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or
employees to serve as record custodians of their office or department.
   C.   Requests:
      1.   All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a
public record in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall address
their request to the custodian charged with the responsibility for the
maintenance of the records sought to be inspected or copied.
      2.   Whenever any city officer, employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this section is presented with a request for access, to, or a
copy of, a public record, which record the custodian does not have in his or
her possession and for which he or she has not been given the responsibility to
keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the
record. (1987 Code § 2-606)
1-7-7: CONFIDENTIAL PERSONNEL RECORDS:
The following personnel records of the city employees are considered
confidential and are not subject to public inspection:
   A.   Those personnel records which relate to internal personnel
investigations, including examination and selection material for employment,
hiring, appointment, promotion, demotion, discipline, or resignation; or
   B.   Such personnel records which if disclosed would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, such as employee evaluations, payroll
deductions, or employment applications submitted by persons not hired by the
city. (1987 Code § 2-607)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Organization Of Court
1-8-2: Definitions
1-8-3: Jurisdiction Of Court
1-8-4: Judge Of The Court
1-8-5: Court Marshal Is Chief Of Police
1-8-6: Clerk Of The Court
1-8-7: Prosecuting Attorney
1-8-8: Rules Of Court
1-8-9: Prosecutions By Written Complaint
1-8-10: Citations For Traffic And Nontraffic Violations
1-8-11: Traffic Bail Bond Procedures
1-8-12: Violations Bureau; Fines In Lieu Of Appearance
1-8-13: Summons For Arrest
1-8-14: Form Of Arrest Warrant
1-8-15: Procedures For Bail Or Bond
1-8-16: Failure To Appear According To Terms Of Bond, Forfeiture
1-8-17: Arraignment And Pleadings By Defendant
1-8-18: Pleas
1-8-19: Trials And Judgments
1-8-20: Witness Fees
1-8-21: Trial By Jury And Waiver
1-8-22: Jurors And Jury Trial Procedures
1-8-23: Suspension Of Judgment Or Costs; Reconfinement
1-8-24: Imprisonment; Work By Prisoners
1-8-25: Community Service Work
1-8-26: Fines And Costs
1-8-27: Penalty Assessment
1-8-28: Narcotic Drug Control Fund
1-8-29: Data And Technical Support Fund
1-8-1: ORGANIZATION OF COURT:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal court
of the city as put into operation by resolution, duly passed and filed in
accordance with law, as authorized by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 27-101 and
27-102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any ordinance of the city, the provisions of this chapter
shall control. (1987 Code § 6-101; amd. 2004 Code)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The peace officer in charge of the police force of the city.
CLERK: The clerk of the city, including any deputy or member of the office
staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office.
COURT: The municipal court of the city.
JUDGE: The judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or
alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this
chapter.
THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The district court judicial district of the state of
Oklahoma wherein the government of this city is situated. (1987 Code § 6-102;
amd. 2004 Code)
1-8-3: JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with
applicable law. (1987 Code § 6-103)
1-8-4: JUDGE OF THE COURT:
   A.   Qualifications:
      1.   There shall be one judge of the court. A judge shall be an attorney
licensed to practice law in Oklahoma. He must be a resident of this county or
an adjacent county or maintain a law office therein.
      2.   A judge who is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law
in other courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his
duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected
with cases within the jurisdiction of the court pending therein, or which might
become the subject of proceedings therein. He may serve as judge of other
municipal courts, if such service may be accomplished consistent with his
duties as judge of this court, with the consent of the city council.
      3.   If a licensed attorney meeting the qualifications of this subsection
is not available or not appointed to serve, the city council may appoint a
resident of the city of the age of twenty five (25) years or older possessed of
good moral character. (1987 Code § 6-104)
   B.   Term: The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years, expiring
on the first Monday in May in each odd numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner
removed for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and
qualified. (1987 Code § 6-105)
   C.   Alternate Judge: There shall be appointed for each judge of the court
an alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications required by this
chapter for the judge. His appointment shall be for the same term and made in
the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the court in any
case if the judge is:
      1.   Absent from the court;
      2.   Unable to act as judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (1987 Code § 6-106)
   D.   Acting Judge: If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly
appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint
some person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the
judge, who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of
pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be
available. (1987 Code § 6-107)
   E.   Appointment Of Judge And Alternate Judge: Judges and alternate judges
shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. A
proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the city council at the
next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the day upon which the
appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at the next regularly
scheduled meeting. The city council may decide upon the proposed appointment by
a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure of decision upon a
proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly
scheduled meeting of the city council, unless the mayor, in writing, withdraws
the proposed appointment. (1987 Code § 6-108)
   F.   Salary And Payments To Judges:
      1.   A judge, other than an alternate judge or an acting judge, shall
receive compensation as set by the city council by motion or resolution.
      2.   An alternate judge or an acting judge shall be paid an amount as set
by motion or resolution of the city council, however payments to an acting or
alternate judge shall not exceed the salary set for a judge in whose stead he
sits. (1987 Code § 6-109)
   G.   Removal Of Judge; Hearing:
      1.   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council
for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the
removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by:
         a.   The mayor; or
         b.   Twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of the city.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
      2.   The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the
hearing, the judge shall be entitled to:
         a.   Representation by counsel;
         b.   Present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him;
and
         c.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
      3.   So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma
administrative procedures act governing individual proceedings, 75 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 309 to 317, as amended shall govern removal proceedings
hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by
a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of such removal. (1987
Code § 6-110)
   H.   Vacancy In Office:
      1.   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
         a.   Dies;
         b.   Resigns;
         c.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
         d.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed
finally in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
      2.   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor
shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as
an original appointment is made. (1987 Code § 6-111)
   I.   Disqualification Of Judge: In prosecutions before the court, no change
of venue shall be allowed; but the judge before whom the case is pending may
certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under the
terms, conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a
judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting
judge appointed as provided in this chapter. (1987 Code § 6-112)
1-8-5: COURT MARSHAL IS CHIEF OF POLICE:
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title,
to the chief of police of the city, who shall be the principal officer of the
court. (1987 Code § 6-113)
1-8-6: CLERK OF THE COURT:
   A.   Duties:
      1.   The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of
the court. He shall:
         a.   Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers.
         b.   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court.
         c.   Enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of
the court.
         d.   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the judge shall direct.
         e.   Receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums of
monies payable to the court.
         f.   Pay to the treasurer of the city all monies so received by him,
except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by
him for special purposes.
      2.   All monies paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund
of the city, or in such other funds as the city council may direct, and it
shall be used in the operation of the municipal government in accordance with
budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed. (1987 Code §
6-114)
   B.   Bond: The court clerk shall give bond, in the form provided by 11
Oklahoma Statutes section 27-111. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to
the city council for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk
of the city and retained in the city archives. (1987 Code § 6-116)
1-8-7: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY:
The attorney for the city, or his duly designated assistant, may be the
prosecuting officer of the court. He shall also prosecute all alleged
violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal proceedings in error and review from
this court to any other court of the state, and to represent the city in all
proceedings arising out of matters in this court. (1987 Code § 6-115)
1-8-8: RULES OF COURT:
   A.   Authority To Prescribe: The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with
the laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper
conduct of the business of the court. (1987 Code § 6-117)
   B.   Enforcement: Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the
judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison
for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against
processes issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the
district courts of this state. (1987 Code § 6-118)
1-8-9: PROSECUTIONS BY WRITTEN COMPLAINT:
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of the city shall be styled "The
City of McLoud vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as provided
hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of a written
complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting
forth concisely the offense charged and approved for filing. (1987 Code § 6-
119)
1-8-10: CITATIONS FOR TRAFFIC AND NONTRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Issuing Traffic Citation: If a police officer observes acts which he
believes to constitute a violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, he
may take the person's name, address, operator's license number, registered
license number of the motor vehicle involved and any other pertinent and
necessary information and may issue him, in writing in form prescribed by the
mayor or his duly designated delegate, a traffic citation embracing the above
information, and also stating the violation alleged to have occurred, and
notifying the person to answer to the charge against him at a time not later
than the date specified in the citation.
   B.   Arrest Of Violator; Warrant For Failure To Appear:
      1.   If a resident of the city is arrested by a police officer for a
violation of any traffic ordinance for which subsection
1-8-11A of this chapter does not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a
nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release the person if the
person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. Provided, however, the
arresting officer need not release the person if it reasonably appears to the
officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to
property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the
citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or
property.
      2.   If the person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant
shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled. If the
arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as
provided for, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment,
or shall be released on his personal recognizance.
   C.   Arrest Of Nonresident; Bail: If a nonresident of the city is arrested
by a police officer for a violation of any ordinance for which subsection
1-8-11A of this chapter does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be
admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on
his personal recognizance.
   D.   Amount And Conditions Of Bail; Cash Bond:
      1.   The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions
of subsections B and C of this section shall be determined by the judge who
shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release on personal
recognizance.
      2.   In the event of arrests at night, emergencies, or when the judge is
not available, a court official, the chief of police or his designated
representative may be authorized by the judge, subject to such conditions as
shall be prescribed by the judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a
sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused. The cash bond shall
not exceed the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged.
      3.   The court official, chief of police, or his designated
representative is authorized, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed
by the judge, to release a resident of the city on personal recognizance.
   E.   Parking Citation Placed On Vehicle: If the alleged offense be a
violation of an ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles,
including any regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator be
not present, the police officer shall place on the vehicle at a place
reasonably likely to come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming
substantially to that prescribed in subsection A of this section, with such
variation as the circumstances require. The operator of this vehicle shall be
under the same obligations to respond to the citation as if it had been issued
to him personally. (1987 Code § 6-120)
1-8-11: TRAFFIC BAIL BOND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Conditions For Release: In addition to other provisions of law for
posting bail, any person, whether a resident of this state or a nonresident,
who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation
of a state traffic law or municipal traffic ordinance, shall be released by the
arresting officer upon personal recognizance, if:
      1.   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States, or any party jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact.
      2.   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person. (1987 Code § 6-121)
      3.   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation, unless the person is unconscious or injured and requires
immediate medical treatment as determined by a treating physician.
      4.   The violation does not constitute:
         a.   A felony.
         b.   Negligent homicide.
         c.   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances, unless the person is unconscious or injured and requires immediate
medical treatment as determined by a treating physician. (1987 Code § 6-121;
amd. 2004 Code)
         d.   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer.
         e.   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver's license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial
or cancellation.
         f.   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant.
         g.   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in
subsections A4a through A4f of this section.
         h.   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight.
         i.   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   B.   Duties Of Arresting Officer Upon Release:
      1.   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided for in subsection A of this section, then the
arresting officer shall:
         a.   Designate the traffic charge.
         b.   Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on
the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver's license, driver's license number, issuing state,
and expiration date.
         c.   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information.
         d.   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation.
         e.   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as
provided for in the citation.
      2.   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance, based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment, is
conditional, and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person's driver's license in this state, or in
the nonresident's home state pursuant to the nonresident violator compact.
   C.   Compliance With State Law: Procedures for arraignment, continuances and
scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting
bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for
suspension of driver's license, shall be as required in state law, 22 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 1115.1 through 1115.5.
   D.   Guilty Plea; Payment Of Fine:
      1.   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the copy of
the citation furnished to him or on a legible copy thereof, together with the
date of the plea and his signature.
      2.   The defendant shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the
fine and costs to the court clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for
payment by mail.
      3.   If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as
provided for in this subsection, such plea shall be accepted by the court, and
the amount of the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the
violation charged or as prescribed by the court.
   E.   Failure To Appear; Arrest Warrant:
      1.   If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of this section, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant, and the municipal or district court clerk, within
one hundred twenty (120) calendar days from the date the citation was issued by
the arresting officer, shall notify the state department of public safety that:
         a.   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         b.   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         c.   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other
arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and
         d.   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      2.   The court clerk shall request the state department of public safety
to either suspend the defendant's driver's license to operate a motor vehicle
in this state, or notify the defendant's home state and request suspension of
the defendant's driver's license in accordance with the provisions of the
nonresident violator compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the state department of public safety. The court clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this subsection
if, with respect to such charges:
         a.   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
         b.   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or, if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         c.   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
         d.   A period of one hundred twenty (120) calendar days or more has
elapsed from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   F.   Record Of License Suspension Requests; Notice: The court clerk shall
maintain a record of each request for driver's license suspension submitted to
the state department of public safety pursuant to the provisions of this
section. When the court or court clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of
the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the
defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the court clerk shall furnish proof
thereof to such defendant, if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail
such proof by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the
address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the
defendant. Additionally, the court or court clerk shall notify the home
jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction
is a member of the nonresident violator compact, and shall in all other cases,
notify the state department of public safety of the resolution of the case. The
form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be approved by the
state department of public safety. Provided however, the court or court clerk's
failure to furnish such proof or notice in the manner provided for in this
subsection shall in no event create any civil liability upon the court, the
court clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any state
department or agency or any employee thereof but duplicate proof shall be
furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request.
   G.   Effective Date: This section shall become effective July 1, 1987. (1987
Code § 6-121)
1-8-12: VIOLATIONS BUREAU; FINES IN LIEU OF APPEARANCE:
   A.   Bureau Established; Rules: There is established a violations bureau for
the city. The judge may establish rules, consistent with the laws of the state
and with the ordinances of the city, for the violations bureau.
   B.   Administered By Court Clerk: The violations bureau shall be
administered by the court clerk and be physically separate and apart from the
police department.
   C.   Acceptance Of Fines: The violations bureau shall accept fines which may
be paid in lieu of a court appearance for such offenses as may be designated by
the city council. The schedule of fines shall be adopted by the city council
from time to time by motion or resolution. A copy shall be kept in the clerk's
office.
   D.   Court Appearance Required For Certain Offenses: In no event shall
payment of a fine without court appearance be accepted in the violations bureau
for the following offenses:
      1.   Driving under the influence of, or while impaired by, intoxicating
liquor or drugs;
      2.   A driver's license offense; or
      3.   If specifically directed by the citing officer, judge, or other
appropriate official to appear in court.
   E.   Final Determination Against Defendant: Payment of any fine to the
violations bureau shall be deemed a final determination of the cause against
the defendant.
   F.   Failure To Pay Fine: If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under
this section fails to do so, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of
this chapter. (1987 Code § 6-123)
1-8-13: SUMMONS FOR ARREST:
   A.   Issuance: Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any
ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or
unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested
and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person
charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the
offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in
the court on a certain day as specified after the summons is served upon him,
and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary.
   B.   Serving Summons; Issuance Of Warrant: The summons shall be served by
delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to
answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for
his arrest, as provided by this chapter. (1987 Code § 6-124)
1-8-14: FORM OF ARREST WARRANT:
   A.   Warrant Of Arrest; Form: Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances
of the city, upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the
attorney of the city or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of
arrest. (1987 Code § 6-125; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Execution Of Warrant: It is the duty of the marshal, personally, or
through a duly constituted member of the police force of the city, or through
any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as
promptly as possible. (1987 Code § 6-125)
1-8-15: PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND:
   A.   Bail Or Bond Allowed: Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in
response to citation or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after
arraignment, the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail
for his appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or
the judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of
bail. In case of arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency
or when the judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of
police, or his designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty
provided by ordinance for the offense charged.
   B.   Bail Bond Schedule: A bail bond schedule may be adopted by the judge
and amended from time. (1987 Code § 6-126)
1-8-16: FAILURE TO APPEAR ACCORDING TO TERMS OF BOND, FORFEITURE:
If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the
terms and conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or
judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court may be lawfully
required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes,
thereby determining the bond to be forfeited. When the bond is other than a
cash bond, without advancing court costs, the judge shall then cause the
forfeiture to be certified to the district court of Pottawatomie County, where
it shall be entered upon a judgment docket and shall have the full force and
effect of a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered
upon the district court judgment docket, the district court clerk shall proceed
in accordance with the provisions of 59 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1331 through
1335. A surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of 22
Oklahoma Statutes section 1108, and 59 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1301 through
1340. Court costs shall be collectable from the proceeds and the bond. (1987
Code § 6-127)
1-8-17: ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT:
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned.
The judge or the attorney of the city, shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial by
jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether
he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may
proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent
disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the
court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date.
(1987 Code § 6-128)
1-8-18: PLEAS:
Four (4) types of pleas are permissible in response to a complaint in the
municipal court:
   A.   Guilty.
   B.   Not guilty.
   C.   Nolo contendere, subject to the approval of the court. The legal effect
of such plea shall be the same as that of a plea of guilty, but the plea may
not be used against the defendant as an admission in any civil suit based upon
or growing out of the act upon which the criminal prosecution is based.
   D.   A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged,
which must be specially pleaded, either with or without the plea of not guilty.
(1987 Code § 6-129)
1-8-19: TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
   A.   Postponement: Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
   B.   Presence Of Defendant: The defendant must be present in person at the
trial. (1987 Code § 6-130)
   C.   Procedure: In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or
by the statutes relating to municipal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by
the supreme court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in trials of
misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be
made effective. (1987 Code § 6-130; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Render Judgment: If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after
the trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within
the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence
accordingly.
   E.   Judgment And Sentence: At the close of trial, the court may proceed to
judgment and sentence, or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.
   F.   Acquittal: If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once.
   G.   Imprisonment; Inability To Pay Fine: A judgment that the defendant pay
a fine may also direct that he be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied at the
rate of one day imprisonment for each five dollars ($5.00) of fine. If the
defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may
direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be
certified to the district court of the county wherein the situs of government
is situated where it shall be entered upon the district court judgment docket
and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment.
Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement of the
judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. (1987 Code § 6-130)
1-8-20: WITNESS FEES:
   A.   Fees Paid By Defendant; Deposit: Witnesses in any proceeding in the
court other than the police officers or peace officers shall be entitled to a
sum per each day of attendance, plus mileage for each mile actually and
necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance, if
their residence is outside the limits of the city. However, no witness shall
receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or
the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with
the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance
for each witness to be summoned, with the exception as provided in subsection B
of this section.
   B.   Indigent Defendants:
      1.   Such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who
files an affidavit setting out:
         a.   The names of no more than three (3) witnesses;
         b.   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to
provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
         c.   That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
         d.   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper
defense.
      2.   The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. (1987 Code §
6-131)
1-8-21: TRIAL BY JURY AND WAIVER:
   A.   Jury Trial: In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable
by fine of more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding court costs, or
by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment, trial shall be by jury,
unless waived by the defendant and the city. If trial by jury is waived, trial
shall be to the court. (1987 Code § 6-132; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Defendant's Change Of Decision: An election waiving jury trial, made at
arraignment, may be changed by the defendant at any time prior to the day for
which trial by the court is set; an election demanding jury trial may be
changed at any time prior to the commencement of proceedings to impanel the
jury for the trial, but if that change occurs after the case has been set for
jury trial, it may not thereafter be rechanged so as again to demand trial by
jury. (1987 Code § 6-132)
1-8-22: JURORS AND JURY TRIAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Drawing Of Names Of Potential Jurors: Whenever a calendar has been made
up for the trial of cases by jury, the judge shall request, in writing, the
presiding judge of the district court for this judicial district to cause the
names of a stated number of jurors, deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases
on the calendar, to be drawn from the jury wheel in accordance with the
governing statutes of the state, and to be certified by the clerk of the
district court to the judge of the municipal court. The request shall be made
in time for the list to be certified and the jurors to be summoned legally
before the trial of the calendar begins. If it is anticipated that the
completion of the calendar will require more than two (2) weeks, the request
for jurors shall specify the number required for each two (2) week period, as
provided by law for the drawing of jurors for the district court. Additional
drawing of other names also may be requested by the judge, when necessary, in
accordance with the law for such additional drawings in the district court. If,
in the future, provisions of the law respecting the drawing of jury lists for
the district court are changed, the judge shall take such steps, in requesting
jury lists for the court, as are necessary to comply with the state law. (1987
Code § 6-133)
   B.   Summons Of Jurors; Form: Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of
the court shall cause a summons in the appropriate form to be issued and served
upon each person on the list. (1987 Code § 6-133; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Service Of Summons: Service shall be made, as the judge may prescribe
by rule or direct by order, either in person upon the juror by the marshal of
the court or by any member of the police force of the city, or by the clerk of
the court, through certified mail, directed to the juror at his address as
given in the jury list with request for a personally signed return receipt. In
any proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the
due mailing of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the
presentation of an official postal return receipt purportedly signed by the
addressee shall be prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by
the addressee and, therefore, that he was properly served therewith.
   D.   Number And Qualifications: A jury in the court shall consist of six (6)
jurors, good and lawful men or women, citizens of the county of Pottawatomie,
possessing the qualifications of jurors in district court.
   E.   Hearing Testimony: After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together
and hear the proofs and oral arguments of the parties, which must be delivered
in public and in the presence of the defendant.
   F.   Rendering Verdict: A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of
five (5) jurors.
   G.   Determine Questions Of Law: In all actions tried before a jury, the
judge shall determine all questions of law, including questions as to the
introduction of evidence arising during the trial. He also shall instruct the
jury as to the law.
   H.   Verdict: The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When
the jury has arrived at its verdict, it must deliver the verdict publicly to
the court. The judge must enter the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so
entered.
   I.   Discharge Of Jury: The jury must not be discharged after the case is
submitted to it until a verdict is rendered, unless the judge, for good cause,
discharges it sooner, in which event the court may proceed again to trial, and
so on, until a verdict is rendered.
   J.   Compensation For Jurors: Jurors shall receive for their services a sum
as set by the city council per day, plus mileage for each mile necessarily
traveled by the most direct route in going to and from the court from their
respective places of residence, if their residence is outside the limits of the
city. The claims for such compensation shall show the location of the juror's
residence and the route and miles traveled, and must be verified as other
claims against the city are verified. Jurors shall be paid out of the general
funds of the city. (1987 Code § 6-133)
1-8-23: SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT OR COSTS; RECONFINEMENT:
   A.   Release Of Defendant: Whenever any person shall be convicted in the
municipal court of violating a city ordinance, the judge trying the case, after
sentence, may suspend the judgment or costs, or both, and allow the person so
convicted to be released upon his own recognizance. Any person so released
shall be required to report at such times and to such person or officer as the
judge shall direct.
   B.   Further Violations; Warrant Issuance:
      1.   The judge may cause a warrant to be issued for any person so
released if it shall be made to appear to the judge that such person:
         a.   Has been guilty of the violation of any law after his release; or
         b.   Is engaging in activities for which such a warrant may be issued
pursuant to state law; or
         c.   Is engaging in vicious habits.
      2.   Upon the issuance of this warrant by the judge, the person shall be
delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he was originally
sentenced and shall serve out the full term for which he was originally
sentenced. (1987 Code § 6-134)
1-8-24: IMPRISONMENT; WORK BY PRISONERS:
   A.   Certified Judgment: If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is
entered, a copy thereof, certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the
chief of police, the sheriff of the county or other appropriate police officer.
Such copy shall be sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
   B.   Work Requirement; Allowance: All prisoners confined to jail on
conviction or on plea of guilty may be compelled, if their health permits, to
work on the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings, or other public
premises or property. For each day of work the prisoner shall be credited for
service two (2) days of imprisonment under his sentence.
   C.   Direction Of Chief Of Police: The chief of police, subject to the
direction of the city council, shall direct where the work shall be performed.
The head of the department in charge of the place where the work is to be
performed, himself, or by some person designated by him, shall oversee the
work. If a guard is necessary, the chief of police shall make provision
therefor. (1987 Code § 6-135)
1-8-25: COMMUNITY SERVICE WORK:
In addition to section
1-8-23 of this chapter, whenever any person shall plead guilty or nolo
contendere, or be found guilty after trial in the Municipal Court of a
violation of a City ordinance, the presiding Judge may grant a continued or
deferred sentence to the person, may impose a fine upon the person, may order
the person to participate in a community service work program without
compensation for a specified number of hours to be determined by the court, may
suspend the judgment or costs or both of the person, or may impose any
combination of the above. (1987 Code § 6-138)
1-8-26: FINES AND COSTS:
   A.   Costs In Addition To Fine: If judgment of conviction is entered, the
Clerk of the Court shall tax the costs to the defendant in an amount not to
exceed such amounts as are authorized by law and established by resolution of
the City Council from time to time, all of which the defendant shall pay in
addition to any fine that may be imposed. In no event shall the total fine
exceed that set out in section
1-4-1 of this title.
   B.   Training Fund: For every case in which a fine, bond forfeiture or
administrative or other fee is collected, a sum is set aside in the amount as
assessed in the schedule of fees for the McLoud Training Fund to be used as a
part of the regular Municipal budget for police. This fee is an amount not to
exceed such amounts as are authorized by law and established by resolution of
the City Council from time to time. In no event shall the total fine exceed
that set out in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2010-01, 8-27-2009)
   C.   Collection Fee: In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statute section 22-138,
there is hereby imposed an additional fee of twenty five percent (25%), on all
debts and accounts receivable, i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and
other debts owed the City of McLoud that have been referred to a private firm
(Perdue) for collection. Said amount to be charged is equal to the rate
approved by contract between City and Perdue and shall not exceed thirty five
percent (35%). (Ord. 2017-11, 10-26-2017, eff. 12-1-2017)
1-8-27: PENALTY ASSESSMENT:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, "convicted" means any final
adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment.
   B.   Penalty Imposed:
      1.   Any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of ten
dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration, excluding parking and standing
violations, or any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense,
shall be ordered by the court to pay seven dollars ($7.00) as a separate
penalty assessment (CLEET) and three dollars ($3.00) as a separate fingerprint
fee (AFIS fees) (OSBI), which shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for, any and all fines and penalties otherwise provided for by law for such
offense.
      2.   The court shall provide for separate bail for the penalty
assessment. A defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may
include the amount of the penalty assessment in the undertaking. (Ord. 2001-07,
7-12-2001)
   C.   Administrative Fee: Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall
collect the penalty assessment and fingerprint fee and deposit it in an account
created for that purpose. As an administrative fee for handling funds
collected, the court is authorized to retain eight cents ($0.08) per fee for
penalty assessment and AFIS fees of such monies and may also retain all
interest accrued thereon prior to the due date for deposits as provided in this
subsection. The remainder of such monies shall be forwarded quarterly by the
Court Clerk to the State Treasury. Deposits shall be due July 15 for the
preceding quarter ending June 30, October 15 for the preceding quarter ending
September 30, January 15 for the preceding quarter ending December 31, and
April 15 for the preceding quarter ending March 31. (Ord. 2001-07, 7-12-2001;
amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Forensic Science Improvement Assessment Fee: A new forensic science
improvement assessment fee (new OSBI) in the amount of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as the penalty
assessment and the AFIS fees. The Municipal Court is authorized to retain five
percent (5%) of the amount collected as the administrative fee (SB 753 and SB
546). (Ord. 2001-07, 7-12-2001)
1-8-28: NARCOTIC DRUG CONTROL FUND:
Any person entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the crime of
misdemeanor possession of marijuana shall be required to pay a five dollar
($5.00) fee, which is in addition to any fines and penalties otherwise provided
for by law for such offense. The Court Clerk shall remit the monies in the fund
on a monthly basis to the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
Control. (Ord. 2009-06, 5-28-2009)
1-8-29: DATA AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT FUND:
Any person entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a traffic citation,
animal control and/or Code enforcement citation for nuisance/abatement issues,
shall be required to pay a five dollar ($5.00) fee, which is in addition to any
fines and penalties otherwise provided for by law for such offense. The funds
will be set up in the appropriate department's (police/Code and animal welfare)
Data and Technical Support Fund to be used for communications, computer support
and other technical assistance. (Ord. 2015-07, 6-25-2015)
CHAPTER 9
CAMPAIGN FINANCE AND ETHICS LAW
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Duty To Verify Residence
1-9-3: Duty Of Campaign Committee To File A Statement Of Organization
1-9-4: Duty Of Municipal Political Committee To File A Statement Of
Organization
1-9-5: Duty To File Report Of Contributions And Expenditures
1-9-6: Duty Of Candidates And Elected Officers To File A Statement Of Financial
Interests
1-9-7: Violations
1-9-8: Judicial Conflict Of Interest
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Definitions of terms used in the McLoud Campaign Finance and Ethics Law
shall be the same as those terms are defined in Rules of the Ethics Commission
promulgated pursuant to Section 3 of Article XXIX of the Oklahoma Constitution,
unless otherwise provided herein.
   B.   As used in the McLoud Campaign Finance and Ethics Law:
 
                               A committee which may be composed of one or more
                               persons the purpose of which is to support the
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE:            election of a specific candidate to municipal
                               office, whose name as it will appear on the
                               ballot shall appear in the name of the
                               committee.
MUNICIPAL OFFICE:              Any elective municipal office established under
                               state or municipal law.
                               Any committee composed of one or more persons
                               whose purpose includes the election or defeat of
                               one or more candidates for municipal office or
MUNICIPAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE: two or more persons whose purpose includes the
                               adoption or defeat of one or more municipal
                               questions appearing on a ballot. (Ord. 2023-03,
                               1-26-2023)
 
1-9-2: DUTY TO VERIFY RESIDENCE:
Every candidate for municipal office shall include a verification letter to be
made by the City Clerk that the address the candidate is registered and
residing in is one that is located within the municipal boundaries of the City
of McLoud and the seat the candidate is seeking election for. If such a
verification document is not provided by the candidate having been issued by
the City Clerk, the candidate may have their declaration for candidacy
challenged by any registered voter of the City. The challenge shall be filed
with the County Election Board, or the City Clerk if receipt refused by the
County Election Board, during the challenge window under state law, and a
hearing held by the County Election Board, or a hearing before the Municipal
Judge if refused by the County Election Board, subject to the conflict
provisions held in subsection 8 of this ordinance, and removed from the ballot
if the person does not reside within the City of McLoud or the boundaries of
the office being sought. (Ord. 2023-03, 1-26-2023)
1-9-3: DUTY OF CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE TO FILE A STATEMENT OF ORGANIZATION:
Each campaign committee shall file a statement of organization with the
municipal clerk subject to the same requirements as set forth for candidate
committees for state office required to file statements of organization with
the Ethics Commission under Rules of the Ethics Commission promulgated pursuant
to Section 3 of Article XXIX of the Oklahoma Constitution, including but not
limited to time for filing and contents. (Ord. 2023-03, 1-26-2023)
1-9-4: DUTY OF MUNICIPAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE TO FILE A STATEMENT OF
ORGANIZATION:
Every municipal political committee shall file a statement of organization with
the municipal clerk subject to the same requirements as set forth for political
committees required to file statements of organization with the Ethics
Commission under Rules of the Ethics Commission promulgated pursuant to Section
3 of Article XXIX of the Oklahoma Constitution, including but not limited to
time for filing and contents. (Ord. 2023-03, 1-26-2023)
1-9-5: DUTY TO FILE REPORT OF CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES:
Every campaign committee and every municipal political committee shall file a
report of contributions and expenditures, if the committee has received or
expended more than $500, with the municipal clerk subject to the same
requirements as set forth for candidate committees and political action
committees, respectively, required to file reports of contributions and
expenditures with the Ethics Commission under Rules of the Ethics Commission
promulgated pursuant to Section 3 of Article XXIX of the Oklahoma Constitution,
including but not limited to time for filing and contents. (Ord. 2023-03, 1-26-
2023)
1-9-6: DUTY OF CANDIDATES AND ELECTED OFFICERS TO FILE A STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL
INTERESTS:
All candidates for municipal office and all elected municipal officers elected
after the effective date of the McLoud Campaign Finance and Ethics Law shall be
required to file a statement of financial interests with the municipal clerk
subject to the same requirements as set forth for candidates for state office
required to file statements of financial interests with the Ethics Commission
under Rules of the Ethics Commission promulgated pursuant to Section 3 of
Article XXIX of the Oklahoma Constitution, including but not limited to time
for filing and contents. (Ord. 2023-03, 1-26-2023)
1-9-7: VIOLATIONS:
An omission or failure to report expenditures in compliance with this act shall
constitute a misdemeanor with a fine of up to One Hundred Dollars ($ 100.00)
for a first offense, and a fine of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for a
second offense. The court shall have discretion as to the fine amount with the
intent of the fine to obtain compliance with reporting requirements. Willful
noncompliance with this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor offense with a
fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1 ,000.00) with the intent of the fine to deter
unlawful activity and punish willful offenders. If the Judge makes a finding
there existed willful noncompliance the elected official shall be removed from
office. (Ord. 2023-03, 1-26-2023)
1-9-8: JUDICIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
If the position the person is seeking to serve, or serving in, makes
determinations as to hiring for the prosecutor or municipal Judge, the Judge
shall provide for a non-conflicted Judge and Prosecutor and the Council shall
provide for payment at the consistent rate of pay for the positions. (Ord.
2023-03, 1-26-2023)
TITLE 2
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Depositories Designated; Deposit Of Funds
2-1-2: Purchasing Agent; Determinations
2-1-3: Purchasing Policies, Limits
2-1-4: Initiation Of Purchase Activities
2-1-5: Purchase Requests; Bid Requirements; Contract
2-1-6: Change Orders
2-1-7: Payment Of Claims
2-1-8: Code Of Conduct; Conflict Of Interest
2-1-9: City Officers Restricted
2-1-10: Internal Controls
2-1-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
   A.   Use Of Designated Depositories: Banks and all savings and loan
associations which are incorporated under federal or state law may be
designated as depositories for the funds of the city. The city treasurer shall
deposit daily all public funds received by him in such banks or savings and
loan associations. (1987 Code § 7-101)
   B.   Funds Secured: The deposits of the city shall be secured pursuant to
the security for local public deposits act, 62 Oklahoma Statutes section 517.1
et seq. (1987 Code § 7-102; amd. 2004 Code)
2-1-2: PURCHASING AGENT; DETERMINATIONS:
The city council shall appoint a purchasing agent or agents for the city. The
purchasing agent shall determine, before purchases are made, that:
   A.   Funds are available;
   B.   The purchase is within the budget of the department;
   C.   The purchase is within the scope of the program for which the request
is made; and
   D.   The department head has made the request for purchase. (1987 Code § 7-
103)
2-1-3: PURCHASING POLICIES, LIMITS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law or ordinance, all city
purchases shall be made by the city purchasing agent. The City Manager shall
act as purchasing agent unless otherwise provided by this Code or any other
city ordinance consistent with applicable law. The City Manager is authorized
to make any purchases that he/she deems necessary for the proper functioning of
the city government, provided that all purchases shall conform strictly to the
conditions of the budget.
The City Manager may appoint such deputy purchasing agents as shall seem
advisable and confer upon them authority to act in such amounts and such
circumstances as he/she shall determine, however the purchasing authority of
any deputy purchasing agent shall not exceed $1000.00.
   B.   Pursuant to law and applicable ordinances, the city manager or his
designated deputy shall, if budgeted by the City Council and/or McLoud Public
Works Authority, contract for and purchase or shall issue purchase orders for
all supplies, materials and equipment for the offices, departments and agencies
of the city government and public works authority in an amount not exceeding
$30,000. Such contracts and purchases shall be made without prior approval of
the City Council or Public Works Authority, if budgeted. If the city manager
contracts for or issues purchase orders for supplies, materials or equipment
with funds not previously budgeted, he may only expend up to $10,000, for City
expenditures, or $20,000 for Public Works without prior approval of the City
Council, or McLoud Public Works Authority, as the case may be. However, nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the expenditure of
funds, the making of purchases or the letting of contracts in an emergency
involving the health, safety and welfare of the City, when, in the reasonable
opinion of the City Manager, such purchase or contract cannot await the calling
of a special or emergency meeting of the City Council or Public Works
Authority. (1987 Code § 7-104; amd. Ord. 2004-17, 9-9-2004; Ord. 2022-04, 9-23-
2021)
2-1-4: INITIATION OF PURCHASE ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Requisitions: All requests to purchase goods and services shall be
initiated by the appropriate department upon completion and presentation of a
purchase requisition to the purchasing agent. Such requisitions shall contain
information sufficient for the purchasing agent to procure such goods and
services.
   B.   Determinations: Upon receipt of the completed purchase requisition, the
purchasing agent shall make the determinations required in section
2-1-2 of this chapter.
   C.   Duties Of Purchasing Agent: If all criteria in subsection B of this
section are met, the purchasing agent shall: (1987 Code § 7-105)
      1.   For purchases under the limits established by subsection
2-1-3B of this chapter: (Ord. 2001-09, 9-13-2001)
         a.   Approve the purchase requisition;
         b.   Encumber funds for the purchase; and
         c.   Initiate a purchase order and place the order. (1987 Code § 7-
105)
      2.   For purchases over the limits established by subsection
2-1-3B of this chapter, present the purchase request to the city council for
disposition. (1987 Code § 7-105; amd. Ord. 2001-09, 9-13-2001)
2-1-5: PURCHASE REQUESTS; BID REQUIREMENTS; CONTRACT:
   A.   Processing Requests: For all purchase requests not authorized for
approval by the purchasing agent, the city council shall:
      1.   Approve or disapprove all purchase requests not requiring the bid
process under state and federal laws and regulations.
      2.   Initiate the solicitation of bids for all purchases requiring the
bid process. Such bid process shall conform to all applicable state and federal
requirements.
      3.   Upon selection of the winning bidder by the city council, such
council shall authorize the purchasing agent to award the contract. In the case
of federal or state funds covered by the contract, the city council shall
follow the prescribed procedures for awarding the contract.
   B.   Contract Payments: After the contract has been awarded, the purchasing
agent shall encumber funds sufficient to pay the contract and set up a payment
schedule to match contract payments. (1987 Code § 7-106)
2-1-6: CHANGE ORDERS:
   A.   Issuance For Change Order: The purchasing agent shall issue a change
order upon approval by the city council, at any time the scope of the contract
changes.
   B.   Claim Covered By Contract: No payment shall be made for any claim from
a contractor unless that claim is covered by the basic contract or a written
change order signed by the purchasing agent and approved by the city council.
(1987 Code § 7-107)
2-1-7: PAYMENT OF CLAIMS:
   A.   Prompt Payment: Payment of all claims shall be prompt and within the
availability of funds.
   B.   Submitting Requests: Requests for payment shall be submitted upon the
appropriate claim form and accompanied by a signed certificate of completion.
   C.   Review: The purchasing agent shall review each claim to verify that the
goods and services are within the scope of the contract or purchase order, and
that such goods and services have been received.
   D.   Approval At Council Meeting: The purchasing agent will submit the claim
for approval at the next regular or special meeting of the city council. (1987
Code § 7-108)
   E.   Making Payment; Signatures Required: Upon approval by the city council,
payment for the claim or purchase order shall be made. Payment shall be made by
warrant, check, or other instrument which shall bear signatures of two (2) city
officials who are authorized to sign warrants, checks, or other instruments.
(Ord. 1992-02, 4-9-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
2-1-8: CODE OF CONDUCT; CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   Prohibition: No employee, officer or agent of the city utilizing
federal, state or local funds in the award or administration of a contract
shall participate in the selection, award or administration of any contract if
a conflict of interest, real or apparent, shall be present.
   B.   Description Of Conflict: Such conflict shall be present when:
      1.   Any employee, officer or agent of the city or any member of their
immediate families or their partners have a financial or other interest in the
firm selected for contract award; or
      2.   Any organization which may receive, or has been awarded, a contract
employs or is about to employ any person under subsection B1 of this section.
   C.   Accepting Gratuities, Favors: No officer, employee or agent of the city
shall solicit nor accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from
contractors, potential contractors, or other parties to contracts.
   D.   Violations; Penalties: Any officer, employee or agent of the City in
violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties, sanctions or
disciplinary actions of Federal and State laws, and violations shall be
referred to the appropriate officer of such entity for disposition. (1987 Code
§ 7-109)
2-1-9: CITY OFFICERS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Selling Materials Or Supplies: No member of the City Council may sell
or furnish for a consideration, any materials or supplies for use of the City;
and any member of the Council voting for or consenting to, or being a party to,
such contract or purchase is personally liable as provided by State law.
   B.   Contracts: The City Council shall not make any contract with any of its
members, or in which any of its members shall be directly or indirectly
interested, such contracts being prohibited by State law.
   C.   Sale, Lease Or Contract: No officer of the City may become directly or
indirectly interested individually in any sale, lease or contract which he is
authorized to make, such being prohibited by State law. (1987 Code § 7-110)
2-1-10: INTERNAL CONTROLS:
   A.   Payroll Disbursements:
      1.   For all employees and Council members of the City of McLoud, a
documented record shall be maintained in a personnel file of the authorized
rate of pay or salary, including benefits, for each employee and Council
member. The City Manager shall approve salaries and rates of pay for all
employees, except that the City Council shall determine the City Manager's pay
rate or salary. Rates of pay for City Council members, Clerk, and Treasurer
(statutory duties) shall be set by ordinance in accordance with State Statutes.
      2.   For each pay period, a record of time worked shall be prepared in
the form of time sheets or logs for each employee and Council member to be
paid. Such record of time worked shall be verified as to its accuracy in
writing by the employee or Council member, department head, and the City
Treasurer or designated Payroll Clerk. Time sheets or logs are to be completed
by each employee daily, maintained by the department head, and available for
review by the City Manager, City Treasurer, or Payroll Clerk. Vacation and comp
time must be noted on the time sheets and approved by the department head and
City Treasurer or designated Payroll Clerk.
      3.   Upon verification of the time worked, the payroll shall be prepared
by the designated Payroll Clerk and a payroll register shall be printed for
review. The payroll register shall be presented to at least one authorized
check signer who shall compare the net payroll amounts to the payroll register
and verify its accuracy. Upon verification, the payroll and related tax and
benefit payments shall be paid.
      4.   All payrolls shall be direct deposited. The net payroll payments
shall be prepared from the payroll register, along with checks (or direct
deposits) for payment of related payroll taxes and other payroll benefits
required by law or contract.
      5.   The payroll register shall be provided to the Governing Body for
informational purposes at the next regular meeting; however, Governing Body
approval is not required prior to payment of payroll related costs if incurred
and paid in accordance with the provisions above.
   B.   Purchases Of Goods And Services (Other Than Payroll And Payroll
Related):
      1.   The following employees have been designated as purchasing agents
empowered to purchase or contract against their assigned budget appropriation
accounts:
         a.   City Manager (all funds and departments).
         b.   City Treasurer.
         c.   City Clerk.
         d.   Purchasing agents designated by the City Manager or City Council.
The City Manager shall assign budget appropriation accounts to the department
heads as needed.
      2.   The employee receiving satisfactory delivery of merchandise or
contract services shall acknowledge such fact by signing the invoice or
delivery ticket. The invoice, along with delivery ticket if applicable, must
then be verified by the authorized purchasing agent as to quantities, services,
and prices. If correct, the invoice must then be signed by the authorized
purchasing agent and coded with the fund(s) and budget line item(s) to be
charged. If it is not clear from the itemized invoice, a description of the
purpose of the purchase must be noted on the invoice. Once the invoice has been
verified as correct, it must be forwarded to the City Treasurer or designated
Accounts Payable Clerk. All invoices must be processed as received, or at least
daily, so that no invoice is lost.
      3.   The City Treasurer or designated Accounts Payable Clerk shall review
all invoices for proper signatures and appropriateness of fund(s) and budget
line item(s) to be charged. Upon acceptance of the invoices, the City Treasurer
or designated Accounts Payable Clerk shall prepare checks in payment of the
invoices and shall cancel each invoice as its check is prepared. Invoices shall
be cancelled by noting on the invoice the date paid, the check number used to
pay the invoice, and the amount paid with the check. All outstanding invoices
that have been properly approved for payment shall be paid at least weekly so
that all City bills are paid in a timely manner and no late payment fees are
incurred.
      4.   The invoices and checks, along with a check register, shall be
presented to two (2) authorized check signers who shall compare the checks to
the invoices and check register and verify their accuracy by signing the check
register. Upon verification, both authorized check signers shall sign the
checks which shall be prepared for distribution. The check register shall list
in check number order the check date, check number, vendor, and check amount,
and shall include a description of the purpose of the expenditure.
      5.   The check register(s) shall be provided to the Governing Body for
informational purposes at their next regular meeting; however, Governing Body
approval is not required prior to payment of invoices if charges were incurred
and paid in accordance with the provisions above.
      6.   For all purchases of goods and services (other than payroll and
related) over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), purchase orders or contracts
shall be prepared by a department head and approved, in writing, by the City
Manager prior to the time the purchase commitment is made.
      7.   For all purchases of goods and services (other than payroll and
related) over seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00), purchase orders
or contracts shall be prepared and approved by the City Council prior to the
time the commitment is made, and such approval shall be recorded in the
minutes. Additionally, the City Treasurer or Accounts Payable Clerk shall
immediately determine that there exists available unencumbered appropriation in
the budget account to be charged, and such determination shall also be recorded
in the minutes. Should appropriation not be available for the proposed purchase
or commitment, the purchase or commitment shall not proceed until necessary
budget amendments are authorized.
   C.   Interfund Transfers:
      1.   All transfers between funds shall only be made in accordance with
Governing Body appropriations as reflected in the original or amended City
budget.
      2.   Once lawfully appropriated, interfund transfer payments may be made
by the City Treasurer without further Governing Body approval in the manner
used for payment of purchases of goods and services.
   D.   Petty Cash:
      1.   As provided for in title 11 Oklahoma Statutes, section 17-102(D),
the City may have petty cash accounts for use in making certain small payments
for costs incurred in operating the City.
      2.   Each petty cash account established shall require Governing Body
approval, including the imprest amount of the petty cash account. However, in
no case should the imprest balance exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      3.   The petty cash accounts shall be reimbursed by utilizing properly
itemized invoices in the manner used for payment of purchases of goods and
services. However, in no case shall an individual payment from petty cash
exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
   E.   Debt Service:
      1.   All long-term indebtedness in the form of bonds, notes, or lease
purchase obligations shall be incurred in the manner provided by law.
      2.   Once lawfully incurred, the City Treasurer shall make payments of
principal and interest on the debt in accordance with the terms specified by
the lender without further approval of the Governing Body.
      3.   The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for
payment of goods and services.
      4.   Current balances on outstanding debt shall be maintained by the City
Treasurer in the appropriate journals.
   F.   Competitive Bidding:
      1.   The City of McLoud shall adhere to the provisions of Oklahoma
Statutes (1991), title 61, sections 101 et seq., when determining when
competitive bidding is required and the manner in which competitive bids will
be obtained.
      2.   If this Code provides for additional competitive bidding
requirements, such additional requirements shall be met.
      3.   In addition to the requirements above, public trusts created
pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes title 60, section 176, of which the City of
McLoud is sole beneficiary, shall also follow the competitive bidding
provisions of Oklahoma Statutes title 60, section 176(g).
   G.   Financial Reporting:
      1.   The City Treasurer shall prepare monthly financial reports which
disclose at least, but not limited to, all receipts and expenditures by fund in
the same format as the approved budget and showing the variance from the
budget.
      2.   The financial reports shall be placed on the agenda for
acknowledgment by the Governing Body at each regular meeting.
   H.   Applicability To Public Trusts:
      1.   For all public trusts created pursuant to title 60 Oklahoma
Statutes, sections 176 - 180, for which the City is beneficiary and for which
the trust's board of trustees is comprised entirely of members of the City
Council, all subsections of this section shall apply.
      2.   For the purposes of public trusts as defined above, City Treasurer
shall mean trust secretary as defined by the trust indenture. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-
22-2018)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL TAXES
ARTICLE A. SALES TAX
SECTION:
2-2A-1: Citation
2-2A-2: Definitions
2-2A-3: Taxes Imposed; Effective Dates; Purposes
2-2A-4: Subsisting State Permits
2-2A-5: Classification Of Taxpayers
2-2A-6: Sales Subject To Tax; Exemptions
2-2A-7: Tax Due Date
2-2A-8: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
2-2A-9: Tax Constitutes Debt
2-2A-10: Collection By Vendors
2-2A-11: Returns, Remittances And Discounts
2-2A-12: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
2-2A-13: Refund Of Erroneous Payments
2-2A-14: Fraudulent Returns
2-2A-15: Records Confidential
2-2A-16: Amendments
2-2A-17: Provisions Cumulative
2-2A-1: CITATION:
This article shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF McLOUD CITY SALES TAX
ORDINANCE. (1987 Code § 7-201)
2-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the state sales tax
code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1352, and 37 Oklahoma Statutes sections 576
and 593, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (1987
Code § 7-202)
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
STATE SALES TAX CODE: Such code as set out in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1350
et seq., as amended.
TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the city or the official agency of the state,
duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to
administer the collection of the tax levied in this article. (1987 Code § 7-
203; amd. 2004 Code)
2-2A-3: TAXES IMPOSED; EFFECTIVE DATES; PURPOSES:
The following city sales taxes shall be imposed and effective as indicated,
unless otherwise extended by a vote of the people. Said taxes have been
approved by a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on same in
elections conducted in the manner prescribed by Oklahoma Statutes:
   A.   Ordinance 1970-01, effective January 1, 1969, levied a one cent ($0.01)
tax to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal
government of the city.
   B.   Ordinance 1001 adopted a one cent ($0.01) tax effective December 1,
1977, to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal
government of the city.
   C.   Ordinance 1983-04 voted on April 5, 1983, adopted an additional one
cent ($0.01) tax to be used by the city or any public trust with the city as
its beneficiary for the limited purposes of maintaining and improving the roads
and streets of the city.
   D.   Ordinance 2008-08 imposed an additional one percent (1%) tax effective
July 1, 2009, to be used for improvements and additions to the sewer and water
facilities, for repairs and maintenance of roads and streets and other benefits
or additions to the infrastructure of the city of McLoud, Oklahoma (the
"city"), and any public trust having the city as beneficiary thereof and/or for
the payment of debt service in connection with obligations issued to finance
said improvements. (1987 Code § 7-207; amd. Ord. 2008-08, 1-22-2009)
2-2A-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purposes of
this article, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any
requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (1987 Code § 7-
205)
2-2A-5: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state sales tax code.
(1987 Code § 7-204)
2-2A-6: SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The city sales taxes shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds
of such sales as specified by Oklahoma Statutes, and exemptions from such taxes
shall be as allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes. (2004 Code)
2-2A-7: TAX DUE DATE:
The tax levied under the provisions of this article shall be due and payable at
the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales
tax under the state sales tax code. (1987 Code § 7-215)
2-2A-8: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the state sales tax. (1987 Code § 7-216)
2-2A-9: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this article shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (1987 Code
§ 7-217)
2-2A-10: COLLECTION BY VENDORS:
   A.   The tax levied under the provision of this article shall be paid by the
consumer or user to the vendor. It shall be the duty of each and every vendor
in the city to collect from the consumer or user, the full amount of the tax
levied by this article, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable
to the average equivalent thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed under this article, or the average
equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner
as other debts.
   C.   A vendor who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to
collect the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or wilfully or
intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or
remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by
whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any
form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he
is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an
adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this article shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person,
firm, corporation, joint venture or association that wilfully or intentionally
fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be collected or paid
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 7-218)
2-2A-11: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected under the provisions of
this article shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner,
form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances of the tax collected
hereunder and shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the
state sales tax code for collection of state sales taxes. (1987 Code § 7-219)
2-2A-12: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure To Pay Tax: Section 217 of title 68, Oklahoma Statutes is
hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and interest or penalties at
the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall
be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied
under this article. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit
the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this
article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency
continues for a period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim
to any discount allowed under this article. (1987 Code § 7-220)
   B.   Waiver: The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by
reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax as levied under this article
may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver as
applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 220. To accomplish the purposes of this subsection, the
applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this article. (1987 Code § 7-221)
2-2A-13: REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied may be made to any
taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and
under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state
sales tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227. To accomplish the
purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (1987 Code § 7-
222)
2-2A-14: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
article shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 7-223)
2-2A-15: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205, and
each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully
effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if herein
set forth in full. (1987 Code § 7-224)
2-2A-16: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance, hereby
authorize the city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city, as provided by law. (1987 Code § 7-225)
2-2A-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any or
all other taxing provisions of this code or city ordinances. (1987 Code § 7-
226)
ARTICLE B. USE TAX
SECTION:
2-2B-1: Citation
2-2B-2: Definitions
2-2B-3: Classification Of Taxpayers
2-2B-4: Subsisting State Permits
2-2B-5: Purpose Of Revenues
2-2B-6: Tax Rate; Subjects Of Taxation
2-2B-7: Exemptions
2-2B-8: Tax Due; Returns; Payment
2-2B-9: Tax Constitutes Debt
2-2B-10: Collection Of Tax
2-2B-11: Revoking Permits
2-2B-12: Remunerative Deductions
2-2B-13: Delinquency; Interest And Penalties
2-2B-14: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
2-2B-15: Fraudulent Returns
2-2B-16: Records Confidential
2-2B-17: Provisions Cumulative
2-2B-1: CITATION:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF McLOUD USE TAX
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax
code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this article. In addition thereto, as used in this article, the
following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
CITY: The city of McLoud, Oklahoma.
TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the city government or the official agency of
the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to
administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
TRANSACTION: Sale. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-3: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma use tax code.
(Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are for the purpose of this article
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-5: PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the city government, and any and all revenues
derived hereunder may be expended by the city council for any purpose for which
funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-6: TAX RATE; SUBJECTS OF TAXATION:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using
or otherwise consuming within the city tangible personal property purchased or
brought into the city, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming
within the city of such property at the rate of three percent (3%) of the
purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person
storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible personal
property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied
hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property
within the city, and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside
Oklahoma; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against
tangible personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which
is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily
retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing,
alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the
tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax any local or city sales tax
previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted
shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by
the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. (Ord. 1993-03,
1-14-1993)
2-2B-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply:
   A.   In respect to the use of an article of tangible personal property
brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in the city for his
or her personal use or enjoyment while within the city.
   B.   In respect to the use of tangible personal property purchased for
resale before being used. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
   C.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma use tax
code and the city use tax ordinance, has been paid by the person using such
tangible personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the
laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the United States. If
any article of tangible personal property has already been subjected to a tax
by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use,
in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma use tax code and
city use tax ordinance, the provision of this article shall also apply to it by
a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the
Oklahoma use tax code and the city use tax ordinance, and the rate by which the
previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall
be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or
municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma or the city.
(Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and
machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of
manufacturing plants already established in the city. Provided, this exemption
shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and
is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation
under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants" shall
mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations, and generally recognized as such.
   E.   In respect to the use of tangible personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city.
   F.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this
city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or
enjoyment.
   G.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property used
or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads.
   H.   In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into
this city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. (Ord.
1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-8: TAX DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENT:
The tax levied by this article is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of
the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-9: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-
1993)
2-2B-10: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Retailer Or Vendor: Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of
business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible
personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in this
city shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this
article from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the
manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall,
by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with
the tax commission the name and address of all his agents operating in the city
and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other
places of business in the city.
   B.   Place Of Business Not Maintained Within State Or Both Within And
Without State: The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in this city and by the out of state place
of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without Oklahoma and making sales of tangible personal property at
such out of state place of business for use in this city. Such retailer or
vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the
tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as
it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer
or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his
knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled
when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more
effectively be collected from the person using such property in the city.
Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed
by delivery to the purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such
retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common
carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
city sales tax at the point of delivery, and the tax shall be collected and
reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. (Ord. 1993-03,
1-14-1993)
2-2B-11: REVOKING PERMITS:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or
the Oklahoma use tax code or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax
commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any,
issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a
corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and
hearing above provided, cancel the corporation's license to do business in this
state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied
with the obligations under this article, the Oklahoma use tax code, or any
orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993;
amd. 2004 Code)
2-2B-12: REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by the state use tax code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-13: DELINQUENCY; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Compliance With Statute: Section 217 of title 68 of the Oklahoma
Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and
penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby
levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying
the tax levied by this article. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any
retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in
the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5)
days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed
under this article.
   B.   Waiver Of Interest And Penalties: The interest or penalty or any
portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay
the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as
provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state
use tax provided in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 220, and to accomplish the
purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-
14-1993)
2-2B-14: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227, and to
accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of section
227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (Ord.
1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-15: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
article shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of noncompliance with this article shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
2-2B-16: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205, of
the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city
use tax as if herein set forth in full. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
2-2B-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of this code or city ordinances. (Ord. 1993-03, 1-14-1993)
ARTICLE C. UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
2-2C-1: Tax Levied
2-2C-2: Franchisees Excepted
2-2C-3: Payment Of Tax
2-2C-4: Failure To Pay Tax
2-2C-5: Tax Constitutes Lien
2-2C-1: TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the
gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of gas in the city, which
tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation, or excise tax
levied by such city, all as provided by state law. (1987 Code § 7-401)
2-2C-2: FRANCHISEES EXCEPTED:
The tax levied under this article shall, when levied, apply to all persons,
firms, associations, or corporations engaged in business of furnishing gas
within the city limits, except it shall not apply to any person, firm,
association, or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city.
(1987 Code § 7-402)
2-2C-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax levied under this article on gas receipts shall be levied for a term of
not more than one year and shall be payable as required by the city council and
placed in the general revenue fund of the city. (1987 Code § 7-403)
2-2C-4: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied
shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from such city and, in
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or
corporation for the amount of the tax and all expenses of collecting same,
including reasonable attorney fees. (1987 Code § 7-404)
2-2C-5: TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within the city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of selling gas within the city limits. (1987 Code § 7-405)
ARTICLE D. LODGING TAX
SECTION:
2-2D-1: Citation
2-2D-2: Effective Date
2-2D-3: Tax Imposed, Use Of Tax
2-2D-4: Amendments
2-2D-5: Subsisting State Permits
2-2D-6: Payment Of Tax
2-2D-7: Provisions Cumulative
2-2D-1: CITATION:
This article shall be known and cited as the CITY OF McLOUD OCCUPANCY SURCHARGE
OR LODGING TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
2-2D-2: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall become and be effective on or after July 1, 2009, subject to
the approval of the registered voters of the city of McLoud, voting on this
article in the manner prescribed by law. Upon approval by the voters as
required in this section, this article shall remain in effect and not be
replaced unless repealed by a majority of registered voters of the city of
McLoud voting to repeal this article in the manner as required by its approval.
(Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
2-2D-3: TAX IMPOSED; USE OF TAX:
There is levied an occupancy surcharge or lodging tax, of five percent (5%)
upon the gross receipts from all occupancy of hotel, motel, RV parks, lots or
any other means of collecting a fee for overnight accommodations, or one dollar
($1.00), per night of said occupancy, whichever is greater, within the city
limits of McLoud, except that the surcharge shall not be assessed where an
occupant rents the room for a period in excess of thirty (30) days. This
surcharge shall be in addition to any existing sales taxes imposed by the city
or the state. The tax levied by this article shall be used for economic
development, including the extension of sewer and water service and the
construction and maintenance of roads, except that twenty percent (20%) of the
tax shall be used for general government and administration of the city of
McLoud. (Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
2-2D-4: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city of McLoud, by their approval of this article at the
election on April 7, 2009, authorize the city of McLoud, by ordinance duly
enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the
method and manner of administering and enforcing this article as may be
necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the
surcharge provided shall not be changed without approval by the registered city
voters, as provided by law. (Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
2-2D-5: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma tax code are, for the purposes of this
article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional city permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
2-2D-6: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state
tax law of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
2-2D-7: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the city ordinances. (Ord. 2008-09, 1-22-2009)
CHAPTER 3
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Fee Levied
2-3-2: Fee In Lieu Of Other Fees, Taxes
2-3-1: FEE LEVIED:
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each
and every person, firm or corporation operating a telephone exchange in the
city in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for each
current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within
the limits of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and
services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision,
police regulations, and police control of the construction of lines and
equipment of the telephone company in the city. The inspection fee and charge
shall be due and payable to the city on or before July 1 of each year for the
preceding calendar year and shall be paid into, and appropriated and expended
from, the general revenue fund of the city. (1987 Code § 7-301)
2-3-2: FEE IN LIEU OF OTHER FEES, TAXES:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the
owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue
to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege, and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes.
However, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct
space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls
systems of the city. (1987 Code § 7-302)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Short Title
3-1-2: Scope
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: License Required; Application; Exemption
3-1-5: License Fee
3-1-6: Issuance And Term Of License
3-1-7: Qualifications Of Applicant
3-1-8: Procedure For Issuance Of License
3-1-9: Contents Of License
3-1-10: Duties Of Licensee
3-1-11: Enforcement And Inspections
3-1-12: Revocation Of License Or Permit; Hearing
3-1-13: Appeal Procedure
3-1-14: Penalty
3-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the GENERAL LICENSING ORDINANCE
OF McLOUD. (2004 Code)
3-1-2: SCOPE:
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances. Where
this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal
property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law,
ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(2004 Code)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BUSINESS: All kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with
all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, and of which
are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on
any premises in the city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.
LICENSE OR LICENSEE: Means, respectively, the words "permit" or "permittee" or
the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege, wherever
relevant to any provisions of this chapter or other law or ordinance.
PERSON: Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies,
associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; or any officers, agents,
employees, factors, or any kind of personal representations of any thereof, in
any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other person, under either
personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PREMISES: All lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with, any such business conducted on such premises. (2004 Code)
3-1-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; EXEMPTION:
   A.   License Or Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise,
without a license or permit therefor being first procured and kept in effect at
all such times as required by this chapter or other law or ordinance of the
city.
   B.   Application For Special Permit: An applicant for a special permit shall
submit an application therefor to the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the
clerk and shall furnish such additional information and make such affidavits as
the clerk shall require.
   C.   Exemption; Nonprofit Organization: The city clerk shall issue special
permits, without the payment of any license fees or other charges therefor, to
any person or organization for the conduct or operation of a nonprofit
enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant
operates, without private profit, for a public, charitable, educational,
literary, fraternal, or religious purpose. (2004 Code)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEE:
License fees shall be in the amounts set by resolution of the city council from
time to time. (2004 Code)
3-1-6: ISSUANCE AND TERM OF LICENSE:
The city clerk shall collect all license fees and shall issue licenses in the
name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions of this chapter
and shall use such forms as adopted by the city council. Such license shall
expire no later than one year after issuance or on June 30 of each year, unless
otherwise provided. (2004 Code)
3-1-7: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT:
The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of every
applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the city clerk.
The following are required:
   A.   History Of Applicant: The license history of the applicant; whether
such person, in previously operating in this or another state under a license,
has had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action.
   B.   Indebtedness To City: The applicant shall not be in default under the
provisions of this chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city,
except for current taxes.
   C.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: The applicant shall verify that the
proposed use of any premises is not in violation of city zoning regulations.
(2004 Code)
3-1-8: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application For License: Every person required to procure a license
under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an
application for such license to the city clerk. The application shall:
      1.   Be a written statement upon forms provided by the city clerk; such
form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant before a
notary public of this state;
      2.   Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance
with section
3-1-7 of this chapter and of any other information which the city clerk shall
find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter; and
      3.   Be accompanied by the full amount of the fees chargeable for such
license.
   B.   Renewal Application: The applicant for the renewal of a license shall
submit a renewal application for such license, together with the license fee,
to the city clerk.
   C.   Duplicate License Or Permit: A duplicate license or special permit
shall be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued,
which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed upon the paying to the city
clerk of a duplicate license fee.
   D.   Denial Of License; Appeal: The city clerk shall, upon disapproving any
application submitted under the provisions of this chapter, place the matter on
the next agenda of the city council, where the applicant may appeal from the
denial. (2004 Code)
3-1-9: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall state, at a minimum, upon its face, the
following:
   A.   The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business
is to be conducted.
   B.   The kind and address of each business so licensed.
   C.   The amount of license fee therefor.
   D.   The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
   E.   Such other information as the city clerk shall determine. (2004 Code)
3-1-10: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
   A.   Permit all reasonable inspections of his business by public authorities
so authorized by law.
   B.   Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
   C.   Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or conditions
which do or may affect the public health, morals or welfare.
   D.   Refrain from operating the licensed business on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period his license is revoked or
suspended.
   E.   Post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times.
   F.   Not loan, sell, give or assign, to any other person or allow any other
person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his
possession a license or insignia which has been issued to the licensee. (2004
Code)
3-1-11: ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Persons Authorized To Inspect: The following persons are authorized to
conduct inspections in the manner prescribed herein:
      1.   The city clerk or other city employee shall make all investigations
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
      2.   The city clerk shall have the authority to order the inspection of
licensees, their businesses and premises, by all city officials having duties
to perform with reference to such licensees or businesses.
      3.   All police officers shall inspect and examine businesses located
within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce compliance with this
chapter.
   B.   Enter Premises For Inspection: All persons authorized herein to inspect
licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without
search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following premises:
      1.   Those for which a license is required.
      2.   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under such license.
      3.   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
   C.   Report Violations: Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses or
premises as herein authorized shall report all violations of this chapter or of
other laws or ordinances to the city clerk and shall submit such other reports
as the city clerk shall order. (2004 Code)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the city clerk
during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the licensee or
permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the subject of
the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed. The city clerk shall be authorized to summarily
order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the
suspension of any business license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen
(15) days.
   A.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the clerk has so acted, the clerk
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   C.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The city council shall render the decision and recommendation.
   D.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
provisions of this code, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the city
clerk after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this
section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this code. (2004 Code)
3-1-13: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the city's decision to the city council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the city clerk within
five (5) days of the action of the city which is appealed.
   B.   Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be
entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The city council shall act
on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the clerk or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which
the city has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the city had
revoked. (2004 Code)
3-1-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Occupation Tax Imposed
3-2-4: State License Required; Posting City Receipt
3-2-5: Payment Required
3-2-6: Failure To Pay Tax; Civil Penalty
3-2-7: Certificate Of Compliance
3-2-8: Retail Package Stores
3-2-9: Compliance With Zoning Regulations
3-2-10: Location Of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments
3-2-11: Separate Premises
3-2-12: Minors And Intoxicated Persons; Restrictions
3-2-13: Transporting Beverages
3-2-14: Hours Of Sale
3-2-15: Drinking And Intoxication In Public
3-2-16: Posting Of Signs
3-2-17: Prizes Prohibited
3-2-18: Penalty
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the City to
preserve the public peace, safety, health and good order thereof, and to aid
the enforcement of the policy of the State as established by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-101 et seq.,
and to establish annual Occupation Taxes upon all persons engaged in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. (1987 Code § 3-101;
amd. Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS 1 :
For the purpose of this chapter, all of the terms and phrases used in this
chapter shall be given the same use and meaning as defined by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act 2 , and the following:
MINOR: A person who, in accordance with State law, has not yet attained the age
at which consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted.
STATE LICENSEE: Any person who holds a license issued under authority of the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (1987 Code § 3-102)
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS § 506.
2 2. 37A OS § 1-101 et seq.
3-2-3: OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Annual Tax Amounts: Annual tax amounts for businesses related to
alcoholic beverages conducted within the City shall be as set by motion or
resolution of the City Council, unless specifically provided for in this Code.
(2004 Code)
   B.   Reduction Or Prorating: The Occupation Taxes prescribed herein shall be
reduced or prorated to the extent necessary to conform to applicable laws
respecting the applicants or holders of State licenses.
   C.   Service Organizations: The license fee for those service organizations
which are exempt under section 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code for
mixed beverage or bottle club licenses shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per year. (1987 Code § 3-103)
   D.   Payment Of Tax: No person, whose principal place of business is in the
City, shall sell intoxicating beverages, or engage in any activity or perform
any transaction or act whatsoever relating to intoxicating beverages for which
a State license is required, until the Occupation Tax levied by this section
has been paid in full to the City Clerk and a receipt or license has been
issued therefor by the City Clerk. (Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-4: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED; POSTING CITY RECEIPT:
   A.   Payment Of Tax; Expiration Date: Any State licensee originally entering
upon any occupation herein listed shall pay the tax therefor at the Office of
the City Clerk on or before the date upon which he enters upon such occupation.
The licensee shall provide a copy of his current State license before payment
of an Occupation Tax will be accepted. All Occupation Taxes shall expire on
June 30 of each year.
   B.   Multiple Locations: Any State licensee carrying on his occupation in
more than one location within the City limits shall be subject to the tax set
out for each such location.
   C.   Issuance And Posting Of City Receipt; Keeping Records: Upon payment of
the Occupation Tax as set out, the City Clerk shall issue a receipt to the
State licensee which licensee shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises
wherein he carries on his occupation. The City Clerk shall also record the name
of such licensee and the address where he engages in his occupation, and such
records shall be duly filed and kept in the permanent files of that office for
at least three (3) years. Thereafter, upon approval of the City Council, the
records may be destroyed.
   D.   Annual Report To State: The City Clerk shall make and transmit to the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission an annual report
covering the fiscal year showing the number and class of businesses upon which
Occupation Taxes were levied, and the amount of money collected from such
taxes. (1987 Code § 3-104)
3-2-5: PAYMENT REQUIRED:
Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter without
first paying the Occupation Tax imposed therefor in advance of such operation
is guilty of an offense against the City and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A penalty in the form of increased tax may be levied upon
any person not paying the tax within fifteen (15) days after it is due. (1987
Code § 3-105)
3-2-6: FAILURE TO PAY TAX; CIVIL PENALTY:
All sums due from any person, firm or corporation by reason of Occupation Taxes
imposed by this chapter shall be recoverable at the suit of the City brought
against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction. In such suit, in
addition to the tax, the City shall be allowed to recover interest at the
maximum allowable rate permitted by State law upon all sums due by way of tax,
from the date of accrual thereof, any penalty, and all costs of collection,
judicial or otherwise, including reasonable attorney fees. Prosecution for an
offense against the City arising out of the failure to pay a tax levied by this
chapter, regardless of the outcome or its continued pendency, shall not
constitute a defense or a bar in any manner to the collection of any tax and
penalties, if any are due, as herein provided. (1987 Code § 3-106)
3-2-7: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Application; Investigation:
      1.   Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the Zoning,
Fire, Health and Safety Codes of the City required by title 37 of the Oklahoma
Statutes shall apply at the Office of the City Clerk by:
         a.   Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office;
and
         b.   Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount as set
by the City Council at the time of filing.
      2.   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the
City shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises
proposed for licensed operations comply with the provisions of the zoning
ordinance and any Health, Fire, Building and other Safety Codes applicable to
it.
      3.   The City shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days
of receipt thereof. (1987 Code § 3-107)
   B.   Issuance Of Certificate:
      1.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is
in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning
shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
      2.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is
in compliance with all applicable Fire, Safety, and Health Codes, a certificate
of compliance shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
      3.   The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the Mayor.
      4.   A conditional certificate may be granted if construction,
modification or alteration of the premises proposed for licensed operations is
not completed. The conditional certificate shall indicate that the proposed
premises will comply with City Zoning, Fire, Safety and Health Codes. A
certificate in accordance with subsections A and B of this section shall be
issued within ten (10) days after all final inspections are complete. (1987
Code § 3-108)
3-2-8: RETAIL PACKAGE STORES:
   A.   Condition Of Sale:
      1.   No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages out of any
retail alcoholic beverage store other than:
         a.   In retail containers;
         b.   At ordinary room temperatures;
         c.   In the original package; and
         d.   For consumption off the premises.
      2.   No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in, the
maintenance and operation of such a store shall suffer or permit any alcoholic
beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be opened
on the premises of such a store. (1987 Code § 3-109)
   B.   Compliance Required: No person shall sell at retail or otherwise, and
no person shall deliver, in consequence of or in completion of such a sale, any
alcoholic beverages at any place in the City except at a retail alcoholic
beverage store in strict conformity with this chapter and the laws of the
State. (1987 Code § 3-110)
3-2-9: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS:
No retail alcoholic beverage package store, no bottle club, and no wholesale
alcoholic beverage store, warehouse, brewery, distillery, winery or any other
place, however described, and for the manufacture or production or bottling of
alcoholic beverages of any kind, shall be located, maintained, or operated by
any person, at any place within the boundaries of the City, except at a
location at which such an establishment is permitted or authorized by the
zoning ordinances of the City. No person shall own, operate, maintain or be
interested in any retail alcoholic beverage store which is located at a place
within the City limits which is in violation of, or forbidden as, a location by
the City or under the laws of the State. (1987 Code § 3-111)
3-2-10: LOCATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Pursuant to the limited exceptions and rules provided by 37A Oklahoma
Statutes 2-139, it shall be unlawful for any mixed beverage club, beer and wine
establishment or bottle club which has been licensed by the ABLE Commission and
which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, or package store, to be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any public or private school or church property
primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities. The
distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such school or
church to the nearest perimeter wall of the premises of such mixed beverage
establishment, beer and wine establishment, bottle club or package store.
   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments, or
bottle clubs, which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-
premises consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000;
provided, if at the time of application for license or renewal the licensed
location has not been in actual operation for a continuous period of more than
sixty (60) days, the license shall not be renewed; or
      2.   Establishments licensed prior to October 1, 2018, to sell low point
beer which were permitted to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any
public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used for
worship services and religious activities, pursuant to the provisions of
section 163.27 of title 37 of Oklahoma Statutes. Such establishments shall be
permitted to have any license in effect on October 1, 2018, transferred to a
mixed beverage license; provided, if such an establishment ceases to regularly
be open to the public or changes ownership, the provisions of this paragraph
shall cease to apply. (Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-11: SEPARATE PREMISES:
   A.   Separation From Adjoining Premises: No person shall maintain, operate
or assist in any manner the maintenance or operation of a retail alcoholic
beverage store or package store in premises which are not separated from
adjoining premises on which any other goods, wares or merchandise are sold or
services are rendered by nontransparent walls, broken only, if at all, by a
passageway to which the public is not admitted.
   B.   Use Of Passageway In Transporting Beverages: No person shall take any
alcoholic beverage through any passageway described in subsection A of this
section for the purpose of selling or reselling such beverage, or for the
purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of such beverages. (1987
Code § 3-120)
3-2-12: MINORS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Sales:
      1.   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic
beverages at any place within the City limits to any person who is a minor.
Neither shall any minor misrepresent his age verbally or in writing, or present
false documentation of age or otherwise, for the purpose of inducing any other
person to sell him alcoholic beverages.
      2.   No person shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic
beverages within the City to an intoxicated person or to any person who has
been adjudged insane or mentally deficient. (1987 Code § 3-113)
   B.   Prohibited Employment; Loitering:
      1.   No minor shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution
or other handling of alcoholic beverages at any place within the City.
      2.   No person shall employ or assist or aid in causing the employment of
any minor at any place within the City in the selling, manufacture,
distribution or other handling of alcoholic beverages.
      3.   No minor shall be permitted to remain within or to loiter about the
premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store.
      4.   Violation of this subsection shall subject the owner or proprietor,
as well as the underage person, to prosecution. (1987 Code § 3-115)
   C.   Intoxicated Persons In Restaurants Or Clubs: No person operating a
cafe, restaurant, club, or any place of recreation within the City, and no
employee engaged in connection with the operation of such a cafe, restaurant,
club or place of recreation, shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated
in the place of business. (1987 Code § 3-119)
   D.   Possession By Minors:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to be in the possession of any intoxicating beverage while such person is
upon any public street, road or highway or in any public building or place.
      2.   Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, shall be
punished by a fine. The applicable fine is as provided in the City fine
schedule. (Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-13: TRANSPORTING BEVERAGES:
It is unlawful to transport any alcoholic beverage, except as provided in
subsection 5-4D-1B4 of this Code. (1987 Code § 3-114; amd. 2004 Code)
3-2-14: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to sell
alcoholic beverages between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-15: DRINKING AND INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC:
   A.   No person shall:
      1.   Knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person
under twenty one (21) years of age;
      2.   Sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverages to an
intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally
deficient;
      3.   Open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the
premises of a package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store,
unless otherwise permitted by law;
      4.   Import into this City, except as provided for in the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, any alcoholic beverages; provided, that nothing
herein shall prohibit the importation or possession for personal use of not
more than one liter (1 L) of alcoholic beverages upon which the Oklahoma Excise
Tax is delinquent;
      5.   Receive, possess or use any alcoholic beverage in violation of the
provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
      6.   Knowingly transport into, within or through this City more than one
liter (1 L) of alcoholic beverages upon which the Oklahoma Excise Tax has not
been paid unless the person accompanying or in charge of the vehicle
transporting same shall possess a true copy of a bill of lading, invoice,
manifest or other document particularly identifying that alcoholic beverages
are being transported and showing the name and address of the consignor and
consignee; provided, this prohibition shall not apply to the first one hundred
eighty liters (180 L) of alcoholic beverages classified as household goods by
military personnel, age twenty one (21) or older, when entering Oklahoma from
temporary active assignment outside the contiguous United States;
      7.   Knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public highway, street or
alley any alcoholic beverage except in the original container which shall not
have been opened and the seal upon which shall not have been broken and from
which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed, unless the opened
container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the
spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a station wagon and panel
truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any
other person in the vehicle while it is in motion;
      8.   Consume spirits in public except on the premises of a licensee of
the ABLE Commission who is authorized to sell or serve spirits by the
individual drink, or be intoxicated in a public place. This provision shall be
cumulative and in addition to existing law;
      9.   Forcibly resist lawful arrest, or by physical contact interfere with
an investigation of any infringement of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act or with any lawful search or seizure being made by a law enforcement
officer or an employee of the ABLE Commission, when such person knows or should
know that such acts are being performed by a State, County or Municipal officer
or employee of the ABLE Commission;
      10.   Manufacture, duplicate, counterfeit or in any way imitate any
bottle club membership card required to be issued by the ABLE Commission
without the permission of the ABLE Commission;
      11.   Consume or possess alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises of
a bottle club unless such person possesses a valid membership card for that
club issued by the club;
      12.   Knowingly possess any bottle club membership card required to be
issued by the ABLE Commission which has been manufactured, counterfeited,
imitated or in any way duplicated without the permission of the ABLE
Commission; or
      13.   Knowingly and willfully permit any individual under twenty one (21)
years of age who is an invitee to the person's residence, any building,
structure or room owned, occupied, leased or otherwise procured by the person
or on any land owned, occupied, leased or otherwise procured by the person, to
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage as defined by Oklahoma Statutes
section 1-103 of title 37A, any controlled dangerous substance as defined in
the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, or any combination thereof, in
such place.
   B.   Except as provided for in subsection C of this section, punishment for
violation of subsection A13 of this section shall be as follows:
      1.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of the provisions of
subsection A13 of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor for the
first offense and be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00);
   C.   Except as provided in Oklahoma Statutes subsection C of section 6-126
of title 37A, any person who shall engage in any of the following and disturb
the peace of any person:
      1.   In any public place, or in or upon any passenger coach, streetcar,
or in or upon any other vehicle commonly used for the transportation of
passengers, or in or about any depot, platform, waiting station or room, drink
or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor unless authorized by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound
of any kind, or inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating substance;
      2.   Be drunk or intoxicated in any public or private road, or in any
passenger coach, streetcar or any public place or building, or at any public
gathering, from drinking or consuming such intoxicating liquor, intoxicating
substance or intoxicating compound or from inhalation of glue, paint or other
intoxicating substance; or
      3.   Be drunk or intoxicated from any cause, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-16: POSTING OF SIGNS:
   A.   Every person who sells alcoholic beverages at retail shall post
conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign stating the
following:
"IT'S THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE."
   B.   Any person who owns, operates or manages a place of business which
sells alcoholic beverages, as defined in Oklahoma Statutes 37A, for off-
premises consumption shall conspicuously post at the place of display of such
beer or alcohol and at the place of sale (cash register) a sign described as
follows: The word "WARNING:" centered and in capital letters at least three
inches (3") in height will be at the top of the notice, with the following
language in capital letters of at least three-fourths inch (3/4") in height:
"PURCHASING ALCOHOL OR BEER AND SUPPLYING IT TO A PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE
IS A FELONY UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA, PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF
NOT LESS THAN $2,500.00 NOR MORE THAN $5,000.00, OR IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO FIVE
YEARS, OR BOTH SUCH FINE AND IMPRISONMENT."
   C.   Failure to post a sign as required in this section shall be an offense
punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the City fee schedule. (Ord.
2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
3-2-17: PRIZES PROHIBITED:
No owner or proprietor of a retail alcoholic beverage store, and no person
employed therein, shall offer or furnish any prize, premium, gift or similar
inducement to a consumer in connection with a sale of alcoholic beverage. (1987
Code § 3-121)
3-2-18: PENALTY:
Any and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense
against the City, and, upon conviction of such an offense, the violator shall
be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1987 Code § 3-122)
CHAPTER 3
ITINERANT VENDORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Burden On Interstate Commerce; Hearing
3-3-3: License Required; Fee
3-3-4: Application For License; Bond
3-3-5: License Nontransferable
3-3-6: Private Residences, Invitation Required; Exceptions
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ITINERANT VENDOR: Means and includes all persons, firms or corporations, as
well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient
business in the city of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise,
or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of
taking orders for the sale thereof and who, for the purpose of carrying on such
business or conducting such exhibits thereof, either hire, rent, lease or
occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other enclosure, vacant
lot or any other property whatever in the city in, through, or from which any
goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or
exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof.
TEMPORARY: As used in the definition of "itinerant vendor" in this section,
means any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite
arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for
at least one hundred (100) days, in or upon which such business is to be
operated or conducted.
TRANSIENT: As used in the definition of "itinerant vendor" in this section,
means any such business of any such itinerant vendor as may be operated or
conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees
who reside away from the city or who have fixed places of business in places
other than the city or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples
thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them, or the
unsold portion thereof, away from the city before the expiration of one hundred
(100) days. (1987 Code § 9-201)
3-3-2: BURDEN ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE; HEARING:
Anyone engaged in interstate commerce or anyone upon which the provisions of
this chapter would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce
may request a hearing before the judge of the municipal court to determine
application or exemption of this chapter to such person. (1987 Code § 9-201)
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale,
exhibit for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale
thereof, any goods or merchandise in the city without first obtaining a license
as herein provided for.
      2.   The city clerk shall issue to any itinerant vendor a license
authorizing such itinerant vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or
exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof in the city his
goods or merchandise only after such itinerant vendor shall have fully complied
with all provisions of this chapter and shall have paid the license fees
hereinafter provided, which sum shall be compensation to the city for the
services herein required of it and to enable the city to partially defray the
expenses of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (1987 Code § 9-202)
   B.   License Fee: The license fee for itinerant vendors shall be as set by
the city council. (1987 Code § 9-204)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; BOND:
The itinerant vendor shall make application to the city clerk at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of his contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the
city, which application shall be in the form of an affidavit, stating the full
name and address of the itinerant vendor, the location of his or its principal
office and place of business, the names and addresses of its officers if it be
a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all
partners if such itinerant vendor be a firm. The application thereof must be
accompanied by:
   A.   A statement showing the kind and character of goods to be sold, or
merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited;
   B.   A certified copy of the articles of incorporation if the itinerant
vendor be a corporation, incorporated under the laws of this state;
   C.   A certified copy of its permit or authority to do business in the state
and current state sales tax permit; and
   D.   A bond in the sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
executed by the itinerant vendor as principal, with some surety company
authorized to do business in the state as surety, which bond shall be payable
to the city for the use and benefit of any person or persons entitled thereto
and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to person,
or persons, caused by or arising from, or growing out of, the wrongful or
illegal conduct of the itinerant vendor while conducting the sale or exhibit in
the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire
duration of the license permit as provided herein, and two (2) years
thereafter. (1987 Code § 9-203)
3-3-5: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
The license provided for in this chapter shall not be transferable nor give
authority to more than one person to conduct a business as an itinerant vendor,
but any persons having obtained such license may have the assistance of one or
more persons in conducting the business. (1987 Code § 9-205)
3-3-6: PRIVATE RESIDENCES, INVITATION REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Consent Or Invitation Required: In the exercise of the authority
conferred upon the city by state law, the practice of going to, in or upon the
premises of any private residence in the city by door to door salespersons,
solicitors, peddlers and order takers, without the express consent, request or
invitation of the owner or the occupant of such private residence, for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the purchase or for the sale of goods, wares,
or publications or merchandise of any description, or the purpose of peddling,
or hawking the same, or for the purpose of soliciting subscriptions thereto, is
hereby prohibited.
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to salespersons, solicitors,
peddlers or order takers representing sales for local nonprofit or charitable
organizations, nor to the sale or soliciting of any order for the sale of milk,
dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs or other farm and garden produce so
far as the sale of the commodities named in this subsection is authorized by
law.
   C.   Penalty: Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor against the city. Any person convicted of violating
any provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 9-206)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL SALES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: License Required Per Location; Restrictions
3-4-3: Application For License
3-4-4: Issuance; Term; Investigation
3-4-5: License Fee
3-4-6: Interval Between Sales
3-4-7: Signs
3-4-8: Display Of Goods
3-4-9: Persons Exempted From Chapter
3-4-10: Revocation Or Refusal Of License
3-4-11: Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, "residential sale" means any sale of what is
held out to be or is commonly known as a garage, porch, room, backyard, or
patio sale or any other type of general sale conducted from or on any premises
not located in a zoning district which permits such sales, where goods or
articles of any type are held out for sale to the public. This definition shall
not include a situation where specific items are held out for sale and all
advertisement of such sale specifically names the items to be sold. (1987 Code
§ 9-301)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED PER LOCATION; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall hold, conduct, engage in, or
participate in any manner in, a residential sale without a license as provided
for in this chapter.
   B.   Compliance With Regulations: The issuance of a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall not exempt such persons from the terms and
provisions of other ordinances.
   C.   Separate Licenses; Time Limit; Nonprofit Organizations: A separate
license shall be required for each location at which a residential sale is to
be held. No location shall be eligible for more than one license in any sixty
(60) day period, unless there has been a change in the ownership of such
location, or unless licenses for such locations have been issued to nonprofit
organizations, associations, or corporations. No nonprofit organization,
association or corporation may be issued more than one such license in any
sixty (60) day period. (1987 Code § 9-302)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a license shall furnish the city clerk with the following
information:
   A.   Full name and address of applicant;
   B.   The location at which the proposed residential sale is to be held; and
   C.   The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held.
   D.   The application shall be submitted online with the City of McLoud.
(1987 Code § 9-303; amd. Ord. 2024-03, 1-25-2024)
3-4-4: ISSUANCE; TERM; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Issuance And Term Of License: The city clerk is authorized to grant a
license for a residential sale for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive
days to any person applying who otherwise complies with the requirements of
this chapter.
   B.   Inability To Hold Sale; Reissuance Of License: If a residential sale is
not held on the dates for which the license is issued or is terminated during
the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an
affidavit by the license holder to this effect is submitted, the city clerk may
issue another license to the applicant for a residential sale to be conducted
at the same location within thirty (30) days from the date when the first sale
was to be held.
   C.   Investigation: Before issuing a residential sale license, the city
clerk or city administrator may conduct such investigation as may reasonably be
necessary to determine if there is compliance with this chapter. (1987 Code §
9-304)
3-4-5: LICENSE FEE:
There is hereby levied a fee for residential sale licenses. The amount of the
fee shall be as set by the city council by motion or resolution. (1987 Code §
9-305)
3-4-6: INTERVAL BETWEEN SALES:
No person shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner or allow
a residential sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or
ownership more than one time in any sixty (60) day period; subject, however, to
the exceptions allowed in sections
3-4-2 and
3-4-4 of this chapter. (1987 Code § 9-307)
3-4-7: SIGNS:
   A.   Number Allowed: Signs advertising residential sales shall be limited to
the two (2) signs and stakes issued by the city with the permit. Persons
conducting residential sales are not authorized to post other signs or notices
of the sale. Signs advertising residential sales shall not be placed in public
easements. The city clerk or designated person is hereby authorized to adopt
such further regulations or restrictions as shall be reasonably necessary to
enforce these restrictions. (Ord. 2012-10, 10-18-2012)
   B.   Removal: All signs must be removed not later than twenty four (24)
hours following conclusion of the sale.
   C.   Signs advertising residential sales shall not be provided by the town.
Signs must be of a form and size approved prior to the sale. Previously
approved signs are available. (1987 Code § 9-308; amd. Ord. 2024-03, 1-25-2024)
3-4-8: DISPLAY OF GOODS:
The sale area of any residential sale shall be confined to the premises for
which the license has been issued, and, in no event, shall articles or goods be
displayed after the sale expiration date. (1987 Code § 9-309)
3-4-9: PERSONS EXEMPTED FROM CHAPTER:
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following:
   A.   Persons acting pursuant to an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction;
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials; or
   C.   Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions. (1987 Code § 9-310)
3-4-10: REVOCATION OR REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   False Information On Application: Any license issued under this chapter
may be revoked or any application for issuance of a license may be refused by
the city clerk if the application submitted by the applicant or license holder
contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement.
   B.   Cancellation; Time Limit For Issuance Of Another License: If any person
is convicted of any offense under this section, the city clerk is instructed to
cancel any existing residential sale license held by the person convicted and
not to issue such person another residential sale license for a period of one
year from the time of conviction. (1987 Code § 9-306)
3-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 9-311)
CHAPTER 5
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Application For License; Issuance
3-5-3: License Fee
3-5-4: Display Of License
3-5-5: Prohibited Devices Not Legalized
3-5-6: Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   A.   Means and includes any and all mechanical, electronic or video devices
which upon the payment or insertion of a coin, script, token or similar object
which causes, permits or is incentive for, the propelling or motivating of any
ball, marble, electronic simulation or other gadget or object that produces or
creates or makes possible the production or creation of a game of skill,
amusement, entertainment or test of strength, including, but not limited to,
shuffleboards, coin operated devices utilizing tables, boards or cases of any
size whatsoever, balls, sticks, cues, pegs or marbles; and whether or not any
motivating force involved is furnished by the player or the device.
   B.   "Coin operated amusement devices" as defined herein shall not include
coin operated machines operated by penny coins only; or coin operated vending
machines used exclusively for the purpose of selling tangible personal
property, such as cold drinks, tobacco products, candies, postage stamps or
other similar merchandise; or services such as pay telephones, parking meters,
gas or electric meters or other distribution of needful services.
POOL, BILLIARD OR SNOOKER TABLES: Any table specifically manufactured for the
purpose of playing pool, billiards or snooker, whether or not the tables are
coin operated. (1987 Code § 9-401)
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Application To Clerk: Application for an annual license on such devices
shall be made to the city clerk.
   B.   Contents: The application form shall contain the name of the applicant,
a description of the device, location of the device and such other information
deemed necessary by the clerk to identify the device.
   C.   Machines: Any number of machines may be included in one application.
   D.   Payment Of Fee; Issuance: Upon payment of the license fee and approval
of the application, the clerk shall issue a license for the device or devices
covered by the application. (1987 Code § 9-403)
3-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
Every person who owns and has available to the public, or who permits to be
operated by the public in or on his place of business any coin operated
amusement device, pool table, billiard table or snooker table, shall pay an
annual license fee for each such device. The amount of the fee shall be as set
by motion or resolution of the city council. (1987 Code § 9-402)
3-5-4: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Before any coin operated amusement device, pool table or snooker table is put
into operation or placed where the same may be operated by the public, and at
all times when the same is being operated, or is available to the public for
operation, a license, issued by the city, shall be firmly affixed to the device
covered thereby and plainly visible to, and readable by, the public. (1987 Code
§ 9-404)
3-5-5: PROHIBITED DEVICES NOT LEGALIZED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to legalize any device that may be
prohibited by the laws of this state or the ordinances of the city. The city
clerk may assume that any device described in any application, and for which a
license fee is paid, is lawful. No claim for a refund of any license fee will
be entertained based upon an owner's or operator's inability to operate such
device because of any law of this state or city or for any other reason. (1987
Code § 9-405)
3-5-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 9-406)
CHAPTER 6
RECREATION CENTERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: License Required
3-6-3: Application For License; Requirements
3-6-4: Regulations For Operation
3-6-5: Slot Machines And Punchboards Prohibited
3-6-6: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-6-7: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter, a "recreation center" means any place, business
or premises which maintains one or more pool tables, snooker tables or billiard
tables or one or more electronic or video games, pinball machines, table games
or other similar devices or services; provided, that the following shall not be
considered recreation centers:
   A.   Private homes;
   B.   Duly licensed bottle clubs, taverns, bars or dance halls;
   C.   Churches and church recreation or activity centers; or
   D.   Businesses where tables, games, machines or devices are maintained
occupying floor space equivalent to less than five percent (5%) of the maximum
occupancy of the business, as established by the building code of the city.
(1987 Code § 9-501)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a "recreation
center", as defined in section
3-6-1 of this chapter, without a valid annual license therefor issued by the
clerk of the city. (1987 Code § 9-502)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Application for an annual license shall be made on forms provided by
the clerk of the city.
      2.   Licenses shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire on June
30 of the year for which it is issued.
      3.   The annual fee for the license for the operation of a recreation
center shall be as set by motion or resolution of the city council, payable
upon the issuance of the annual license.
      4.   Holders of recreation center licenses shall conspicuously display
such licenses on the premises of the licensed recreation center.
   B.   Contents Of Application: The application for an annual license to
operate a recreation center shall contain the following:
      1.   The name of the applicant, who must be the owner of such business;
      2.   The location where it is intended to conduct such business;
      3.   The age of the applicant;
      4.   The business and residence addresses of the applicant for the five
(5) years next preceding the date of the filing of the application; and
      5.   Whether anyone on the premises has or holds a United States internal
revenue license or special liquor dealers' license.
   C.   Verification: The application shall be verified by oath of the
applicant. (1987 Code § 9-503)
3-6-4: REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION:
It is an offense punishable as hereafter set forth for any recreation center
operator, manager, or person having supervisory control thereof, or employee to
do, or permit to be done, any of the following acts:
   A.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: Operate a recreation center at any
location in violation of the city's zoning ordinance.
   B.   Compliance With Chapter: Violate any provision of this chapter.
   C.   Compliance With State Statutes: Violate any of the statutes of the
state of Oklahoma.
   D.   Hours Of Operation: Operate or be open for operation during hours other
than specified as follows:
      1.   Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday: Eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight;
      2.   Friday: Eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the
following Saturday morning;
      3.   Saturday: Eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
the following Sunday morning; and
      4.   Sunday: Twelve o'clock (12:00) noon until twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight.
   E.   Liquor Or Beer Consumption: Sell, barter, give away or permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages or beer in or about the premises of such
recreation center.
   F.   Intoxicated Persons: Permit any intoxicated person, whether by alcohol,
drugs, or other substances, to be in or about the premises.
   G.   Dancing: Permit dancing on the licensed premises.
   H.   Minors During School Hours: Permit on the premises any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years during a public school day between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M., and one o'clock
(1:00) P.M. until three o'clock (3:00) P.M., except when accompanied by a
parent, legal guardian, or as part of a recognized school sponsored activity.
   I.   Remaining On Premises After Closing Time: Permit any person not an
employee to be or remain on the licensed premises or in that portion of the
premises wherein the recreation activities take place more than fifteen (15)
minutes after closing time. (1987 Code § 9-505)
3-6-5: SLOT MACHINES AND PUNCHBOARDS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to expose or operate in his
place of business within the city any punchboard or slot machine which contains
any element of chance or in the operation of which chance plays any material
part. (1987 Code § 9-504)
3-6-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Filing Complaint; Hearing; Determination:
      1.   All complaints concerning recreation centers shall be submitted to
the chief of police for investigation. If the chief of police finds that a
violation of the provisions of this chapter has been committed, he may file a
complaint with the clerk of the city, setting forth the alleged acts
constituting the violation.
      2.   Upon the filing of such a complaint, the clerk shall fix a date for
hearing of the complaint by the city council, and shall cause to be served upon
the licensee a copy of the complaint and notice of the time and place of the
hearing.
      3.   The complaint and notice of hearing may be served upon the manager,
operator, partner or person shown on the application for the license as having
supervisory control over the premises of the recreation center or if such
person may not be found, by mailing the same by registered or certified mail
addressed to such person at the licensed premises.
      4.   At the hearing thereon, the complainant, the licensee or any
interested person may be present and present such evidence as may be relevant
and material.
      5.   If at the conclusion of such hearing, the city council finds that
the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the city
council shall suspend for not more than fifteen (15) days or revoke the license
issued hereunder. Upon suspension or revocation, the licensee shall immediately
cease operating as a recreation center.
   B.   Application After Revocation; Time Limit: Following the revocation of
any recreation center license, an application for a license as a recreation
center upon the same premises shall not be accepted by the city clerk for a
period of thirty (30) days following the revocation. (1987 Code § 9-506)
3-6-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 9-507)
CHAPTER 7
FARMERS' MARKETS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Standards
3-7-2: Health Department Supervision
3-7-3: Months Of Operation And Days Open
3-7-4: Signage
3-7-5: Application And Permit
3-7-6: Suspension Of Permit
3-7-7: Business License Required
3-7-8: Fees
3-7-1: STANDARDS:
Farmers' markets must comply with all of the following regulations:
   A.   Farmers' markets are allowed in areas zoned A-1, A-2, C-1 and C-2, and
must be sponsored by a bona fide not for profit organization.
   B.   The commodities to be sold at a farmers' market shall be limited to:
      1.   Farm and garden produce and agricultural products such as fruits and
vegetables, plants, flowers, nuts and seeds, meat, poultry, fish, dairy
products, and honey;
      2.   Baked goods, processed food items (such as jams, jellies, salsas,
and sauces), and hot or cold beverages; and
      3.   Nonagricultural arts and crafts products that are handcrafted by the
seller.
   C.   Food items prepared or assembled on site may be sold at farmers'
markets, as long as:
      1.   The prepared or assembled food items are compatible with and
complementary to the other products sold at the farmers' market, and
      2.   Vendors preparing or assembling food on site obtain the necessary
health department permits.
   D.   The sponsor of a farmers' market must provide to the city proof of
liability insurance in such amounts as shall be reasonably required from time
to time by the city.
   E.   Sufficient parking must be provided such that the farmers' market does
not create parking or traffic congestion on or around the property where the
market is located. Written permission must be obtained from the owner of any
private parking areas used to serve the farmers' market.
   F.   Farmers' markets may not be established in any manner that impedes or
impairs emergency service ingress and egress to any fire hydrant or building.
No farmers' market vendor or any vehicle associated with the farmers' market
shall be located within fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant.
   G.   The sponsoring committee or organization is responsible for supervising
and ensuring the remittance of sales tax from farmers' market sales to the
state tax commission.
   H.   All tents, booths, tables, and other temporary structures used in the
operation of the farmers' market must be removed from the farmers' market site
at the conclusion of each day the market is in operation except on consecutive
days with the permission of the property owner.
   I.   All trash, fruit or produce remnants, debris, and general litter must
be removed from the farmers' market site at the conclusion of each day the
market is in operation. The sponsoring committee or organization is responsible
for ensuring the general cleanup of the farmers' market area at the conclusion
of each day of operation. (Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
3-7-2: HEALTH DEPARTMENT SUPERVISION:
Each vendor selling processed foods, baked goods, meats, eggs, dairy products,
or other goods that may be a health concern is subject to approval of the
applicable state and county health and agriculture departments and shall
operate according to the rules and regulations of such departments. (Ord. 2014-
13, 10-23-2014)
3-7-3: MONTHS OF OPERATION AND DAYS OPEN:
Farmers' markets may operate year round. However, no farmers' market may
operate more than three (3) days in any seven (7) day period. (Ord. 2014-13,
10-23-2014)
3-7-4: SIGNAGE:
Farmers' markets are allowed one on site temporary banner and two (2) off site
temporary banners, provided:
   A.   The on site banner is limited to twenty (20) square feet in area and
the off site banners are each limited to ten (10) square feet in area;
   B.   The owner of the property where the banners are placed has given
written permission to hang the banners;
   C.   The banners are not illuminated; and
   D.   The banners are only displayed on days and during times the farmers'
market is actually in operation, except that the off site banners may be
displayed a maximum of twenty four (24) hours prior to the operation of the
farmers' market. (Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
3-7-5: APPLICATION AND PERMIT:
An application for a farmers' market permit shall be filed with the city clerk,
who shall review the application and issue a farmers' market permit if the
proposed market complies with all the standards of this chapter and all other
applicable sections of this code. The application shall be on a form available
at the city office and shall contain the following required information:
   A.   Name of the applicant and organizational affiliation;
   B.   A current copy of the sponsoring committee's or organization's bylaws
or rules of operation;
   C.   Existing zoning of site and contiguous properties;
   D.   Site plan, drawn to scale, showing proposed locations of all market
uses as well as existing permanent structures and parking areas;
   E.   The proposed dates and times the market will be in operation;
   F.   Proof of liability insurance. (Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
3-7-6: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
The city manager, city clerk, code enforcement officer, fire marshal and other
designated city employees are authorized to conduct inspections of the farmers'
market to ensure compliance with the standards of this section. A farmers'
market permit shall be suspended and the market immediately ceased in the event
the city finds the market violates any of the provisions of this section or the
conditions set forth in the farmers' market permit. The permit may be
reinstated at such time as the violation is corrected. (Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-
2014)
3-7-7: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A farmers' market permit is not a business license and the granting of said
permit shall not relieve the permittee of any other license requirement of the
city or any other public agency. (Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
3-7-8: FEES:
An annual permit fee shall be charged as established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
CHAPTER 8
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
SECTION:
3-8-1: Medical Marijuana Establishments
3-8-2: Inspection
3-8-3: Medical Marijuana Growing Facilities For Personal Medical Use; Security
3-8-4: Smell Or Noxious Odor
3-8-5: Possession Of Marijuana And Public Smoking Or Vaping Of Medical
Marijuana
3-8-1: MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   All Medical Marijuana Dispensaries are required to obtain a permit from
the City Clerk. These establishments are defined as any medical marijuana
establishment licensed by the State of Oklahoma as a Medical Marijuana
Dispensary. A lawfully issued Medical Marijuana Dispensary Permit shall be
valid for 12 calendar months.
   B.   The City Council will establish by resolution a fee to obtain the
Permit for Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. The fee shall be used to offset
municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration, and enforcement of medical marijuana dispensaries.
   C.   Medical Marijuana Dispensaries shall only be located in areas zoned C-
2 or C-3, and shall be subject to any Special Use Permit as may be applicable
by the Municipal Code of the City of McLoud.
   D.   A Permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed
location would be located within (1,000) feet of any of the following uses:
      1.   Any private or public school or school property where students
enrolled in grades pre-school through grade 12 may be present during the school
day or after hours for school sanctioned extra-curricular programming;
   E.   For the distance requirements outlined in this ordinance, the distances
described shall be computed utilizing the measurement method authorized by the
Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority for this purpose.
   F.   Buildings where medical marijuana is stored or dispensed must be
equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are
detectable off premises.
   G.   Nothing in this Ordinance be construed to: 1) allow persons to engage
in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance; 2) allow the use of
medical marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 3) allow any activity that is
otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law.
   H.   Any Medical Marijuana Permit issued under the municipal code of the
City of McLoud is subject to compliance with the McLoud Municipal Code and all
applicable State Statutes. Failure to comply with the Municipal Code and State
Statutes will result in the denial or revocation of the permit, and a fine of
$200.00 per day while the violation exists.
   I.   Commercial Medical Marijuana Cultivation, Commercial Medical Marijuana
Processing, Commercial Medical Marijuana Storage Facilities, and all other
Licensed Medical Marijuana Facilities or Medical Marijuana Businesses other
than Medical Marijuana Dispensaries are hereby prohibited within the municipal
boundaries of the City of McLoud.
      1.   This subsection shall not apply to licensed Medical Marijuana
Businesses granted a permit by the City of McLoud prior to August 29th, 2019.
These licensees shall be eligible to apply for renewal of the previously
granted permit subject to any future regulations implemented by the City of
McLoud.
   J.    Applicants for a Medical Marijuana Dispensary license shall provide a
copy of the Certificate of Compliance application form provided by the Medical
Marijuana Authority to the City Clerk, or his/her designee, at the time of
application for a Medical Marijuana Dispensary Permit. (Ord. 2019-08, 8-29-
2019)
3-8-2: INSPECTION:
   A.   All permits outlined in this ordinance will be subject to inspection by
an authorized city employee or agent prior to issuance.
   B.   The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both the applicant and City.
   C.   The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
(Ord. 2019-08, 8-29-2019)
3-8-3: MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR PERSONAL MEDICAL USE; SECURITY:
   A.   All Medical Marijuana Growing Facilities for Personal Medical Use shall
be subject to security provisions as stated in the State Statutes of the State
of Oklahoma and any applicable State Agency Rules and outlined herein prior to
the granting of a permit. Failing to comply with security provisions as stated
herein will result in a fine of $200 per occurrence.
   B.   Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for marijuana
cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key or
equivalent, at all times except when the residential facility is actively being
supervised in person by the permit holder.
   C.   Growing medical marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to
the interior of a single private residence, or an outdoor property secured by a
6-foot sight proof fence appropriate for the zoning district.
   D.   Growing medical marijuana shall not be visible from the public right of
way.
   E.   All portions of a residential medical marijuana use growing area used
shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes. The growing area must
be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or other related
problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1000 watts per light. The use of gas
products (CO2, butane, etc.) or CO2 and ozone generators in the growing area is
prohibited.
   F.   Growing medical marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that
constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if
growing medical marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration
that is detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of life and property.
   G.   The primary use of the residential property in which medical marijuana
is grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning
cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress
and egress. No room shall be used for growing medical marijuana where such
cultivation will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating,
sleeping or sanitation/bathing. (Ord. 2019-08, 8-29-2019)
3-8-4: SMELL OR NOXIOUS ODOR:
The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of marijuana by a
person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana license shall be
treated as a public nuisance. (Ord. 2019-08, 8-29-2019)
3-8-5: POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA AND PUBLIC SMOKING OR VAPING OF MEDICAL
MARIJUANA:
   A.   Public smoking or vaping of medical marijuana is prohibited in any
building or on any property owned or operated by the City of McLoud, and any
additional location which is deemed unlawful in the Oklahoma State Statutes or
State Agency Rules.
   B.   Possession of marijuana in excess of the limits imposed by State
Statute shall be prohibited.
   C.   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor offense subject to a
fine of $400 per occurrence. (Ord. 2019-08, 8-29-2019)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Enforcement By County Health Department
4-1-2: Obstructing Health Officer
4-1-3: Quarantine; Violations
4-1-4: Penalty
4-1-1: ENFORCEMENT BY COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT 1 :
Anywhere in this code where the term "health officer" is used, it shall be
construed to mean the director of the county health department or his duly
designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of the mayor and city
council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of the city as set
out in this section and any such decisions rendered under this section shall be
subject to review by the city council upon an appeal from an offender. (1987
Code § 8-501)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-6C-2 of this code.
4-1-2: OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with any health
officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the health laws of the
city. (1987 Code § 8-502)
4-1-3: QUARANTINE; VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate or refuse or fail to
comply with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the
board of health or any officer charged with enforcement of such order,
direction, prohibition, rule or regulation.
   B.   During times of public health emergencies, declared by the Governor,
Mayor, or other competent authority. The Mayor may issue an order to infected
persons, or persons reasonably suspected of being carriers of any contagious
disease, requiring such person to remain in quarantine for a period not to
exceed 21 days. During such quarantine, such person shall not leave his/her
residence except for essential travel for medical exams or treatment,
purchasing food or other necessities, or such other purposes as are specified.
Such person shall make every effort to avoid unnecessary contact with others.
   C.   A first violation of the Order shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $200.00. A second or subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.00 and/or 10 days in jail. (1987 Code § 8-503; amd. Ord.
2020-04, 4-16-2020)
4-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violation. (1987 Code § 8-504)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Nuisances Defined, Generally
4-2-2: Persons Responsible
4-2-3: Time Does Not Legalize
4-2-4: Remedies Against Nuisances
4-2-5: City Power To Define And Abate
4-2-6: Certain Public Nuisances Defined
4-2-7: Health Nuisances, Abatement
4-2-8: Creating Or Maintaining Nuisance Unlawful
4-2-9: Summary Abatement
4-2-10: Abatement By Suit In District Court
4-2-11: Procedures Cumulative
4-2-1: NUISANCES DEFINED, GENERALLY:
   A.   Nuisance: A "nuisance" is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to
perform a duty, or is any thing or condition which either:
      1.   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others;
      2.   Offends decency;
      3.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or
      4.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   B.   Public Nuisance: A "public nuisance" is one which affects at the same
time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons,
although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals
may be unequal.
   C.   Private Nuisance: Every "nuisance" not included in subsection B of this
section is a private nuisance. (1987 Code § 8-301)
4-2-2: PERSONS RESPONSIBLE:
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance
upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable
therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. (1987 Code § 8-
302)
4-2-3: TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE:
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right. (1987 Code § 8-303)
4-2-4: REMEDIES AGAINST NUISANCES:
   A.   Public: The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      1.   Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
      2.   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      3.   Civil action; or
      4.   Abatement:
         a.   By person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 12;
or
         b.   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (1987 Code § 8-
304)
   B.   Private: The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      1.   Civil action; and
      2.   Abatement:
         a.   By person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes sections 14
and 15; or
         b.   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (1987 Code § 8-
305)
4-2-5: CITY POWER TO DEFINE AND ABATE:
As provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16, the city has power to determine
what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and,
for the protection of the public health, the public parks, and the public water
supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the
city has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the
owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. (1987 Code §
8-306)
4-2-6: CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED:
   A.   Nuisances Enumerated: In addition to other public nuisances declared by
other sections of this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be
public nuisances:
      1.   Unwholesome Food Or Drink: The sale, or offering for sale, of
unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or
offerings are made.
      2.   Intoxicating Liquor: The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of
intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city, or
keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or
furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city.
      3.   Obscene Books, Papers: The exposure, display, sale, or distribution
of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects;
or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or
distributed.
      4.   Gambling Places: The keeping of a place where persons gamble,
whether by cards, slot machines, punchboards or otherwise.
      5.   Places Of Prostitution: The keeping of a place where prostitution,
illicit sexual intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced.
      6.   Unlawful Activities: The keeping of a place where activities in
violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on. (1987 Code §
8-307; amd. 2004 Code)
      7.   Public Dances: (Rep. by Ord. 2005-02, 2-10-2005, eff. 2-10-2005)
      8.   Contagious Disease: The public exposure of a person having a
contagious disease.
      9.   Loud Noises: The continued making of loud or unusual noises which
annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which
makes such noises.
      10.   Radio And Television Interference: The operation or use of any
electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with
radio or television reception by others.
      11.   Crowds Obstructing Traffic: Any use of a street or sidewalk or a
place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to
obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs
traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance.
      12.   Water, Ice Or Snow Falling From Building Onto Street Or Sidewalk:
Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from
any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk.
      13.   Stagnant Water; Mosquito Breeding: All wells, pools, cisterns,
bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed,
or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger
the public safety.
      14.   Weeds And Refuse: Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of
manure, refuse, or other things, which are, or are likely to be, breeding
places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on
which such exist.
      15.   Dangerous Buildings: Any building or structure which is dangerous
to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition.
      16.   Pit Or Hole Endangering Public Safety: Any pit, hole, or other
thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger
the public safety.
      17.   Fire Or Explosion Hazard: Any fire or explosion hazard which
endangers the public safety.
      18.   Activities Endangering Public Peace: Any occupation or activity
which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare.
      19.   Unsanitary Stables; Animal Noises: Any stable or other place where
animals are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the
city, by reason of any noise or noises made by the animal therein, or by reason
of lack of sanitation. (1987 Code § 8-307; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Enumeration Cumulative: The above enumeration of certain public
nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or
ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more
specific terms. (1987 Code § 8-307)
4-2-7: HEALTH NUISANCES, ABATEMENT:
   A.   Order Abatement:
      1.   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-
1011, the health officer has authority to order the owner or occupant of any
private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense,
any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of
insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any
other condition adversely affecting the public health, within twenty four (24)
hours, or within such other time as may be directed, in writing.
      2.   Such order may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the
premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a policeman,
or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner,
occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are
unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown, or is
without the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the
premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a
general circulation in the city.
   B.   Abatement By City; Assessment Of Costs: If the order is not complied
with, the health officer may cause the order to be executed and complied with,
and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of
removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other
city utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the
city water system or such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a
part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall become due and
payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in
payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of
any city utility service, such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may
be collected in any manner in which any other debt due the city may be
collected. (1987 Code § 8-311)
4-2-8: CREATING OR MAINTAINING NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner,
lessee, or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city.
(1987 Code § 8-310)
4-2-9: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
   A.   Nuisances Constituting Immediate Danger: Some nuisances are of such
nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health,
safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It
is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to
require, the mayor or other appropriate officer or agency of the city
government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such
nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can
be taken toward such abatement. (1987 Code § 8-308)
   B.   Request For Abatement: The chief of the fire department, the chief of
police, the city attorney and the building inspector, or any other officer
subordinate to the mayor may submit, through or with the consent of the mayor
to the city council, a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined
by the ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it
be abated. The mayor himself, the health officer, any council member, or any
resident or residents of the city may submit such a statement and request a
recommendation to the city council. (1987 Code § 8-308; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Determination Of Nuisance; Notice; Hearing: The city council shall
determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the
purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the city council shall have power
to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects. Before
proceeding to abate the nuisance or have it abated, the city council shall give
notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property
concerned, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and
opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the owner and other
persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by service by a police
officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the names or addresses
are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of the person
or persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the
necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper of
general circulation within the city.
   D.   Abatement By City; Assessment Of Costs: If the city council finds that
a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner or other persons
responsible for, or causing, the nuisance to abate it within a specified time
if the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or persons or
public adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent
delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for, or causing, the
nuisance do not abate it within the specified time, the city council shall
direct the mayor to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary
abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16. The
city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the
owner or other persons responsible for, or causing, the nuisance, as may be
just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until
paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts
of the city may be collected. (1987 Code § 8-308)
4-2-10: ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT:
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city
may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is
located, as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 17. (1987 Code § 8-309)
4-2-11: PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative as to any other
penalties or procedures authorized. (1987 Code § 8-313)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS AND TRASH
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Trash Or Weeds Accumulation Unlawful
4-3-3: Reporting Accumulation On Property
4-3-4: Receipt Of Report; Hearing And Notice
4-3-5: Removal By City Employees Or Contract
4-3-6: Determination And Assessment Of Costs
4-3-7: Lien On Property, Civil Remedy
4-3-8: Enforcement Officer; Appeal By Property Owner
4-3-9: Depositing Rubbish On Public Or Private Property
4-3-10: Removal Of Dead Animals
4-3-11: Littering
4-3-12: Abandoned Iceboxes, Refrigerators And Other Appliances
4-3-13: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CLEANING: The removal of trash from property.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county
treasurer.
TRASH: Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials,
rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for,
discarded or abandoned.
WEEDS:
   A.   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac
and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
      1. Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless
such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to
the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to
traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of the weeds;
      2. Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
      3. Harbors rodents or vermin;
      4. Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
      5. Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
      6. Is dead or diseased.
   B.   The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from
a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. (1987 Code § 8-102; amd. 2004
Code)
4-3-2: TRASH OR WEEDS ACCUMULATION UNLAWFUL:
   A.   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of
land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to
allow trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises. It is the
duty of such owner or occupant to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds.
   B.   Each owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land is
responsible for maintaining weeds and trash to the centerline of the alley or
any easement abutting the property or centerline of an abutting street. (1987
Code § 8-101)
4-3-3: REPORTING ACCUMULATION ON PROPERTY:
Any officer, employee or citizen of the city who discovers an accumulation of
trash or the growth of grass and weeds in excess of twelve inches (12") in
height, or both these conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the
city, shall report the condition to the city clerk. (Ord. 1991-05, 5-9-1991)
4-3-4: RECEIPT OF REPORT; HEARING AND NOTICE:
   A.   Abatement Procedure: The city clerk, upon verifying the report of
accumulation of grass, weeds and/or trash, shall forward the report to the city
council. The city council may cause property within the city to be cleaned of
trash, weeds and grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the following
procedure:
      1.   Notice Requirements: The city clerk shall give at least ten (10)
days' notice to the owner of the property by mail at the address shown by the
current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office before the city
council holds a hearing or takes action. The notice shall contain the
provisions of this section and that the premises in question is in violation of
section
4-3-2 of this chapter. Notice shall order the property owner to clean the
property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as
appropriate, and said notice shall further state that unless such work is
performed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be
done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk
against the property for the costs due and owing the city. Notice shall be
mailed certified, return receipt requested, stating date delivery was made, and
the name and address of the mailee. If the property owner cannot be located
within ten (10) days from the date of mailing, notice may also be given by
posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication in a legal
newspaper serving the area, one time not less than ten (10) days prior to any
hearing or action by the city. If the city council anticipates summary
abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of
this section, the notice, whether by certified mail, posting or publication,
shall state that any accumulations of trash or weeds or grass growth on the
owner's property occurring within six (6) months after the removal of trash or
cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may
be summarily abated by the city council; that the costs of such abatement shall
be assessed against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property
to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner.
      2.   Owner Consent For City Removal: The owner of the property may give
his written consent to the city authorizing the removal of the trash or the
mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving said written consent, the owner waives
his right to a hearing by the city.
      3.   Hearing: A hearing will be held by the city council to determine
whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused
the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the
public and the community or a hazard to traffic or creates a fire hazard to the
danger of property.
   B.   Summary Abatement: If the city council causes property within the city
limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in
accordance with the procedures provided for in subsection A of this section,
any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the
property occurring within a six (6) month period may be declared to be a
nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the
property owner. At the time of each such summary abatement, the city shall
notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice
shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten (10) days
after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as
provided for in subsection A of this section. Unless otherwise determined at
the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as
provided for in sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter; provided, that these sections shall not apply if the
records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice
was given pursuant to subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1991-05, 5-9-1991)
4-3-5: REMOVAL BY CITY EMPLOYEES OR CONTRACT:
   A.   Right Of Entry: Upon finding that the condition of the property
constitutes a detriment or hazard, as specified in subsection
4-3-4A3 of this chapter, and that the property would be benefited by the
removal of such conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of
entry on the property to remove trash, mow weeds or grass, and perform
necessary duties as a governmental function.
   B.   City Supervision Or Letting Of Bids: The work ordered to be performed
under section
4-3-4 of this chapter may be done by the employees of the city under
supervision of the city, or it may be let by contract. The contract shall be
awarded to the lowest and best bidder. (Ord. 1991-05, 5-9-1991)
4-3-6: DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under section
4-3-5 of this chapter, the city clerk shall report the cost thereof to the city
council. Such report shall be itemized as to each tract of property involved as
follows: labor, machinery rental or depreciation, fuel and supplies, cost of
notice, other costs and indirect costs of five percent (5%) of direct actual
costs. The council shall examine the report and, after receiving appropriate
information, shall determine the total costs of the work. The council shall
direct the city clerk to forward a statement and demand payment of the total
cost by certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the owner of the
property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the
treasurer of the county in which the property lies. (1987 Code § 8-106)
4-3-7: LIEN ON PROPERTY, CIVIL REMEDY:
If the costs of the work performed under this chapter are not paid within
thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by section
4-3-6 of this chapter, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the
property upon which the work was done is located, in order that the amount be
levied upon the property and be collected by the county treasurer in the manner
prescribed by the law of this state. The lien is coequal with the lien of ad
valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and
superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall
continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as
provided in this section, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection
of the amount owing and interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the
city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and
directing discharge of the lien. (1987 Code § 8-107)
4-3-8: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; APPEAL BY PROPERTY OWNER:
   A.   Designation Of Enforcement Officer: The city council may designate an
administrative officer to carry out the duties of the city council as provided
in sections
4-3-1 through
4-3-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Right Of Appeal: The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the
city council from any order of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10)
days after the administrative hearing. (1987 Code § 8-108)
4-3-9: DEPOSITING RUBBISH ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash,
slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse
or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or watercourse, or
upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in the city. (1987 Code
§ 8-109)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  8-3-7 of this code regarding unauthorized use of commercial dumpsters.
4-3-10: REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in the city shall,
within twenty four (24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its
carcass, and failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1987 Code § 8-
111)
4-3-11: LITTERING:
   A.   Definition; Prohibition:
      1.   "Littering" is defined as throwing any trash, refuse, wastepaper,
tin can, bottle or any other object or substance whatever upon the public
streets, alleys, roadways and sidewalks of the city or upon any real property
owned or occupied by another.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to litter. (1987 Code § 8-112)
   B.   Littering From Automobiles: It is unlawful for any person to throw from
any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the
streets, alleys and roadways of the city any litter, trash, wastepaper, tin can
or any other substance or refuse whatever. (1987 Code § 8-113)
   C.   Accumulations On Property:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person occupying any real property, either as
tenant or owner, to allow trash, wastepaper, litter objects, bottles, tin cans
or any other used or disposed of objects to accumulate upon such real property
or premises being so occupied or rented to such an extent as to constitute a
littering nuisance.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person occupying any real property, either as
tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash, wastepaper, litter objects,
bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of objects to be carried from
the occupied premises, either by the wind, elements or otherwise to any
adjoining or other real estate not so owned or occupied by the offender. (1987
Code § 8-114)
4-3-12: ABANDONED ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS AND OTHER APPLIANCES:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or other entity to leave, place or abandon,
in any place accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, stove, washing machine, dryer, dishwasher, tank, or any other
container or appliance with a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or
more that has a door with a lock or other fastening device that cannot be
easily released and opened from the inside of such appliance or container,
without first removing the door, lock or fastener. (Ord. 2007-07, 9-27-2007)
4-3-13: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation found violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 8-116)
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
4-4-1: Purpose
4-4-2: Scope
4-4-3: Definitions
4-4-4: Permit Requirements And Conditions; Fee
4-4-5: Open Burning Prohibited
4-4-6: Salvage Operations Utilizing Open Burning Prohibited
4-4-7: Permissible Open Burning
4-4-8: Fire Inspection Required
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is for the purpose of preventing, abating, and controlling air
pollution resulting from air contaminants released in the open burning of
refuse and other combustible materials. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
4-4-2: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to all operations involving open burning, except those
specifically exempted by section
4-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the content clearly indicates otherwise:
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS: Any substance which will readily burn and shall include
those substances which, although generally considered incombustible, are or may
be included in the mass of the material burned or to be burned.
OPEN BURNING: The burning of combustible materials in such a manner that the
products of combustion are emitted directly to the outside atmosphere.
OPEN PIT INCINERATOR: A device consisting of a pit (into which the material to
be combusted is placed) and nozzles, pipes, and other appurtenances designed
and arranged in a manner to deliver additional air and/or auxiliary fuel to, or
near, the zone of combustion so that theoretically complete combustion is
accomplished or approached.
PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION: All particulate and gaseous air contaminants emitted as
a result of the burning of refuse and combustible materials.
REFUSE: Garbage, rubbish, and all other wastes generated by a trade, business,
industry, building operation, or household. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
4-4-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS; FEE:
   A.   Permit Number Required: Prior to burning any combustible material as
allowed under this chapter, all persons must first obtain a permit number from
the city clerk or police dispatch, during such times as city hall is not open
for business. The person obtaining the permit number shall provide such
information as is reasonably required by the city clerk or police dispatch. The
city clerk and/or police dispatch shall provide written notice of the issuance
of such permit number in such form as the fire department shall require. (Ord.
2013-03, 4-25-2013)
   B.   Term Of Permit: Such permit shall be valid for a thirty (30) day
period. (Ord. 2016-01, 3-24-2016)
   C.   Notification: The permit holder must notify police dispatch at least
thirty (30) minutes prior to each burn. The permit holder is responsible for
determining if there are any burn bans in effect and if the weather is suitable
for burning.
   D.   Restrictions: No burning is allowed if the wind speed equals or exceeds
gusts of fifteen (15) miles per hour. The burning of household trash and refuse
within the city limits of McLoud is prohibited. Permits will not be issued for
the burning of combustible material other than normal brush, limbs, leaves and
yard waste unless first inspected and approved by the fire chief and/or fire
marshal.
   E.   Burn Ban: If a burn ban is issued during the period of the permit the
permit is no longer valid. A new permit must be obtained once the burn ban is
lifted or expires.
   F.   Permit Fee: The fee set for the permit required under subsection A of
this section shall be as set by resolution of the city council from time to
time.
   G.   Business Hours For Permits: Permits must be obtained Monday through
Friday, business hours at city hall. Permits will not be issued on weekends or
holidays.
   H.   Fine: Failure to obtain the required permit shall be an offense subject
to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 2014-11, 10-
9-2014)
4-4-5: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of refuse and
other combustible materials, except as allowed in compliance with section
4-4-7 of this chapter. The fine or penalty for violation of this section shall
double if such violation occurs at any time a burn ban or similar act or
prohibition is in effect pursuant to the authority of any governmental entity
having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2011-12, 4-28-2011)
4-4-6: SALVAGE OPERATIONS UTILIZING OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of combustible
material in connection with the salvage of motor vehicles, tires, oil and
similar substances, containers, coated or painted wire and metals, and other
materials. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
4-4-7: PERMISSIBLE OPEN BURNING 1 :
The open burning of refuse and other combustible materials may be conducted as
specified in this section if no public nuisance is, or will be, created and if
the burning is not prohibited by, and is conducted in compliance with, other
applicable laws and the ordinances, rules, and orders of governmental entities
having jurisdiction, including air pollution control ordinances, rules and
orders. The authority to conduct open burning under the provisions of this
chapter does not exempt or excuse a person from the consequences, damages, or
injuries which may result from such conduct nor does it excuse or exempt any
person from complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and orders
of the governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the open burning
is conducted in compliance with this chapter. The following are allowed:
   A.   Training Exercises: Fires purposely set for the instruction and
training of public and industrial firefighting personnel when authorized by the
appropriated governmental entity.
   B.   Elimination Of Fire Hazard: Fires set for the elimination of a fire
hazard which cannot be abated by any other means when authorized by the
appropriate governmental entity. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
   C.   Removal Of Dangerous Or Hazardous Materials: Fires set for the removal
of dangerous or hazardous material where there is no other practical or lawful
method of disposal upon approval of the fire chief or his representative. (Ord.
1993-06, 8-12-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Campfires: Campfires and other fires used solely for recreational
purposes, for ceremonial occasions, or for outdoor noncommercial preparation of
food.
   E.   Forest Or Range Lands: Fires purposely set to forest or range lands for
a specific reason in the management of forest or game in accordance with
practices recommended by the Oklahoma department of wildlife conservation, the
Oklahoma state department of agriculture, and the United States forest service.
   F.   Clearing Land: The burning of trees, brush, grass, and other vegetable
matter in the clearing of land, right of way maintenance operations, and
agricultural crop burning, if the following conditions are met:
      1.   Prevailing winds at the time of the burning must be away from any
city or town, the ambient air of which may be affected by air contaminants from
the burning; (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
      2.   The location of the burning must not be adjacent (within 500 feet)
to any occupied residence other than those located on the property on which the
burning is conducted; (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   Care must be used to minimize the amount of dirt on the material
being burned;
      4.   The initial burning may begin only between three (3) hours after
sunrise and three (3) hours before sunset, and additional fuel may not be
intentionally added to the fire at times outside the limits stated above; and
      5.   The burning must be controlled so that a traffic hazard is not
created as a result of the air contaminants being emitted. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-
1993)
   G.   Domestic Household Refuse: (Rep. by Ord. 2014-11, 10-9-2014)
   H.   Hydrocarbons From Pipeline Breaks Or Accidents: The burning of
hydrocarbons which are spilled or lost as a result of pipeline breaks or other
accidents involving the transportation of such materials or which are generated
as wastes as the result of oil exploration, development, refining, or
processing operation, if the following conditions are met:
      1.   The material cannot be practicably recovered or otherwise lawfully
disposed of in some other manner;
      2.   The burning must not be conducted within a city or town or in such
proximity thereto that the ambient air of such city or town may be affected by
the air contaminants being emitted;
      3.   The initial burning may begin only between three (3) hours after
sunrise and three (3) hours before sunset, and additional fuel may not be
intentionally added to the fire at times outside the limits stated above; and
      4.   The burning must be controlled so that a traffic hazard is not
created as a result of the air contaminants being emitted.
   I.   Open Pit Incinerator: The burning of any combustible material in an
open pit incinerator which has been properly designed and which is properly
operated for the control of smoke and particulate matter.
   J.   Smokeless Atmospheric Flares: The burning of hydrocarbons, which must
be wasted, through the use of smokeless atmospheric flares if, after
investigation, a condition of air pollution exists. (Ord. 1993-06, 8-12-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-2B-8C2 of this code.
4-4-8: FIRE INSPECTION REQUIRED:
On all burns other than grass, leaves, brush, wood, and agricultural grasses,
an inspection is required to be made by the fire chief, fire marshal or their
designated deputy prior to commencing the burn. (Ord. 2014-11, 10-9-2014)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Storing, Leaving Or Abandonment Of Vehicles
4-5-3: Removal And Impoundment Of Abandoned Vehicles
4-5-4: Notice Requirements
4-5-5: Public Hearing
4-5-6: Disposition Of Vehicles
4-5-7: Redemption Of Impounded Vehicles
4-5-8: Penalty
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined in this section, which
does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or
plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the
condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative,
abandoned or discarded.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along
the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall mean any other publicly owned property or facility.
(1987 Code § 8-401)
4-5-2: STORING, LEAVING OR ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Storing Or Parking Dismantled Vehicle; Nuisance; Exceptions:
      1.   No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing,
or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any
public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of
seventy two (72) hours.
      2.   The presence of a junked motor vehicle or parts thereof on private
or public property is unlawful and an offense and is hereby declared a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle enclosed within a
building on private property or to any motor vehicle held in connection with a
business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any
motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for
operation on drag strips or raceways. (1987 Code § 8-402)
   B.   Abandonment Of Vehicles: No person, firm or corporation shall abandon
any motor vehicle within the city on any public or private property, and no
person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonably to appear to have
been abandoned. (1987 Code § 8-413)
4-5-3: REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   Notice To Remove: Whenever it comes to the attention of the mayor or
his designee that any nuisance as defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served
upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no
such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them
of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal within the time
specified in this chapter. (1987 Code § 8-403)
   B.   Responsibility For Removal: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be
heard, the owner of the junked motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the
private property upon which the same is located, either or all of them, shall
be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
city, the owner or occupant of the private property where the junked motor
vehicle is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (1987 Code § 8-
404)
   C.   Removal From Property:
      1.   If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied
within the ten (10) day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice
requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the existence of
the violation is affirmed by the city council, the chief of police or his
designee has the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and
remove it from the premises. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with,
hinder, or refuse to allow such person to enter upon private property for the
purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. (1987 Code
§ 8-409; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   The city shall continue to prosecute criminal charges on a daily
basis for failure to abate the nuisance or shall have the right to take
possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. (1987
Code § 8-409)
      3.   Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the
chief of police or his agent shall give notice to the registered owner of the
vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property
from which the vehicle was removed, that the vehicle or vehicles have been
impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the
location of where the vehicle or vehicles are stored, and the costs incurred by
the city for removal. (1987 Code § 8-410)
   D.   Impounding: The chief of police or other appropriate official, or any
member of his department designated by him, is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city, which reasonably
appears to be in violation of this chapter, or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such
vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance
with the applicable ordinances. (1987 Code § 8-414)
4-5-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Procedure: The chief of police of the city shall give notice of removal
to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, at least
ten (10) days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient
notice when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private
property on which the vehicle is located and a duplicate copy is sent by
certified mail to the owner or occupant of the private property to his last
known address. (1987 Code § 8-405)
   B.   Content Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal
within the time specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that
upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city shall prosecute a
criminal complaint for failure to abate the nuisance, and the city or its
designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied
against the owner or occupant of the property. (1987 Code § 8-406)
4-5-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Request For Hearing:
      1.   Filing Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are
directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for
hearing before the city council within the ten (10) day period of compliance
prescribed in subsection
4-5-4A of this chapter.
      2.   Request Directed To Clerk: Request for hearing shall be directed to
the city clerk. (1987 Code § 8-407)
   B.   Procedure: The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the
filing of the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall
be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days in
advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the
notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either
party deems necessary. (1987 Code § 8-408)
4-5-6: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES:
Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the chief of
police or his agent, or other person authorized by law, shall, after a period
of ten (10) days, give notice of public sale not less than ten (10) days prior
to the date of the proposed sale or other disposition of the vehicle. (1987
Code § 8-411)
4-5-7: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may redeem
such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction
thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the city clerk of such sums as
he may determine and the actual and reasonable expense of removal, and any
preliminary sale expenses, plus storage, for each vehicle redeemed. (1987 Code
§ 8-412)
4-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 8-415)
CHAPTER 6
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Possession Of Lighted Tobacco In Certain Places Prohibited
4-6-3: Exemptions
4-6-4: Designated Smoking Rooms And Areas
4-6-5: Posting
4-6-6: Violation And Penalty
4-6-7: Enforcement
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: An electronic and/or battery operated device, the
use of which may resemble smoking that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose
of nicotine or other substances. Electronic smoking device includes any such
device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic
cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an
electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
INDOOR WORKPLACE: Any indoor place of employment or employment type service for
or at the request of another individual or individuals, or any public or
private entity, whether part time or full time and whether for compensation or
not. Such services shall include, without limitation, any service performed by
an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner, proprietor,
manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant or
volunteer. An indoor workplace includes work areas, employee lounges,
restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any
other spaces used or visited by employees, and all space between a floor and
ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows,
regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to such indoor workplace at any
given time, whether or not work is being performed.
OUTDOOR AREA: Any covered area, partially covered area or area open to the sky
that is on a property owned by the city.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than employees
are invited or permitted. The term is synonymous with the phrase "any indoor
place used by or open to the public".
RECREATIONAL AREA: Any area that is owned, controlled or used by the city of
McLoud and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of
any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes, but is not
limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses,
walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming
pools, roller and ice skating rinks, beaches surrounding lakes and skateboard
parks.
RESTAURANT: Any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity.
SMOKING: The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
lighted smoking device.
STAND ALONE BAR, STAND ALONE TAVERN, AND CIGAR BAR: An establishment that
derives more than sixty percent (60%) of its gross receipts, subject to
verification by competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and
low point beer and no person under twenty one (21) years of age is admitted,
except for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in 37
Oklahoma Statutes section 537B2 and that is not located within, and does not
share any common entryway or common indoor area with, any other enclosed indoor
workplace, including a restaurant.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and
any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of
nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed
with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the
human body. "Tobacco product" does not include any cessation product
specifically approved by the United States food and drug administration for use
in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
4-6-2: POSSESSION OF LIGHTED TOBACCO IN CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED:
   A.   The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is in
any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation, or any
indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law.
   B.   All buildings, or portions thereof, owned or operated by this city,
shall be entirely nonsmoking.
   C.   All indoor and outdoor recreational areas owned or operated by the city
shall be entirely tobacco free to include all forms of tobacco products
including electronic smoking devices. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
4-6-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The restrictions provided in section
4-6-2 of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Stand alone bars, stand alone taverns and cigar bars;
   B.   The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being
operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games;
   C.   Up to twenty five percent (25%) of the guestrooms at a hotel or other
lodging establishment;
   D.   Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption
on the premises;
   E.   Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the
immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace,
and the workplace has only incidental public access. "Incidental public access"
means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is not an
employee, present at the business to transact business or make a delivery. It
does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part of
their business;
   F.   Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access;
   G.   Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers;
   H.   Private residences and workplaces within private residences, except
that smoking shall not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as
a licensed childcare facility during hours of operation;
   I.   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment;
   J.   A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the armed forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19) of the internal
revenue code, 26 USC sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19), when such
facility is utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the
conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event or
activity which is open to the public; and
   K.   Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking shall not
be allowed within fifteen feet (15') of any exterior public doorway or any air
intake of a restaurant. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
4-6-4: DESIGNATED SMOKING ROOMS AND AREAS:
   A.   An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so under this chapter
may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for
cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking,
provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the
outside in such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking
area. No exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within fifteen feet (15')
of any entrance, exit or air intake.
   B.   If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in section
4-6-3 of this chapter or in a smoking room pursuant to subsection A of this
section, such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space
or, if it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking
space shall be fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air
from the smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative
air pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area
when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room
shall not be exhausted within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance, exit or air
intake. Any employer may choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including
being totally smoke free.
   C.   A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the nursing home care act may
designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be
fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative
air pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is
recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building.
   D.   Restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking areas
and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such
designated smoking rooms which shall be in a location which is fully enclosed,
directly exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot
escape when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of
the building. No exhaust from such room shall be located within twenty five
feet (25') of any entrance, exit or air intake. Such room shall be subject to
verification for compliance with the provisions of this subsection by the state
department of health. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
4-6-5: POSTING:
   A.   The person who owns or operates a place where smoking or tobacco use is
prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at least
four inches by two inches (4" x 2") in size, at each entrance to the building
indicating that the place is smoke free or tobacco free.
   B.   Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows:
      1.   In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is
in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible;
      2.   In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility involved shall be responsible; and
      3.   In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility shall be responsible. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
4-6-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who knowingly violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus applicable
court costs. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
4-6-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The state or local governmental agency or the person who owns or operates a
public place shall, at a minimum, do the following in order to prevent smoking
in public places:
   A.   Post signs at entrances to places where smoking is prohibited which
state that smoking is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of
tobacco smoke; and
   B.   Ask smokers to refrain from smoking upon observation of anyone
violating the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-26, 12-19-2013)
CHAPTER 7
BIOSOLIDS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Intent
4-7-3: Applicability
4-7-4: Biosolids Prohibited
4-7-5: Penalty
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BIOSOLIDS: Solid, semi-solid, or liquid residue generated during treatment of
domestic sewage in a treatment works; and include domestic septage, scum, or
solids removed in primary, secondary, or advanced wastewater treatment
processes, and a material derived from biosolids.
The term excludes biosolids products that are in a bag or container packaged
for routine retail sales through regular retail outlets which are primarily
used for residential purposes in limited quantities.
TREATMENT WORKS: Facilities installed for the purpose of treating,
neutralizing, stabilizing, or disposing of sewage, industrial waste, or other
wastes, including, but not limited to a plant, disposal field, lagoon, pumping
station, constructed drainage ditch or surface water intercepting ditch,
incinerator, area devoted to sanitary landfills, or other works. (Ord. 2025-07,
4-24-2025)
4-7-2: INTENT:
   A.   It is recognized that the land application of biosolids can pose a
potential risk to public safety and environmental quality, and may not be
appropriate, even when applied in accordance with federal and state
regulations. Biosolids may contain heavy metals, pathogenic organisms, chemical
pollutants, and synthetic organic compounds which may pose a risk to public
health and the environment. Application of biosolids is an incompatible land
use in the incorporated City limits because of the smell, dust, and other
immediate undesirable effects.
   B.   Land application of biosolids can negatively affect the brand,
reputation, and environmental health of the City of McLoud.
   C.   It is therefore the intent of this Chapter to prohibit land application
of biosolids within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 2025-07, 4-24-2025)
4-7-3: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter applies to all private and public lands in the City of McLoud.
Temporary storage of biosolids during the treatment process on municipal-owned
land as part of a municipal treatment works is exempt from the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2025-07, 4-24-2025)
4-7-4: BIOSOLIDS PROHIBITED:
Land application of biosolids is prohibited within the corporate limits of the
City of McLoud. (Ord. 2025-07, 4-24-2025)
4-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates Section
4-7-4 of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $750.00 for every day that the violation continues.
(Ord. 2025-07, 4-24-2025)
CHAPTER 8
LIVESTOCK
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose
4-8-2: Applicability
4-8-3: Definitions
4-8-4: Limitations On Livestock For Small Parcels
4-8-5: Existing Uses
4-8-6: Enforcement And Penalties
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of
the community by regulating the keeping of livestock on smaller parcels of land
within the city limits, ensuring adequate grazing space, and preventing
potential environmental and nuisance concerns. (Ord. 2026-01, 8-28-2025)
4-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all properties within the incorporated limits of the
McLoud zoned A2 Agricultural, and R Residential districts. (Ord. 2026-01, 8-28-
2025)
4-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
ACRE: 43,560 square feet of land area.
GRAZING LAND: Land used or usable for feeding and exercise of livestock by
natural forage, excluding areas covered by structures, pavement, or non-
grazeable terrain.
LIVESTOCK: Means and includes cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, sheep, goats,
swine, and any other hoofed animals kept for agricultural or personal use.
(Ord. 2026-01, 8-28-2025)
4-8-4: LIMITATIONS ON LIVESTOCK FOR SMALL PARCELS:
   A.   Any property within city limits that is less than five (5) acres in
total lot size shall be subject to the following limitation:
      1.   No more than one (1) livestock animal may be kept per one (1) acre
of grazeable land on the property.
   B.   For purposes of calculating allowable livestock, fractions of an acre
shall not be rounded up.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the keeping of
customary household pets (dogs, cats, rabbits, etc.) except where prohibited by
ordinance. (Ord. 2026-01, 8-28-2025)
4-8-5: EXISTING USES:
There shall be no grandfathering rights for this chapter. Any property,
regardless of existing livestock at the time of passage, must fully comply with
the limitations in
4-8-4 immediately upon the effective date. (Ord. 2026-01, 8-28-2025)
4-8-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   This chapter shall be enforced by the City Code Enforcement Officer or
designee.
   B.   Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $200 per day of violation and/or removal of excess animals as
determined by the City. (Ord. 2026-01, 8-28-2025)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created; Chief
5-1-2: Duties Of Department
5-1-3: Police Officers
5-1-4: Community Service Work Program
5-1-5: Unclaimed Property
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; CHIEF:
There shall be a police department, the head of which is the chief of police,
or police chief. The chief of police is an officer of the city, and has
supervision and control of the police department. All police officers are
officers of the city. (1987 Code § 13-301)
5-1-2: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Duties, Generally: It is the duty of the police department to apprehend
and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the
ordinances of the city; to suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies
which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve
all warrants, writs, executions, and other processes properly directed and
delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state
law as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all
respects to perform all duties pertaining to the office of police officer.
   B.   Operation Of City Jail: The police department has charge of and
operates the city jail. (1987 Code § 13-302)
5-1-3: POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointment: Police officers shall be appointed subject to approval of
the city council. They shall meet all statutory and city requirements to be
eligible to serve as police officers.
   B.   Duties: Police officers shall perform such duties as shall be required
of them by the chief of police, city ordinances, federal, state and county
regulations and any other actions required in the maintenance of good order and
public peace. (1987 Code § 13-303)
5-1-4: COMMUNITY SERVICE WORK PROGRAM:
   A.   Administration: The police department shall create and administer a
community service work program. The purposes of such program will be to serve
as a penal sanction for persons violating the ordinances of the city and to
provide a valuable service to the community.
   B.   Participation In Work Program:
      1.   Participants of this program will be persons ordered to perform
community service work by the municipal court for the city.
      2.   Participation in the program will be according to a schedule
consistent with the employment and family responsibilities of the person.
      3.   All work to be performed will be for the express and sole benefit of
the public in general, and will not be for the benefit of any private
individuals.
   C.   Completion Of Program; Report: Upon a person's successful completion of
the work program, the police department will report to the court clerk that the
person has completed the program. The report shall contain the total number of
hours the person participated in the work program.
   D.   Expulsion From Program: At any time, with just cause, the police
department may expel a participant from the program. When a participant is so
expelled, the police department shall give prompt notice to the court clerk
indicating the reason for the expulsion. (1987 Code § 13-304)
5-1-5: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
   A.   Complete Record Required:
      1.   All personal property which comes into the possession of any police
officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the
possession of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a
criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto,
shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge
of the chief of police.
      2.   The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose,
make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was
taken and the place where it was found; and the record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. (1987 Code § 13-501)
   B.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Property:
      1.   Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains
in the possession of the chief of police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which
is not to him satisfactorily established, for a period of six (6) months, shall
be sold, and the proceeds of the sale shall be paid over to the city clerk, who
shall issue his receipt therefor, and deposit the same to the credit of the
general fund of the city, except such personal property as in the opinion of
the mayor can be more advantageously used by some department or office of the
city government. (1987 Code § 13-502; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Ten (10) days before a sale of such unclaimed property, the chief of
police shall sign and have posted in a conspicuous place in the city clerk's
office, where it will be plainly visible to persons who visit that office,
notice of the time, place, and manner of such sale, and general description of
the property to be sold. However, if, in the opinion of the mayor, all or any
portion of the personal property may be more advantageously used in any city
department or office, he shall so instruct the chief of police, in writing, and
the chief shall thereupon deliver the personal property designated to that
department or office of city government and make a permanent record of its
disposition. (1987 Code § 13-502)
   C.   Property Found By Private Person: Any personal property found by a
person other than a public official or employee, which is delivered to any
police officer for identification, if not claimed or identified within thirty
(30) days, shall, within ten (10) additional days thereafter, if requested by
the finder, be returned to him, and a record of such disposal made thereof. If
the finder does not request return of the property to him within such
additional ten (10) days, then the chief of police shall sell the property as
if it had been found by a public official or employee, or, on instruction by
the mayor, deliver it to some department or office of the city government for
its use. (1987 Code § 13-503)
   D.   Recovery By Owner: If any property is sold as herein provided, and the
owner thereof takes and recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the
amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim
being submitted and approved by the city council. (1987 Code § 13-504)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-2-1: Department Established; Duties
5-2-2: Fire Chief; Assistant Chief
5-2-3: Company Officers
5-2-4: Training/Safety Officer
5-2-5: Secretary-Treasurer
5-2-6: Members; Appointment And Duties
5-2-7: Bylaws; Rules And Regulations
5-2-8: Fire And Medical Services; Fees
5-2-9: Use Of Fire Equipment; Inventory And Repair
5-2-10: Fire Protection Outside City Limits
5-2-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; DUTIES:
   A.   Definition: The term "volunteer firefighter" means one who is enrolled
as a member of the fire department of the city and who serves in that capacity
without receiving a regular salary. The size of the volunteer fire department
of the city shall be composed of not less than twelve (12) nor more than twenty
(20) members. (1987 Code § 13-201; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Department Established; Chief: There shall be a fire department, the
head of which shall be the chief of the fire department. (1987 Code § 13-201)
   C.   Duties, Generally: It is the duty of the fire department, among others,
to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate; to
promote fire prevention; and, unless otherwise provided, to enforce all
ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of persons from fire
in public and private buildings.
   D.   Administer First Aid: Trained personnel will administer first aid and/
or medical attention. (Ord. 1995-02, 5-11-1995)
5-2-2: FIRE CHIEF; ASSISTANT CHIEF:
   A.   Administration; Duties Of Fire Chief: The chief shall be the
administrative head of the department, subject to the laws of the state,
ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations adopted in this chapter.
The chief shall have the following powers and duties, and he may assign duties
to other members of the department: (1987 Code § 13-202)
      1.   The chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the department and the performance of all other duties
imposed upon him. He shall have supervision and control of the fire department,
subject to the supervision and control of the city council. (Ord. 1995-02, 5-
11-1995)
      2.   The chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
department, the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year. (1987 Code § 13-202)
      3.   The chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members. (1987 Code § 13-202; amd. 2004 Code)
      4.   The chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties.
      5.   The chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the department.
      6.   The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson,
shall notify proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence
for future use in the case.
      7.   The chief is authorized to enter any building or premises in the
city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice on persons for any violations that may be found.
      8.   The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the
department and shall make reports to the city council as it may require. The
chief shall keep the city council informed regarding the fire department and
its needs. (1987 Code § 13-202)
   B.   Duties Of Assistant Chief: In the absence of the chief, the assistant
chief on duty shall command the department and be held responsible therefor in
all respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief. (1987 Code
§ 13-203)
5-2-3: COMPANY OFFICERS:
Company officers shall be selected by the chief based upon the following
criteria:
   A.   Knowledge of firefighting;
   B.   Leadership ability; and
   C.   Knowledge of firefighting equipment. (1987 Code § 13-204)
5-2-4: TRAINING/SAFETY OFFICER:
   A.   Duties: The training/safety officer shall have the following
responsibilities:
      1.   Once a month, inspection of station and equipment, and report
findings.
      2.   Maintain training records and safety records.
      3.   Be responsible for safety briefing at each fire meeting.
      4.   Be responsible in maintaining that each member receives forty (40)
hours of minimum training each year in order to keep up certification and
cards.
   B.   Rank: The training/safety officer has the same duties and rank as a
captain. (Ord. 1995-02, 5-11-1995)
5-2-5: SECRETARY-TREASURER:
One member elected by the members of the fire department shall be a secretary-
treasurer. His duties shall consist of the following:
   A.   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting.
   B.   Keeping the minutes of each meeting.
   C.   Collecting any monies due the department by the members. (1987 Code §
13-205)
   D.   Keeping up to date records of all members, addresses and phone numbers.
(Ord. 1995-02, 5-11-1995)
5-2-6: MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES:
   A.   Appointment; Probation: All new members will be appointed by the board
of fire officers and are on probation for one year after their appointment.
   B.   Approval Of Members: New members, upon completion of their probation
period, must be approved by the majority of the fire department.
   C.   Disciplinary Actions: Any firefighter causing any irregularity or
breaking any rules of the fire department shall be questioned by the board of
fire officers and be subject to disciplinary actions (example: counseling,
probation or removal).
   D.   Complaint Against Department: Any firefighter making a complaint as to
the operation of the fire department will make it before the board of fire
officers in writing.
   E.   Business With City Officials: Any business the members have with the
city officials or the city council that affect the operation of the fire
department will be taken care of by the board of fire officers.
   F.   Driving Apparatus: All new members on probation cannot drive apparatus
until properly trained and approved before the board of officers.
   G.   Driver Of First Truck On Scene: The driver of the first truck on the
scene is responsible for filling out all reports, and will be incident
commander until relieved by an officer.
   H.   Responsibilities Of Drivers: Drivers are responsible for any unsafe
driving and/or damages of apparatus, and subject to counseling and possible
probation and/or suspension by the board of officers.
   I.   Maintenance; Report: All drivers are responsible for their apparatus
being cleaned and put back into service. (A maintenance report of any defective
equipment shall be filled out and turned in.)
   J.   Physical Examination Required: All new members are subject to taking a
physical examination. (Ord. 1995-02, 5-11-1995)
   K.   Residence: Effective February 8, 2007, members will reside no more than
five (5) miles outside the McLoud fire department district. (Ord. 2012-01, 1-
26-2012)
   L.   Duty Regarding Absences: Members that are unable to attend meetings or
training classes must contact any officer before the scheduled event, otherwise
it will be unexcused.
   M.   Excused Absences:
      1.   Excused absences are as follows:
         a.   Work.
         b.   Vacation.
         c.   Immediate family hardship.
         d.   Sickness.
         e.   School/church activities.
         f.   School.
      2.   If not covered by subsection M1 of this section, the absence is
unexcused. If any abuse is suspected of the excused absences, as listed in
subsection M1 of this section, members will be subject to counseling,
probation, suspension or removal.
   N.   Use Of Personal Vehicles: Firefighters may be required to drive
personally owned vehicle to the scene.
   O.   Bunker Gear: All firefighters are required to have their bunker gear
(coats, pants, helmet, gloves and Nomex) with them at the scene. (Ord. 1995-02,
5-11-1995)
5-2-7: BYLAWS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Bylaws Of Department: The bylaws of the department shall include the
following:
      1.   All volunteer fire department members are required, when notified,
to respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies.
      2.   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters.
      3.   At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month. (1987 Code § 13-207)
      4.   Any member having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three
(3) unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will be expelled from
the fire department rolls. (1987 Code § 13-207; amd. 2004 Code)
      5.   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is
required to notify the chief or officers. (Ord. 1995-02, 5-11-1995)
      6.   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members
of the department will be expelled from the rolls.
      7.   Any member of the fire department may be expelled from the rolls for
the following offenses: (1987 Code § 13-207; amd. 2004 Code)
         a.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
         b.   Any act of insubordination;
         c.   Neglect of duty;
         d.   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire
department;
         e.   Conviction of a felony; or
         f.   By majority vote of the members of the company and approval of
the city council. (1987 Code § 13-207)
   B.   Rules And Regulations: The city council, by motion or resolution, may
adopt and change regulations relating to the fire department, its organization,
operation and compensation. (1987 Code § 13-208)
5-2-8: FIRE AND MEDICAL SERVICES; FEES:
   A.   Fire Services Fee:
      1.   The city is empowered to charge a fee for fire services per hour for
each and every truck that dispenses water on a fire within the city's fire
area. A minimum charge as set by motion or resolution of the city council per
fire and a maximum charge as set by motion or resolution of the city council
per fire is allowed. (1987 Code § 13-209; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   It is the duty of the firefighter in charge to get the address and
location of the fire, insurance company and agent's name and address, and home
address, mailing address and signature of owner or renter.
      3.   The billing of this fee will be done by the city clerk after the
fire report is turned in to the city clerk. (1987 Code § 13-209)
   B.   Fee For Medical Emergency Calls:
      1.   The city is empowered to charge a fee for medical emergency calls to
which the department responds. The charge for this medical emergency response
shall be as set by motion or resolution of the city council per call made if
any supplies are used. (Ord. 1995-02, 5-11-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   It is the duty of the firefighter in charge to get the name,
address, and location of the call to which the department responds. Signature
of the person to whom the response is made, if possible, should be obtained,
along with the individual's home address and mailing address.
      3.   The billing of this fee will be done by the city clerk after the
response report is turned in to the city clerk. (Ord. 1995-01, 2-9-1995)
5-2-9: USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; INVENTORY AND REPAIR:
   A.   Use For Private Purpose: No person shall use any fire apparatus or
equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without
proper authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the
department.
   B.   Permission Required: No person shall enter any place where fire
apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the
department unless accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an
officer or authorized member of the department. (1987 Code § 13-210)
5-2-10: FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Contracts Authorized: The city is hereby authorized and empowered to
enter into contracts or agreements with individuals, firms, private
corporations or associations, or political subdivisions of the state for fire
protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to contract to provide
fire protection jointly with other organizations and municipal subdivisions of
the state. (1987 Code § 13-211)
   B.   Terms, Fees For Service: Any contract entered into by the city with an
individual owner, firm, private corporation, or association for outside aid, or
mutual aid for fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner,
firm, private corporation, or association, or political subdivision to the city
for such fire apparatus and personnel at the rate per call as set by the city
council. All monies received from the calls shall go into the general fund.
(1987 Code § 13-212)
   C.   Authority To Answer Calls: The fire department of the city is hereby
authorized and directed to answer all calls outside the corporate city limits
in the discretion of the fire chief. The fire department may not answer such
outside calls if, in the opinion of the fire chief, it is inexpedient to do so
on account of another fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or
dangerous highways, or other physical conditions. (1987 Code § 13-213)
   D.   Firefighters Serving In Regular Line Of Duty: All volunteer
firefighters of the fire department of the city attending and serving at fires
or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city, as
herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of duty
as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the city. The
firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any firefighters' pension
and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire prevention
work were being done within the corporate limits of the city. Compensation of
firefighters shall be as provided by the city council by ordinance or
resolution. (1987 Code § 13-214)
   E.   Department Considered Agent Of State: The fire department of the city
answering any fire alarm, or call, or performing any fire prevention services
outside the corporate limits of the city shall be considered as an agent of the
state, and acting solely and alone in a governmental capacity, and the city
shall not be liable in damages for any act of commission, omission, or
negligence while answering or returning from any fire, or reported fire, or
doing any fire prevention work under and by virtue of this section. (1987 Code
§ 13-215)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL DEFENSE
SECTION:
5-3-1: Purpose Of Organization
5-3-2: Department Established; Organization; Meetings
5-3-3: Director Of Civil Defense
5-3-4: Compensation Of Members; Nonliability Of City
5-3-1: PURPOSE OF ORGANIZATION:
A civil defense organization is created for the city to carry out preparations
for, and to function in, the event of emergencies endangering the lives and
property of the people of the city. The duties of the civil defense
organization are the protection of the lives and health of the citizens and of
property and property rights, both private and public, and performance of all
functions necessary and incident thereto. (1987 Code § 13-401)
5-3-2: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government a
department of civil defense which shall consist of:
   A.   A director of civil defense who shall be appointed and may be removed
by the mayor and serves at his pleasure; and
   B.   A civil defense advisory committee. This committee shall consist of the
mayor as chairman and five (5) members appointed by the mayor and serving at
his pleasure. The committee shall select from its members a vice chairman and
secretary. It shall hold such meetings as are directed by the mayor, and its
function shall be to act in an advisory capacity as needed or requested by the
mayor or the director of civil defense. (1987 Code § 13-402)
5-3-3: DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE:
   A.   Executive Head Of Department: The director of civil defense shall be
the executive head of the department of civil defense and shall be responsible
for carrying out the civil defense program of the city.
   B.   Compensation: The director shall serve without compensation but may be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of his duties.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities: It shall be the duty of the director of
civil defense, as soon as practicable after his appointment, to perfect an
organization to carry out the purposes set forth in this chapter, and he shall
have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies and
to appoint and designate the chairman or chief officer of such bodies as may be
necessary to perfect such an organization. He shall have further duty and
responsibility to cooperate with all civil defense agencies of other
governmental units, including the state and the federal government. The
director of civil defense is further authorized to formulate written plans and
gather information and keep written record thereof to govern the functions of
the civil defense organization. (1987 Code § 13-403)
   D.   Emergency Powers:
      1.   In the event of an enemy caused emergency or emergency resulting
from natural causes, the director of civil defense, after due authorization
from the mayor, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and
regulations relating to civil defense and, if necessary, take control of
transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and
public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. He
shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies
or civil defense organizations. If required by the mayor, the director shall
have control over any and all funds allocated from any source for the purpose
of alleviating distress conditions in the city.
      2.   The director of civil defense and other members of the civil defense
organization created by him shall have the power and authority to enforce the
laws of the state and ordinances of the city during the period of emergency and
shall at such time have the further power to make arrests for violations of
such laws or ordinances. (1987 Code § 13-404)
5-3-4: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
All members of the civil defense organization created in this chapter shall
serve without compensation. The city shall not be liable for any personal or
bodily injury received by any member of such organization while acting in the
line of duty. (1987 Code § 13-405)
CHAPTER 4
OFFENSES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS; MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Attempts To Commit Offense
5-4A-2: Aiding In Offense
5-4A-3: Penalty
5-4A-1: ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself. (1987 Code § 10-101)
5-4A-2: AIDING IN OFFENSE:
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular
offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids
another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and
punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. (1987 Code § 10-102)
5-4A-3: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 10-701)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-4B-1: Petty Larceny
5-4B-2: Injuring Automobiles And Other Vehicles
5-4B-3: Injuring Buildings And Other Property
5-4B-4: Placing Signs On Property Of Another
5-4B-5: Throwing Or Shooting At Persons Or Property
5-4B-6: Tampering With Or Damaging Public Utilities
5-4B-7: Unlawful Intrusion Upon Land
5-4B-8: Illegal Entrance
5-4B-9: Depositing Handbills, Advertisements On Streets
5-4B-10: Throwing Injurious Substances
5-4B-11: Injuring Public Streets, Trees And Plants
5-4B-12: Trespass Prohibited
5-4B-13: Parking On Property Of Another
5-4B-14: Interfering With Fire Hydrants
5-4B-15: Graffiti
5-4B-1: PETTY LARCENY:
   A.   Definition: "Petty larceny" is the taking of personal property of value
not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) accomplished by fraud or stealth and with
intent to deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such
property from the "person" of another.
   B.   Prohibited Act: Petty larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits
larceny shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1987 Code § 10-201)
5-4B-2: INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter,
occupy, loiter in, or injure any automobile or other vehicle belonging to
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. (1987
Code § 10-202)
5-4B-3: INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest
any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use;
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use. (1987 Code § 10-203)
5-4B-4: PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark,
write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill,
placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building, fence,
sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. (1987
Code § 10-204)
5-4B-5: THROWING OR SHOOTING AT PERSONS OR PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object
into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit
another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any
stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light
or other property of another (whether public or private), except in case where
such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property. (1987
Code § 10-205)
5-4B-6: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES:
It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or
other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas,
water or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly or
privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use the gas,
water or electricity without it passing through the meter or any other way so
as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person to damage,
molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of
any public utility, including any telegraph or telephone system. (1987 Code §
10-206)
5-4B-7: UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND:
It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of land
within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or to
erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such
license or authority, or to place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any
street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, shanty, hovel, or other structure
without authority of law or ordinance. (1987 Code § 10-207)
5-4B-8: ILLEGAL ENTRANCE:
It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an
area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or structure is
public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or any
notice or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such
entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed, or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. It is
unlawful for any person to remain on the property of another after having been
given notice, written or verbal, to leave by the owner or person in charge.
(1987 Code § 10-208)
5-4B-9: DEPOSITING HANDBILLS, ADVERTISEMENTS ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be
thrown, left or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter. (1987 Code § 10-209)
5-4B-10: THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES:
It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon
the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive or
other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or urine, with
intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal. (1987 Code § 10-210)
5-4B-11: INJURING PUBLIC STREETS, TREES AND PLANTS:
   A.   Plants And Trees: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and without
authority cut, pull, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants,
shrubs or trees growing in or around any park or public street within the city,
or wilfully or without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure
or destroy any gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or wilfully
injure or destroy any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such
park or ground. Any person violating this subsection, upon conviction thereof,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1987 Code § 10-211)
   B.   Public Streets And Trees:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city;
         b.   Attach any guywires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or
any wire to any live tree with the exception of temporary attended and licensed
amateur radio equipment upon review by the City Manager or his/her designee to
include being mindful of Overhead Powerlines;
         c.   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue
or alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under
the supervision or control of, the city;
         d.   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street,
road, alley or other public place in the city; or to cut, break or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
         e.   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the city inspector to do so.
      2.   Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done
under the supervision of the street superintendent or city engineer. (1987 Code
§ 10-212; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 4-25-2024)
5-4B-12: TRESPASS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
be defined as follows:
    PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property other than public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: That property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
   TRESPASS: Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other
person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied
consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. "Trespass" shall
also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful
possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the
agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of the
premises. "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private
property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after
having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer. The
provisions of this definition shall not apply to persons, including employees,
whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in
lawful possession of such premises nor shall the provisions of this sentence
apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such premises.
"Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property
before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business
day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this
definition.
   B.   Prohibited Act: It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private
property. (1987 Code § 10-213)
5-4B-13: PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge or by
authority of law or ordinance. (1987 Code § 10-214)
5-4B-14: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Opening; Interference: It is unlawful for any person, except one duly
authorized by the city utility personnel or a member of the fire department, to
open, turn on or off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect
anything with, any fire hydrant or stopcock belonging to the city.
   B.   Obstructing Access 1 : It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access
to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt or other
thing, or in any other manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant. (1987 Code
§ 10-215)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-12-11 of this code.
5-4B-15: GRAFFITI:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
    APPLIES GRAFFITI, APPLY GRAFFITI, OR APPLYING GRAFFITI: The act of drawing,
painting, chiseling, scratching, or etching graffiti on public or private
property within the city.
   GRAFFITI: Means, without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol,
slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible
to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched, or etched on a rock,
tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building, or other structure. However, this
definition does not include advertising or any other letter, word, name,
number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of
any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property or by an
authorized agent for such owner or occupant.
   OCCUPANT: Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as a
tenant of property or any person in actual physical possession of property.
   OWNER: Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as the
owner of a fee simple interest in property.
   REMOVAL, REMOVE OR REMOVED: When used in relation to the eradication of
graffiti, means the act of taking graffiti off or masking the presence of
graffiti on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other
structure.
   B.   Prohibited Act: No person shall apply graffiti to public or private
property within the city. Any person who applies graffiti to public or private
property within the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each act of
applying graffiti shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2004-02, 2-26-
2004, eff. 2-26-2004)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC; PERSONS
SECTION:
5-4C-1: Disturbing The Peace
5-4C-2: Assault And Battery
5-4C-3: Insulting Signs, Literature Or Language
5-4C-4: Fireworks Regulated
5-4C-5: Storing Or Keeping Explosives
5-4C-6: Weapons; Firearms
5-4C-7: Loud Noise, Music, Amplified Sound
5-4C-8: Hunting, Fishing And Wildlife
5-4C-1: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or
others by doing any of the acts set out in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Acts Enumerated: "Disturbing the peace" is the doing of any of the
following in such a manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of
another or others:
      1.   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
      2.   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      3.   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      4.   Lewdly exposing one's person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      5.   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon, whether loaded or
not, at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      6.   Holding an unlawful assembly of two (2) or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      7.   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude,
indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any
other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance
thereof;
      8.   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      9.   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
10. Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or
alarm the public. (1987 Code § 10-301)
5-4C-2: ASSAULT AND BATTERY 1 :
   A.   Definitions:
    ASSAULT: Any intentional, wilful, or unlawful attempt or offer with force
or violence to do a corporal hurt to another.
   BATTERY: Any intentional, wilful or unlawful use of force or violence upon
the person of another, or by making any physical contact with another without
consent.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and
battery within the jurisdiction of the City. Any person committing an assault
or an assault and battery within the jurisdiction of the City shall be guilty
of an offense. (1987 Code § 10-501)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 5-4E-3 of this chapter.
5-4C-3: INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE:
   A.   Signs: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the
City to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device which, in its common
acceptance, is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the City, and
which is calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach
of the peace or an assault.
   B.   Literature, Language: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully use,
utter, publish, circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or
insulting language or literature where:
      1.   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault; or
      2.   The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated
to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. (1987 Code § 10-302)
5-4C-4: FIREWORKS REGULATED:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "fireworks" shall have the
meaning prescribed by State law, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1622. (1987 Code
§ 10-303)
   B.   Prohibitions: The purchase, sale or storage of fireworks within the
corporate limits of the City is prohibited, except that the storage and sale of
fireworks is allowed between the dates of June 15 and July 6 and between the
dates of December 15 and January 2 within any district zoned Commercial or
Agricultural, provided the person or entity storing and selling such fireworks
has complied with the requirements of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1621 et
seq., demonstrates such compliance to the satisfaction of the City, and obtains
a permit for such storage and sale from the City Clerk. The fee for such permit
and the fee for public displays shall be as established by resolution of the
City Council from time to time.
   C.   Public Displays:
      1.   The Fire Marshal or Fire Chief, with the concurrence of the City
Administrator may designate a public area or areas for the supervised public
discharge or display of fireworks by an organization or group of individuals.
      2.   The Fire Marshal may adopt rules and regulations for granting and
issuing permits for the supervised public display of fireworks. Persons or
entities requesting a permit shall provide proof of insurance as required by 68
Oklahoma Statutes section 1629.
      3.   Permits may be granted and issued upon application to the City Clerk
after the application is approved by the City Administrator in consultation
with the Fire Chief and Chief of Police and after the permit fee and
application have been filed with the City Clerk.
      4.   Every display shall be managed and supervised by an operator who
shall provide proof of insurance as required by 68 Oklahoma Statutes section
1629, and be approved by the Fire Marshal and the Chief of Police prior to the
commencement of the display.
      5.   Application shall be made in writing not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the date set for the display.
      6.   Any fireworks which have not been discharged before the termination
of the display shall be disposed of or stored in a safe manner approved by the
Fire Marshal.
   D.   Discharge Or Firing:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to set off or
detonate any fireworks of an explosive nature or noise emitting type, nature or
description within the corporate limits of the City except as authorized by
this Code. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-24-2014)
      2.   Persons within the corporate limits may use or otherwise discharge
class C fireworks only from eleven thirty o’clock (11:30) P.M. to eleven fifty
nine o’clock (11:59) P.M. on December 31, and from twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight to twelve thirty o’clock (12:30) A.M. on January 1, and from ten
o’clock (10:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. on July 3 and from ten o’clock
(10:00) A.M. to ten thirty o’clock (10:30) P.M. on July 4, provided that the
following conditions are met:
         a.   Such fireworks must be discharged on a noncombustible surface of
sufficient size to contain the entire ground portion of the display and not
closer than twenty five feet (25') from any permanent structure; and
         b.   An adult person over the age of eighteen (18) shall obtain a
permit from the City at a cost set forth by resolution by the Governing Body,
said permit identifying the adult in charge of this use by name and address,
and also identifying the proposed location on the permit holder's property.
Applications for said permits shall be made available during normal business
hours from the City and separate permits shall be required for the use and
discharge of fireworks during the dates surrounding the 4th of July and the
time frame surrounding New Year's Eve; and
         c.   The adult permit holder in charge of the use must be present for
any household member to use the fireworks and within one hundred feet (100') of
the point of display, and have the permit posted in a place of prominence or
available for inspection during the discharge of the fireworks by any law
enforcement officer. The permit holder is further responsible for cleaning up
any debris caused by any person discharging fireworks under the permit holder;
and
         d.   Private persons may not use or discharge fireworks on any public
street, public easement, or public property unless approved by the City; and
         e.   In the event that the display of fireworks is open to the public,
or more than twenty five (25) individuals are present during the discharge of
fireworks then the gathering shall be considered a public discharge and must
get approval from the City in addition to obtaining a permit as required by
this Code; and
         f.   In the event that the State, County or City issues a red flag
fire alert or burn ban for the area encompassing the City and/or the City
Manager, upon the advice of the Fire Chief determines that the City is in fire
danger due to the weather conditions, the City Manager may declare the use of
fireworks to be illegal and all fireworks permits to be void, without refund
during the emergency period. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-24-2014; amd. Ord. 2018-14, 11-
15-2018; Ord. 2025-09, 6-26-2025)
5-4C-5: STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the City any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or
substance of any kind without having first complied with the laws of the State
for the purpose of selling, storing or keeping such items. (1987 Code § 10-304)
5-4C-6: WEAPONS; FIREARMS:
   A.   Carrying Weapons: Except as specifically authorized by 21 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1289.1 et seq., (Oklahoma Fire Arms Act of 1971) and 21
Oklahoma Statutes section 1290.1 (Oklahoma Self Defense Act), it shall be
unlawful for any person to carry, openly or concealed, upon or about his
person, or in any mode of transportation, any pistol, handgun, revolver, rifle,
shotgun, bow, cross-bow, dagger, bowie knife, switchblade or spring type knife,
metal knuckle or any other dangerous or deadly weapon, firearm or instrument,
as described above, and except for law enforcement personnel acting in the line
of duty or scope of employment, or as otherwise authorized by State law.
   B.   Reckless Conduct; Alcoholic Beverages: It is unlawful for any person to
consume 3.2 beer or any alcoholic beverage while in possession of any weapon
described in subsection A of this section, except for law enforcement persons
actively engaged in undercover duties. It is unlawful for any person to engage
in reckless conduct while in possession of any of the weapons described in
subsection A of this section. Reckless conduct includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, actions which create a situation of unreasonable risk and
probability of death or significant bodily harm to another and demonstrating a
conscious disregard for the safety of another person. No person shall willfully
point a weapon at another person, except while acting in self defense, or
defense of others, or of property, or discharge any weapon, except in self
defense or defense of others, or of property, in any place where there is a
person or property likely to be harmed or endangered thereby, regardless of
whether actual injury shall occur.
   C.   Discharging Weapons: No person shall discharge any weapon or firearm,
of any type within the City limits, except for law enforcement and public
safety employees acting in the line of duty or scope of employment, and except
for persons lawfully in possession of a weapon when acting in self defense, the
defense of others, or of property. This prohibition shall not apply to persons
lawfully engaged in hunting or sporting activities in areas zoned agricultural
or in areas specifically designated for such activities, such as those areas
owned by the Pottawatomie County Development Authority and designated for
hunting. Any hunting or sporting activities shall be in strict compliance with
any applicable rules and regulations of the State of Oklahoma, the property
owner, and the City of McLoud. (Ord. 2018-07, 6-28-2018)
5-4C-7: LOUD NOISE, MUSIC, AMPLIFIED SOUND:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of
the City by operating, having operated, or permitting to be operated, any
contrivance, whether electric or not, any motor vehicle, or any other device,
with or without a loudspeaker, in such a manner as to emit loud music, noise or
words. However, this section shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing
chimes, bells, carillons or other religious music. (1987 Code § 10-308)
5-4C-8: HUNTING, FISHING AND WILDLIFE:
   A.   Citation: This section and all amendments hereto may be cited or
referred to as the HUNTING, FISHING AND WILDLIFE CODE, CITY OF MCLOUD, and may
so appear upon all official documents, records or instruments.
   B.   Code Controlling: Except as specifically provided by law as set forth
in this section, the Hunting, Fishing and Wildlife Code shall be applicable in
all areas of Wes Watkins Lake, and within all other areas within the City
limits of McLoud.
   C.   Adoption Of Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation Code:
      1.   Code Adopted: The provisions of the Oklahoma Wildlife Conservation
Code, 29 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1-101 through 7-801, and including section
1001, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto are hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the City within
the City limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
      2.   Definitions Adopted: The provisions and definitions contained in 29
Oklahoma Statutes section 1-101 et seq., are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference, applicable to this section.
   D.   Application Of Regulations: Any police officer and any authorized
rangers or employees of the City may enforce this section and ordinances
governing and regulating hunting, fishing and other related activities within
the limits of the City.
   E.   Obedience To The Hunting, Fishing And Wildlife Code:
      1.   Committing Unlawful Act: It is an offense against the City for any
person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this
section.
      2.   Parental Responsibility: It is an offense against the City for the
parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section.
   F.   Penalty: Every person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2011-23, 8-25-2011)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
SECTION:
5-4D-1: Liquor And Drug Related Offenses
5-4D-1A: Possession Of CDS
5-4D-2: Gambling
5-4D-3: Prostitution
5-4D-4: Nuisance Properties
5-4D-5: Nudity; Improper Dress; Indecent Exposure
5-4D-6: Obscene Materials, Conduct
5-4D-7: Sleeping In Public
5-4D-8: Begging
5-4D-9: Harmful Deception
5-4D-10: Swindling
5-4D-1: LIQUOR AND DRUG RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Public Intoxication And Drinking:
      1.   For the purposes of this section, a "state of intoxication" means
the condition in which a person is under the influence of any intoxicating,
spirituous, vinous or malt liquors, low point beer, or of any narcotic or drug,
to such extent as to deprive the person of his or her full physical or mental
power, or in which a person is a danger to himself or others.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street,
alley, or other public place in the City in a state of intoxication. (1987 Code
§ 10-401; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   a. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess any
intoxicating beverage, 3.2 beer or any prohibited drug or controlled dangerous
substance as defined by State or Federal law, except as specifically authorized
by law, on real property or premises owned or operated by the City of McLoud.
         b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A3a of this section
the consumption or possession of low point (3.2) beer, beer and wine by persons
twenty one (21) years of age or older, is permitted on land owned or operated
by the City at:
            (1)   An event for which a special event permit has been issued by
the City, subject to such policies and conditions as are set by the City
Administrator. The permittee shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with
such policies and conditions.
            (2)   Sidewalk tables appurtenant to a legally licensed bar, tavern
or food service establishment provided such service is limited to seated
patrons. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove low point beer, beer,
wine or any alcoholic beverage from the designated area of the bar, tavern or
food service establishment. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
such bar, tavern or food service establishment to permit any person to remove
low point beer, beer, wine or any alcoholic beverage from the designated
seating area. (Ord. 2015-18, 12-17-2015)
   B.   Possession, Transportation Of Liquor, Low Point Beer:
      1.   For the purpose of this subsection B, "intoxicating beverage" and
"low point beer" shall be as defined in Oklahoma Statutes. (1987 Code § 10-402;
amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 2018-13, 9-27-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
      2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to be in possession of any intoxicating alcoholic beverage or low point beer
while such person is upon any public street, road or highway or in any public
place within the City limits.
      3.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to permit such person to be in possession of an
intoxicating alcoholic beverage.
      4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving
vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any intoxicating beverage or low
point beer, except in the original container which shall not have been opened
and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed unless the
opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment. The rear trunk or
compartment shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or
panel truck or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion 1 . (1987 Code § 10-402;
amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Sale Or Possession Of Liquor, Beer: It is unlawful:
      1.   For any person to barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to
another any intoxicating alcoholic beverage or low point beer of any kind,
except as permitted by law;
      2.   To have in possession or under control any intoxicating beverage or
low point beer, except as permitted by law, or to transport or in any manner
convey from place to place in the City any intoxicating beverage or low point
beer, except as permitted by law;
      3.   To loiter in a place where intoxicating liquor or low point beer is
sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
      4.   To keep, maintain, aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place
where intoxicating liquor or low point beer is sold, bartered, given away or
otherwise furnished in violation of law. (1987 Code § 10-403; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Marijuana Prohibited:
      1.   For the purpose of this subsection D, "marijuana" shall have the
meaning prescribed by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101. "Drug paraphernalia"
shall have the meaning prescribed by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101,
including the "factors to determine", in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101.1.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to:
         a.   Manufacture, grow, harvest, cultivate, propagate, plant,
compound, convert, produce, process, test, pack, repack, store, distribute,
dispense or possess with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense
marijuana;
         b.   Use, have, inject, ingest, inhale, otherwise introduce into the
human body or possess marijuana;
         c.   Use or possess drug paraphernalia or to deliver, possess or
manufacture any such paraphernalia singly or in conjunction with any other
person; or
         d.   Appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or
other public place in the city while under the influence of a controlled
dangerous substance or marijuana.
      3.   This subsection D shall not apply to any marijuana lawfully obtained
or authorized by valid prescription order from a licensed physician while
acting in the course of his professional practice. (1987 Code § 10-404)
   E.   Hosting, Permitting Or Allowing A Party, Gathering Or Event Where
Minors Are Consuming Alcoholic Beverages Is Prohibited:
      1.   Responsibility Of Person(s) Having Control:
         a.   It is the duty of any person(s) having control of any premises,
which knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take
all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any
minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering
by inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued identification cards
to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
         b.   It is unlawful for any person(s) having control of any premises
to knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises, either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage, had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection E1a of this
section.
      2.   Conduct Between Minor And Parent: This subsection E shall not apply
to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively
between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian.
      3.   Family Activity: Nothing in this subsection E should be interpreted
to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from
providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision
of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering
intoxicated and is found in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held
responsible in the same manner as at a nonfamily gathering.
      4.   Religious Practice: Nothing in this subsection E should be
interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of
alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated, and
is found to be in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held
responsible in the same manner as at a nonreligious gathering.
      5.   Premises Licensed To Dispense Alcohol: This subsection E shall not
apply to any premises licensed by the state to dispense alcoholic beverages.
      6.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
subsection E shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of up to two hundred dollars
($200.00), plus all court costs and statutory penalties.
      7.   Violations: Violations of this subsection E may be prosecuted by the
city criminally, civilly and/or administratively as authorized by state law or
this code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs associated
with enforcement of this subsection E by using all remedies or procedures
provided by statute, ordinance or law. This subsection E shall not limit the
authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any
criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this code, nor shall they
limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising
out of the same circumstances.
      8.   Preemption By Law: This subsection E shall not apply where
prohibited or preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 2013-27, 12-19-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-2-13 of this Code.
5-4D-1A: POSSESSION OF CDS:
   A.   The City adopts and incorporates herein, the Oklahoma Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, being 63 O.S. § 2-101 et seq., as amended, but only
to the extent that said act regulates misdemeanor offenses. Misdemeanor
offenses described and listed in the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Substances Act
shall be the enforceable municipal offense of simple possession of controlled
dangerous substances, under this chapter and section, and for the purpose of
establishing locally appropriate rules and regulations for the public health,
safety, and welfare of the city. The adoption of such misdemeanor offenses in
the said act is not intended to, or does not repeal any other provision of this
chapter, but shall be in addition thereto.
   B.   Prohibited acts. It is unlawful for any person knowingly or
intentionally to possess any controlled dangerous substance, as defined in the
Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act, unless such substance was
obtained directly or pursuant to a valid prescription or order from a
practitioner, while acting in the course of his professional practice, or
unless exempted in any misdemeanor act or offense in the Oklahoma Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substance Act.
   C.   Penalties for violation. Any person who violates this section shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be punishable as follows:
      1.   Upon conviction of the first offense, punishment shall be a fine in
an amount not to exceed $200.00 and costs.
      2.   Upon conviction of a second and subsequent offense, punishment shall
be by a fine in an amount of not to exceed $500.00 and costs. (Ord. 2021-04,
10-22-2020; amd. Ord. 2021-04, 1-28-2021)
5-4D-2: GAMBLING:
   A.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or
employee thereof, to do any of the following:
         a.   To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on
or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards, or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value;
         b.   To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
         c.   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
         d.   To knowingly permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this subsection A.
      2.   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to
play any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein
the element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks
or any other representatives of value. (1987 Code § 10-416)
   B.   Frequenting Gambling Places: It is unlawful for any person to be about
in the immediate vicinity where a person or persons are gambling, whether by
playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise. (1987
Code § 10-417)
5-4D-3: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
    LETTING PREMISES FOR PROSTITUTION: The granting of the right of use or the
leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of
prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with that
knowledge.
   PROSTITUTION: The giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for
hire or money.
   SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTES: The soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing,
or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of promoting
prostitution.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Be a prostitute;
      2.   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      3.   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      4.   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      5.   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution; or
      6.   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution
in the limits of the city. (1987 Code § 10-405)
5-4D-4: NUISANCE PROPERTIES:
   A.   Definition; Prohibited Acts: A “Nuisance Property” means any structure
or vehicle by which the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency of the
public is disturbed by reason of any people therein committing or resorting to
any of the following acts:
      1.   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      2.   The violation of any of the ordinances of the city or statutes of
the state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages including beer containing more than one- half of one percent (0.5%)
alcohol by volume;
      3.   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute
or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
      4.   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
      5.   Any property on which three or more nuisance violations have
occurred within a floating 90-day period, which shall begin on the date of a
violation, which result in convictions. A new floating 90-day period shall
begin at the time that there is a change of tenant or other person responsible
for the property. A Nuisance Violation shall be three violations of any of the
following offenses:
         a.   Any offense listed in Title 5, Chapter 4 of the McLoud Municipal
Code;
         b.   Any misdemeanor offense under state law;
         c.   Any felony under state law.
   B.   Maintaining Or Leasing:
      1.   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping
and maintaining a Nuisance Property
      2.   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or
corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle,
mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or
otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any
Nuisance Property , and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building,
structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied
as a Nuisance Property no persons, partnership, entity, or corporation shall
continue to grant permission to so use such premises as a Nuisance Property.
Any owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership, entity, or corporation
having control over any property type outlined in this section who
intentionally violates this section will have committed a misdemeanor offense
subject to a fine of $500 per offense. A third or subsequent violation of this
section is subject to a fine of up to $1000.00 and incarceration of up to 30
days.
         a.   For the purpose of this ordinance intent means knowledge of a
nuisance property or nuisance violations occurring on the property. Knowledge
is presumed when the municipal government provides notice by certified first
class mail to the address of record of the owner, lessee, lessor, or other
person, partnership, entity, or corporation.
         b.   Any property owner charged with violating the provisions of this
section may submit a property improvement plan to the municipal judge
compliance with which may serve as a condition of a deferred sentence. The
judge shall have the discretion to determine whether such property improvement
plan will likely preclude the commission of further nuisance violations on the
subject property.
   C.   Residents And Visitors: No person shall knowingly reside in, enter
into, or remain in a Nuisance Property. In any prosecution for violation of
this subsection, the city shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by
direct evidence only and not by circumstantial evidence. This subsection shall
not apply to physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional or
official duties. (Ord. 2020-05, 8-27-2020)
5-4D-5: NUDITY; IMPROPER DRESS; INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
   B.   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
   C.   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person. (1987 Code § 10-
409)
5-4D-6: OBSCENE MATERIALS, CONDUCT:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms, when used in this section, shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC: The matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
   DISSEMINATE: To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
   KNOWINGLY: Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
   MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material
or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial
representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment or machines.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state.
   OBSCENE: To the average person applying contemporary community standards:
      1.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion;
      2.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and
      3.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   PERFORMANCE: Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity.
   PROMOTE: To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
   SERVICE TO PATRONS: The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages; including, but not limited to,
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining. (1987 Code § 10-410)
   B.   Prohibited Conduct:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Knowingly disseminate, sell, offer for sale, publish, display,
distribute, make available to the public or buy any obscene material; or
         b.   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal; or
         c.   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
         d.   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to
public view:
            (1)   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region;
            (2)   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
            (3)   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof; or
            (4)   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
      2.   Each complete or partial display or other material exhibition of any
motion picture film or other material shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a projectionist,
assistant projectionist, usher or cashier, provided such person has no
financial interest in the motion picture theater, and so long as that person is
not acting as director or manager of the theater. (1987 Code § 10-411)
5-4D-7: SLEEPING IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., to sleep on any street, in any other
public place, or on any property of another without the express or tacit
consent of the owner or person in charge of such place. (1987 Code § 10-414)
5-4D-8: BEGGING:
It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or
agency, except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need. (1987 Code § 10-415)
5-4D-9: HARMFUL DECEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(1987 Code § 10-418)
5-4D-10: SWINDLING:
It is unlawful to get money or property from any other person or persons or
businesses under false pretenses, deception, cheating or by any other
fraudulent act. (1987 Code § 10-420)
ARTICLE E. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
SECTION:
5-4E-1: Resisting Police Officer, Public Official
5-4E-2: Refusing Or Failing To Assist An Officer
5-4E-3: Assault Or Battery Upon Police, Other Officer
5-4E-4: Offenses Relating To Prisoners
5-4E-5: Impersonating Officer Or Employee
5-4E-6: False Alarms
5-4E-7: False Representation To Officer
5-4E-8: Removal Of Barricades
5-4E-1: RESISTING POLICE OFFICER, PUBLIC OFFICIAL:
   A.   Resisting Police Officer:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    OBSTRUCTION OF: Shall, in addition to its common meaning, include:
         a.   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest;
         b.   Any violence toward, or any resistance or opposition to, the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and
before he is under arrest; or
         c.   Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his
identity known to the arresting officer.
   RESISTING AN OFFICER: The intentional opposition or resistance to, or
obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized
by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful
process or court order, when the offender knows, or has reason to know, that
the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his
official capacity.
      2.   Resisting: It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any
way interfere with, a police officer or any person duly authorized to act as
such, while the officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his
official duties within the limits of the city.
      3.   Assisting Person To Flee: It is unlawful for any person to warn or
signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an
officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or
barrier in the face of, or in front of, an approaching officer. (1987 Code §
10-601)
   B.   Resisting Public Official: It is unlawful for any person knowingly or
wilfully to:
      1.   Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his official duties;
      2.   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or
      3.   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive
or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (1987 Code §
10-610)
5-4E-2: REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER:
   A.   Authority To Request Assistance: An officer of the city making or about
to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or other process,
in accordance with the ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or
suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call
upon persons to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process or
suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   B.   Failure To Assist: It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon
thus to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. (1987 Code §
10-602)
5-4E-3: ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE, OTHER OFFICER 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly commit any assault, battery or
assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the
law while in the performance of his duties. (1987 Code § 10-603)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 5-4C-2 of this chapter.
5-4E-4: OFFENSES RELATING TO PRISONERS:
   A.   Rescuing Prisoners: It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal
manner, to set at liberty, rescue or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner or
prisoners, from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the
same or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to
assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either
before or after conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(1987 Code § 10-604)
   B.   Escape Of Prisoners: It is unlawful for any person confined in the city
jail or other place of confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or
other public places of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held
in legal custody by authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from
any such jail, prison or custody. (1987 Code § 10-605)
5-4E-5: IMPERSONATING OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (1987
Code § 10-606)
5-4E-6: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any
manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or police
department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire
department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run. (1987 Code § 10-607)
5-4E-7: FALSE REPRESENTATION TO OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or
official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. (1987 Code § 10-608)
5-4E-8: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. (1987 Code § 10-609)
CHAPTER 5
MINORS
ARTICLE A. CURFEW
SECTION:
5-5A-1: Findings
5-5A-2: Definitions
5-5A-3: Curfew Imposed; Exceptions
5-5A-4: Aiding And Abetting Minors
5-5A-5: Enforcement
5-5A-1: FINDINGS:
The city council hereby makes the following findings:
   A.   The city has a compelling governmental interest in restricting certain
late night activities of juveniles in order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of juveniles and other persons and their property.
   B.   The intent of this article is to narrowly tailor the restriction of
late night activities of juveniles to the extent juvenile crime and violence is
reduced and juveniles as well as other citizens and their property are
protected from harm.
   C.   Juveniles are particularly vulnerable to the influence of persons who
do not have the best interest of the juvenile in mind, and due to the inability
of juveniles to make important or critical decisions in an informed and mature
manner, to avoid making choices that could be detrimental to their health,
safety, or welfare.
   D.   The city does not desire to interfere with the parent-child or parent-
juvenile relationship or the parental right to raise children or juveniles.
   E.   While the city recognizes parents and/or responsible adults need wide
latitudes in supervising their children, the city desires to protect juveniles
from nocturnal dangers and encourage parental responsibility. (Ord. 1994-06, 8-
11-1994)
5-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
In this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the following meanings:
CITY: The city of McLoud, Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma.
CURFEW HOURS: Those hours during the period ending at six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
all days of the week, and beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
Sunday through Thursday and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday
night.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. Furthermore, the term
"minor" shall be synonymous with the term "juvenile".
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a minor: a) as a natural or adoptive
parent; b) as a legal guardian; c) as a person who stands in loco parentis; or
d) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place
to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business,
entertainment, or other lawful purpose.
REMAIN: To stay behind, to tarry, to stay unnecessarily and to linger, to fail
to leave when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of any public place.
STREET: A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as
a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a
sidewalk, for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the legal right of
way, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or
unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right of
way of a street.
TIME OF NIGHT: Is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central
Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour
by the public.
YEAR OF AGE: Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth to, but not
including the day of, the next, such as the eighteenth birthday. (Ord. 2004-04,
3-11-2004)
5-5A-3: CURFEW IMPOSED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for:
      1.   Any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be or remain in or
upon the streets or any public place within the city of McLoud at night, during
curfew hours;
      2.   Any parent of a minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient
control, allow a minor to remain in any public place or street within the city
during curfew hours; or
      3.   Any owner, operator, or employee of a public place to knowingly
allow a minor to remain upon the premises of any public place during curfew
hours.
   B.   It is a defense to subsection A1 of this section if the minor is:
      1.   Accompanied by a parent of such minor, or when accompanied by an
adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in
accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a
specified area;
      2.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly;
      3.   On an errand at the specific direction of the minor's parent,
without any detour or stop;
      4.   Involved in an emergency;
      5.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
resident of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to a police
officer;
      6.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      7.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
      8.   Attending or traveling between home and an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor; or
      9.   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
   C.   It is a defense to subsection A2 of this section for the parent of a
minor if the minor would qualify for any defense listed above.
   D.   It is a defense to subsection A3 of this section if the owner, operator
or employee of a public place promptly notified the police department that a
minor was present on the premises of the public place during curfew hours and
remained after being asked to leave. (Ord. 2004-04, 3-11-2004)
5-5A-4: AIDING AND ABETTING MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully aid, abet, allow,
encourage, or, by omission of a duty, encourage or assist a minor to commit any
municipal, state, or federal offense. (Ord. 2004-04, 3-11-2004)
5-5A-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall
ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred. (Ord. 1994-06, 8-
11-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE B. PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
SECTION:
5-5B-1: Definitions
5-5B-2: Furnishing Or Sale Of Tobacco Products To Minors
5-5B-3: Receipt Of Tobacco Products By Minors
5-5B-4: Distribution Of Tobacco Product Samples
5-5B-5: Sale Of Tobacco Products Prohibited Except In Original, Sealed Package
5-5B-6: Public Access To Displayed Tobacco Products
5-5B-7: Report Of Violations And Compliance Checks
5-5B-8: Retaliation
5-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
            Any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or heated under
            ordinary conditions of use, and consists of or contains:
            A.   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing
            tobacco,
            B.   Tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product, which, because of
            its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filter, or its packaging and
CIGARETTE:  labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette
            described in subsection A of this definition.
            The term “cigarette” includes “roll your own” (i.e., any tobacco which, because
            of its appearance, type, packaging, or labeling is suitable for use and likely to
            be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes). For
            purposes of this definition of cigarette, nine one-hundredths (0.09) of an ounce
            of “roll your own” tobacco shall constitute one individual “cigarette”.
            A driver’s license, license for identification only, or other generally accepted
PROOF OF    means of identification that describes the individual as twenty-one (21) years of
AGE:        age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and
            appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE:     A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose
            of promoting the product.
SAMPLING:   The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public place.
TOBACCO     Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption.
PRODUCT:
TRANSACTION The process by which a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
SCAN:       validity of a driver’s license or other government issued photo identification.
            Any commercial device or combination of devices used at a point of sale or entry
TRANSACTION that is capable of deciphering in an electronically readable format the
SCAN        information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a driver’s license or
DEVICE:     other government issued photo identification. (Ord. 2013-08, 7-25-2013; amd. Ord.
            2020-01, 2-27-2020)
 
5-5B-2: FURNISHING OR SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS:
   A.   Furnishing To Underage Person; Underage Employee’s Duties: It is
unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any manner any tobacco
product to another person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or to
purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person. It shall
not be unlawful for an employee under twenty-one (21) years of age to handle
tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee’s duties.
   B.   Demand Proof Of Age: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or
recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that
the prospective purchaser may be less than twenty-one (21) years of age. If an
individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products has demanded
and was shown proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not
under twenty-one (21) years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof
of age shall not constitute a violation of this subsection B.
   C.   Defenses: Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably
relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection A
or B of this section. A person cited for violation of this section shall be
deemed to have reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not
be found guilty of such violation, if such person proves that:
      1.   The individual who purchased or received the tobacco product
presented a driver’s license or other government issued photo identification
purporting to establish that such individual was twenty-one (21) years of age
or older; and
      2.   The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the
driver’s license or other government issued photo identification presented by
such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan
device.
      3.   Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any
person cited for a violation of this section if such person failed to exercise
reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture
appearing on the driver’s license or other government issued photo
identification was that of the individual who presented it. The availability of
the defense described in this subsection does not affect the availability of
any other defense under any other provision of law.
   D.   Violation; Fine: When a person is convicted or enters a plea and
receives a continued sentence for a violation of subsection A or B of this
section, the total of any fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a two
(2) year period following the first offense; and
      3.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third or subsequent offense
within a two (2) year period following the first offense. (Ord. 2013-08, 7-25-
2013; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
5-5B-3: RECEIPT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age
to purchase, receive, or have in his or her possession a tobacco product, or to
present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false or
fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product. It
shall not be unlawful for an employee under twenty-one (21) years of age to
handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee’s
duties.
   B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of subsection A of this section, the total of any
fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense; and
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second or subsequent offense
within a one year period following the first offense. (Ord. 2013-08, 7-25-2013;
amd. Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
5-5B-4: DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT SAMPLES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to distribute tobacco products or product
samples to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   B.   No person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public
street, sidewalk, or park that is within three hundred feet (300') of any
playground, school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily
by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   C.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of subsection A or B of this section, the total of any
fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense; and
      3.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third or subsequent offense.
(Ord. 2013-08, 7-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
5-5B-5: SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS PROHIBITED EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the
original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
   B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of this section, the total of any fines, fees, or
costs shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord.
2013-08, 7-25-2013)
5-5B-6: PUBLIC ACCESS TO DISPLAYED TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for
sale tobacco products in any manner that allows public access to the tobacco
product without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco product or an
employee or the owner of the store. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to retail stores which do not admit into the store persons under twenty-
one (21) years of age.
   B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of this section, the total of any fines, fees, or
costs shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord.
2013-08, 7-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 2-27-2020)
5-5B-7: REPORT OF VIOLATIONS AND COMPLIANCE CHECKS:
   A.   Any conviction for a violation of this article and any compliance
checks conducted by the police department pursuant to subsection B of this
section shall be reported in writing to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement
(ABLE) commission within thirty (30) days of the conviction or compliance
check. Such reports shall be compiled in the manner prescribed by the ABLE
commission. Convictions shall be reported by the court clerk or her/his
designee and compliance checks shall be reported by the chief of police or his/
her designee.
   B.   Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may be enlisted by the
police department to assist in enforcement of this article pursuant to the
rules of the ABLE commission. (Ord. 2013-08, 7-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2020-01, 2-
27-2020)
5-5B-8: RETALIATION:
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against
any employee, applicant for employment or customer because such employee,
applicant, or customer reported violations or suspected violations of any
provisions of this article. (Ord. 2013-08, 7-25-2013)
ARTICLE C. TRUANCY
SECTION:
5-5C-1: Parental Responsibility
5-5C-2: Violation By Minor
5-5C-3: Exceptions
5-5C-1: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian or legal custodian of a minor who
is over the age of five (5) years and under the age of eighteen (18) years, to
neglect or refuse to cause or compel such minor to attend and comply with the
rules of a public, private, or other school of the parent's choosing in which
the minor is enrolled, or unless other means of education is provided in
compliance with state law. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2004-01, 2-26-2004, eff. 2-26-2004)
5-5C-2: VIOLATION BY MINOR:
It shall be unlawful for any minor who is over the age of sixteen (16) and
under the age of eighteen (18) years of age and who has not finished four (4)
years of high school work, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the
rules of some public, private, or other school, or receive an education by
other means for the full term the schools of the district in which the minor
attends are in session. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2004-01, 2-26-2004, eff. 2-26-2004)
5-5C-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This article shall not apply:
   A.   If any such minor is prevented from attending school by reason of
mental or physical disability, as determined by the board of education of the
district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician
or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing
physician.
   B.   If any such minor is excused from attendance at school, due to an
emergency, by the principal of the school in which the minor is enrolled, at
the request of the parent of the minor.
   C.   If any such minor is excused from attending school by:
      1.   The administrator of the school or district where the minor attends
school; and
      2.   The parent, guardian or legal custodian of the minor. Provided,
further, that no minor shall be excused from attending school by such joint
agreement between a school administrator and the parent, guardian or legal
custodian of the minor unless and until it has been determined that such action
is in the best interest of the minor and/or the community, and that said minor
shall thereafter be under the supervision of the parent, guardian or legal
custodian until the minor has reached the age of eighteen (18) years.
   D.   If any such minor is observing religious holy days if, prior to the
absence, the parent of the minor submits a written request for the absence. The
school district shall excuse a student pursuant to this subsection for the days
on which the religious holy days are observed and for the days on which the
student must travel to and from the site where the student will observe the
holy days. (Ord. 2004-01, 2-26-2004, eff. 2-26-2004)
CHAPTER 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Animal Control Officer Or Police Chief Authority
5-6-3: Dog Licensing And Tags
5-6-4: Dog And Cat Vaccinations Required
5-6-5: Killing Vicious/Dangerous Animals
5-6-6: Keeping Of Rabid Or Vicious/Dangerous Animals
5-6-7: Dogs Muzzled And Cats Confined
5-6-8: Rabies Control And Procedures
5-6-9: Zoning Regulations Prevail
5-6-10: Animals At Large
5-6-11: Pasturing In Public Areas
5-6-12: Noise; Disturbing Peace And Quiet
5-6-13: Keeping Swine Prohibited
5-6-14: Buildings For Animals; Location And Condition
5-6-15: Disposal Of Manure
5-6-16: Cruelty To Animals
5-6-17: Impoundment Of Animals
5-6-18: Penalty
5-6-19: Keeping Fowl
5-6-20:    Definitions
5-6-21:    Identification
5-6-22:    Rabies Vaccination
5-6-23:    Maximum Number
5-6-24:    Parents’ Liability
5-6-25:    Noise
5-6-26:    Running At Large
5-6-27:    Disposition Of Feral Or Vicious Cats
5-6-28:    License Required Generally; Fee
5-6-29:    Required After Acquisition
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section, except in those cases where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat, rabbit,
chicken, goose, duck, turkey, or other animal or fowl.
AT LARGE: A. Not securely confined by a fence or other means on premises under
the control of, or occupied by, the owner; or
   B.   Not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family
over twelve (12) years of age or an agent of the owner, by leash, whether on
the owner's premises or not.
LIVESTOCK: Any of the following: cattle, swine, sheep, goats, poultry or fowl.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an animal.
The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal remains,
or to which it customarily returns, for a period of ten (10) days or more,
shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal.
VICIOUS/DANGEROUS ANIMAL: A vicious animal or a dangerous animal is defined as
any animal that: a) because of its physical nature, is capable of inflicting
serious physical harm or death to human beings, or domesticated animals and
would constitute a danger to human life or property; b) has behaved in such a
manner that the owner knows or should reasonably know that the animal has
tendencies to attack or to bite human beings or other animals; c) commits an
unprovoked attack on a person or animal on private or public property; or d)
threatens to attack, attacks or terrorizes a person or domestic animal in such
a manner that public safety is in jeopardy and when, in the opinion of the
animal control officer or other officer of the law, such animal poses a
personal or public threat. (1987 Code § 4-101; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 2011-11, 4-
28-2011; Ord. 2014-01, 3-27-2014)
5-6-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER OR POLICE CHIEF AUTHORITY:
   A.   Inspection: The animal control officer, Chief of Police, or any
designated officer or employee of the City shall have the right to inspect any
place or structure where an animal is kept upon citizen complaint or under any
circumstance in which such officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that
an animal is being kept or harbored in violation of this code. (Ord. 2011-13,
4-28-2011)
   B.   Issuance Of Order: Such officer may issue any such reasonable order as
he may deem necessary to the owner of the animal to cause the animal to be kept
as provided in this chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance.
   C.   Complaint Before Municipal Judge: Such officer may make a complaint
before the municipal judge against any person for violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure shall not
abridge the right of others to make such complaint. (1987 Code § 4-110)
5-6-3: DOG LICENSING AND TAGS:
   A.   Licensing And Registration Fees; Exceptions:
      1.   License Required: All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained by their
owners in the city shall be licensed and registered each year, if over six (6)
months of age, on or before the anniversary date of the initial issuance of the
dog's license, or within fifteen (15) days after the dog is brought into the
city. (1987 Code § 4-130)
      2.   Issuance Of License; Vaccination Required: Dog licenses shall be
issued by the city clerk, upon submission by the owner of a certificate of
vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian, or upon submission of the
affidavit of vaccination signed by the owner, upon payment of a license tax,
not to exceed five dollars ($5.00), as set by the council for each animal.
(Ord. 2013-04, 7-25-2013)
      3.   Information For Licensing: The owner shall state at the time
application is made for such license, and upon printed forms provided for such
purpose, his name and address, and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog
owned or kept by him, and such other reasonable information as the city clerk
might request. (1987 Code § 4-130)
      4.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not be intended to
apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor to
dogs kept in kennels or pet shops for sale, nor to dogs brought into the city
for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to "seeing eye dogs" or
"hearing dogs" properly trained to assist blind or deaf persons, which dogs are
actually being used by blind or deaf persons for the purpose of aiding them in
going from place to place. (1987 Code § 4-130; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Collar And Tag Requirements; Duplicate License:
      1.   Issuance Of Tag; Attach To Collar: Upon payment of the license fee,
the clerk shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a tag for each dog
so licensed. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar,
to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag
are consistently worn by the dog.
      2.   Lost Tag; Issuance Of Duplicate; Fee: In case a tag is lost or
destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the clerk upon proof of a receipt
showing the payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of
a fee as set by the city council for such duplicate.
      3.   Tags Nontransferable: Dog tags shall not be transferable from one
dog to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fees because of
the death of the dog, or the owner's leaving the city before the expiration of
the license period. (1987 Code § 4-131)
   C.   Counterfeiting Tags; Illegal Use: No person shall counterfeit, or
attempt to counterfeit, any tag issued for a dog as provided in this section,
or take from any dog a tag legally placed upon it, or place such tag upon a dog
for which the tag was not specifically issued. (1987 Code § 4-132)
5-6-4: DOG AND CAT VACCINATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Vaccination Required: The owner or keeper of any dog or cat of six (6)
months of age or older within the city limits shall ensure that the dog or cat
is vaccinated against rabies every calendar year, or once every three (3) years
when such vaccination is performed by a licensed veterinarian with an approved
three (3) year vaccine. Vaccinations shall be performed by a licensed
veterinarian, the owner or some responsible person designated by the owner.
Each owner choosing to have the dog or cat vaccinated by someone other than a
licensed veterinarian shall provide an affidavit of vaccination to the city in
such form as the city shall require. Pursuant to Oklahoma state department of
health regulations an animal vaccinated by someone other than a licensed
veterinarian is considered an unvaccinated animal should the animal bite or
come into contact with a rabid animal.
   B.   Affix Metal Tag To Collar: Owners shall affix, or have affixed, to the
collar or harness of each vaccinated dog or cat a metal disc with sufficient
information thereon that the vaccination certificate or affidavit covering the
animal may be readily traced. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-27-2013)
5-6-5: KILLING VICIOUS/DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
Any person may kill an animal in self-defense or in defense of another person
or domesticated animal when the animal, without undue provocation, bites him or
another person or domesticated animal, or attacks, or attempts to bite or
attack, him or another person or domesticated animal in such manner that an
ordinarily prudent person would be led to believe that the person or animal
toward whom the efforts of the animal are directed is about to be bitten or
otherwise physically harmed. (Ord. 2011-14, 4-28-2011)
5-6-6: KEEPING OF RABID OR VICIOUS/DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   No person or other entity shall own or harbor any rabid or vicious/
dangerous animal within the city, unless the same is kept upon private premises
of such person or entity and securely locked within a sufficient enclosure to
prevent any possible means of escape. For a secure enclosure to be sufficient,
it must be constructed with four (4) sides, a top, a bottom and a locked gate
of sufficient materials, not including soil, to prevent any possible means of
escape. Any vicious/dangerous animal running at large on the streets or alleys,
or other public ways, of the city shall be immediately removed and impounded,
or terminated when deemed necessary by the animal control officer or other
authorized city employee, to protect public safety when the situation warrants,
regardless of whether or not such animal has a collar and tag or muzzle. Any
leash, tether, chain, rope or other device used to control a vicious/dangerous
animal when an animal is taken off personal property shall not exceed six feet
(6') in length without such animal being constituted running at large. Other
officers of the law may likewise, when deemed necessary to protect the public
safety, remove, impound or terminate a vicious/dangerous animal when the
situation warrants. Any animal deemed vicious/dangerous by the city court may
be terminated by euthanasia with the consent of the owner or keeper of such
animal, or upon the order of the municipal judge.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or other designated
city employee or official to investigate any proper claim that an animal is
vicious/dangerous within the meaning of this chapter. Should the investigating
official determine that a vicious/dangerous animal poses an immediate threat to
the public health or safety, he shall immediately seize and impound the animal.
If the owner or keeper of such animal disputes the finding of the animal
control officer or other designated official, the investigating officer shall
also refer the matter to the city attorney for filing of a verified complaint
requesting a finding by the court that the impounded animal is vicious/
dangerous and aid in the proceedings instituted in the municipal criminal court
against any person for harboring a vicious/dangerous animal. The fact that the
owner or keeper of such animal disputes the determination of the animal control
officer shall not prevent or delay the impoundment of the animal.
   C.   If the court shall fail to find, upon a preponderance of the evidence
presented in an evidentiary hearing, that the animal seized and impounded is a
vicious/dangerous animal, then the court shall order the animal control officer
to return the animal to its owner. If such animal is found by the municipal
court to be a vicious/dangerous animal, the court shall order the animal
control officer to euthanize the animal, or direct the owner of such animal to
take such steps as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health and
safety.
   D.   At the option of the owner, but subject to the approval of the animal
control officer, an animal impounded pursuant to this section may be impounded
in a private kennel or veterinary clinic during the pendency of the vicious/
dangerous animal action. The operators of the facility shall then assume full
liability for the confinement and maintenance of such animal and shall not
release it without it first being authorized by the animal control officer or
the court. All fees for such impoundment shall be the responsibility of the
owner. In no event shall the city be liable for costs or fees charged by the
private facility. Further, the court may assess the owner the cost of
transporting the animal to the privately operated impoundment facility.
   E.   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of two
hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs, or such other amount as shall be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2014-
01, 3-27-2014)
5-6-7: DOGS MUZZLED AND CATS CONFINED:
   A.   Emergency Resolution For Muzzling, Confining; Notice: When the health
officer determines and certifies that a dog, cat or other animal in the city,
or within five (5) miles of the city, is or was infected with rabies and that
an epidemic of rabies threatens the city, the city council, by resolution, may
order all dogs to be muzzled when at large within the city, and if deemed
desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time to be determined by
the city council. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its passage shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall go
into effect on the date following such publication unless the resolution
prescribes a later time.
   B.   Dogs Or Cats At Large Prohibited: While such resolution is in effect,
it is unlawful for any owner to permit an unmuzzled dog or a cat to be at large
in violation of such resolution, or for any such dog or a cat to be at large in
violation thereof. (1987 Code § 4-123)
5-6-8: RABIES CONTROL AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Report Animal Biting; Quarantine: Every animal that bites or scratches
a person shall be reported within four (4) hours to the chief of police or the
animal control officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the city
animal shelter or a veterinary hospital, all at the owner's expense, for a
period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine, except
by permission of the health officer, or at a licensed veterinarian hospital
chosen by the owner if the owner agrees to pay for the quarantine in advance.
Failure of the owner to quarantine his animal will make him guilty of an
offense.
   B.   Strays Confined At Animal Shelter: In the case of stray animals, or in
the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at
the animal shelter.
   C.   Supervised Quarantine May Be Required: The owner, upon demand by an
employee empowered to enforce this chapter, shall forthwith surrender any
animal that has bitten or scratched a human, or which is suspected of having
been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expenses for which shall
be borne by the owner, and the animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged
free of rabies.
   D.   Death Of Animal Under Quarantine: When an animal under quarantine has
been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being
rabid, and dies while under such observation, the animal control officer or
veterinarian shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health
department for pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public
health officer of reports of human contacts and diagnosis made of the suspected
animal.
   E.   Rabies Diagnosis; Extended Quarantine: When one or both reports give a
positive diagnosis of rabies, the health officer may recommend a citywide
quarantine for a period of six (6) months, and upon the invoking of such
quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the
streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal
shall be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the
health officer or the animal control officer.
   F.   Animals Bitten During Quarantine: During such period of rabies
quarantine as herein designated, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to
be rabid shall be treated for such rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian
or held under six (6) months' quarantine by the owner in the same manner as
other animals are quarantined.
   G.   Additional Cases Of Rabies During Quarantine: In the event there are
additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the
quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six (6)
months.
   H.   Killing Or Removing Animals From City: No person shall kill or cause to
be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to
rabies, or any animal biting or scratching a human, except as herein provided,
nor to remove same from the city limits without written permission from the
health officer of the city or the animal control officer.
   I.   Disposition Of Carcasses Of Dead Animals: The carcass of any dead
animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal
control officer.
   J.   Disposition Of Infected Animals: The animal control officer shall
direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies.
   K.   Refusal To Surrender Animal: No person shall fail or refuse to
surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when
demand is made therefor by an employee empowered to enforce this chapter. Such
refusal shall be deemed an offense.
   L.   Report Bites: It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other
practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of
persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other
information as will be helpful in rabies control.
   M.   Report Rabies Diagnosis: It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian
to report to the City animal control officer his diagnosis of any animal
observed by him to be a rabid suspect. (1987 Code § 4-124)
5-6-9: ZONING REGULATIONS PREVAIL:
In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future zoning
ordinance, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and supersede
the provisions of this chapter. (1987 Code § 4-160)
5-6-10: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   Running At Large Prohibited: No owner shall permit any animal, except a
cat, owned, harbored or kept by him to be at large within the City. It is
unlawful for any animal as provided in this subsection to be at large at any
time within the City. (1987 Code § 4-102)
   B.   Turning Animals At Large Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to
open any enclosure in which any animal is confined as required by ordinance so
as to turn the animal at large, or in any manner to turn the animal at large.
(1987 Code § 4-103)
5-6-11: PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS:
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any
public school ground or other public property, Federal, State, City or other,
on any railroad right-of-way, or on any property without the consent of the
person owning or controlling such property. (1987 Code § 4-104)
5-6-12: NOISE; DISTURBING PEACE AND QUIET:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the City any dog or
other animal who by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and quiet
of any person. The keeping of such an animal is hereby declared a nuisance.
(1987 Code § 4-105)
5-6-13: KEEPING SWINE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person being the owner of, or having the care, custody,
or control thereof, to keep or allow to be kept any swine, hogs, shoats or pigs
at any time in the City, except in areas zoned agricultural and on lot(s) or
acreages comprising three (3) acres or more.
   A.   Such swine shall be kept within an enclosure sufficient to prevent the
swine from escaping therefrom, and all yards and pens shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition and disinfected in such a manner and to the extent
necessary to prevent odors or unsanitary conditions. No person shall maintain,
have or keep any pen, yard or enclosure for the purpose of keeping or
restraining swine, within ten feet (10') of any residence, other than the
owner’s residence, or within twenty five feet (25') of the front line of the
residence or of any open and used street, road or avenue.
   B.   Any person desiring to keep swine in an area zoned A-2 or on a lot(s)
or acreage of less than ten (10) acres shall first obtain a permit from the
City Clerk or her designee for such activity, and the pens and yards shall be
inspected and approved by the City Code Officer, or its designee, prior to
keeping any swine on the premises. The City Code Officer shall have the right
to inspect the pens or yards at any time, and shall have the authority to
revoke the permit for any violation of this Code.
   C.   No person shall keep swine in such manner as to create a nuisance. A
nuisance shall include, but not be limited to any violation of this section or
actions which damage private or public property, or maintaining such swine in a
fashion that would reasonably annoy the comfort, health or peace or quiet of
the people in the community.
   D.   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the keeping
or raising of swine on land owned, operated or leased by the public schools in
conjunction with FFA, 4-H or similar programs so long as such swine are
maintained in such a manner as to not create a public or private nuisance.
   E.   Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the commercial feeding
or breeding of swine within the City limits.
   F.   No person shall keep any more than swine within city limits for any
purpose. This shall only be permitted upon city inspection and successful
permit application. Said permit is subject to periodic inspection in order to
renew. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-26-2018; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 7-25-2024)
5-6-14: BUILDINGS FOR ANIMALS; LOCATION AND CONDITION:
   A.   Construction: Every building wherein any animal shall be kept within
the City shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that it can
be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
   B.   Manure Receptacles Required:
      1.   Every such building, if located within two hundred feet (200') of
any apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store,
building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes or residence
other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which
such animal is kept, shall be provided with a watertight and flytight
receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulations of manure.
      2.   Such receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept
covered at all times, except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises, except in
such receptacle.
   C.   Location: No building, place or establishment wherein animals are kept
shall be maintained closer than forty feet (40') to any apartment house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational,
religious or hospital purposes or residence other than that occupied by the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animal is kept. (1987 Code §
4-107)
   D.   Sanitary Condition: Every place or building wherein an animal is kept
or permitted to be shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable odors. (1987 Code § 4-
109)
5-6-15: DISPOSAL OF MANURE:
Manure shall be hauled outside the City in a manner which does not jeopardize
the public health, or else shall be spread evenly upon the ground and turned
under at once or as soon as the weather permits. (1987 Code § 4-108)
5-6-16: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruel Treatment:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or knowingly
treat an animal, bird, or fowl in a cruel or inhumane manner; or to knowingly
neglect an animal, bird or fowl belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel
or inhumane manner.
      2.   No person shall cruelly beat or otherwise cruelly maltreat any
animal in the City; wilfully and wantonly kill, maim, wound, poison or
disfigure any horse, ass, mule, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, dog or other
domestic animal, bird or beast of any kind; mutilate, cruelly kill, overdrive,
override, overload, unnecessarily confine or fail to provide the same with
proper food, drink or shelter; drive, work or use the same when such animal is
maimed, wounded, sick, lame or otherwise unfit for labor; wilfully abandon the
same to die; carry or cause the same to be carried, hauled or forced along in a
cruel or inhumane manner; or leave any animal tied up, or confined anywhere,
day or night, for more than six (6) hours at a time exposed to inclement
weather or without proper feeding, watering and caring for the same. This
subsection is not to be construed to prevent authorized officers or other
persons from killing dogs or other animals when lawfully entitled to do so.
(Ord. 1991-03, 2-14-1991)
   B.   Poisoning Animals: It is unlawful for a person wilfully to poison any
dog or other animal, except a noxious, nondomesticated animal; or knowingly to
expose poison so that the same may be taken by such an animal. (1987 Code § 4-
151)
   C.   Encouraging Animals To Fight: It is unlawful for any person to
instigate or encourage a fight between animals; or to encourage one animal to
attack, pursue or annoy another animal, except a noxious, nondomesticated
animal; or to keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between animals.
(1987 Code § 4-152)
5-6-17: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Impoundment Authority; Entry On Property: The animal control officer, a
police officer, or such other officer or employee of the City as the City
Council may authorize shall take into custody and impound any animal found at
large or in violation of any provisions of the ordinances of the City. In
taking an animal into custody under authority of this section, the animal
control officer or other officer or employee may enter into private property to
gain custody of the animal. (1987 Code § 4-140)
   B.   Registry Of Impounded Animals; Notice; Disposition:
      1.   The animal control officer, upon receiving any animal, shall make a
complete registry, entering the breed, color, and sex of such animal and
whether or not licensed, and the date of impoundment. If a dog is licensed, he
shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license
tag.
      2.   After impounding any animal where the ownership is known by City
records, City personnel shall call the owner, if known, or mail notice at the
address shown on City records, if any, to notify them of the provisions of this
Code and of the impoundment.
      3.   It is the duty of the animal control officer to keep all animals
impounded for a period of seventy two (72) hours. All inquiries concerning lost
or impounded animals shall be directed to the animal control officer, and after
an animal has been destroyed, the animal control officer shall be required to
dispose of the animal. (1987 Code § 4-141)
   C.   Breaking Pound: No unauthorized person shall:
      1.   Break or attempt to break open the pound, or take or let out any
animal therefrom;
      2.   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the City any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
      3.   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in the
discharge of his duties relating to the taking into custody and impounding of
animals as provided in this chapter. (1987 Code § 4-142)
   D.   Impoundment Fees:
      1.   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall determine the fees
to be charged for impounding and keeping animals.
      2.   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees
to the City Clerk and present his receipt therefor to the person in charge of
the pound before the latter releases the animal. (1987 Code § 4-143)
   E.   Reclamation Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   Proof Of Vaccination: Reclamation of impounded animals may be made
as provided in this subsection. The party desiring to reclaim an animal shall
present to the animal control officer or other employee, who may be designated
by the City Council, proof of ownership, and proof that any dog or cat is
currently vaccinated for rabies or return proof of vaccination within three (3)
days after the date the animal is released. Any person failing to return proof
of vaccination as provided herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The party desiring to reclaim any animal shall pay the
applicable pound fee and show evidence to the animal control officer that the
fee has been paid.
      2.   Proof Of Ownership: The pound officer, before he releases any
impounded animal to any person who claims that he is the owner thereof, shall
satisfy himself of the fact that such representations are true, and to this end
shall have the right to make such inquiry as may be necessary to establish such
facts. He shall have the unreserved right to require the affidavit of the
claimant to the effect that he is the true and lawful owner of such animal and
that he has owned such animal for the time which claimant alleges that he has
owned such animal. He shall have the further unreserved right to require such
claimant to produce witnesses of the fact whose representations may or may not
be reduced to writing and certified accordingly, as the pound officer, in his
discretion, shall determine. (1987 Code § 4-144)
   F.   Disposition, Sale Of Impounded Animals:
      1.   At the end of the period prescribed in subsection B3 of this
section, animals that have not been redeemed by the owner thereof shall be
destroyed in a humane manner or sold in the manner hereinafter provided.
      2.   The sales herein provided for shall be conducted by the person in
charge of the animal shelter or such other persons as may be designated by the
City Council. Such sales shall be for cash to the highest bidder, but the
animals shall not be sold in any event for less than that sum required to cover
the impounding fee, board bill, vaccination, and license fees, where
applicable. If there is no bid, or an insufficient amount is bid as herein
provided, the person in charge of the pound shall destroy such animal, unless
he believes it to be for the best interests of the City to retain the animal
and offer it for sale again. The proceeds of the sale, less the vaccination
fees which shall be paid to the person administering the vaccination, shall be
forthwith delivered to the City Clerk.
      3.   The purchaser of an animal at a sale held as provided herein shall
acquire absolute title to the animal purchased.
      4.   Any dog impounded for more than three (3) days may be released to
the County Humane Society in lieu of killing, and the County Humane Society may
dispose of such dogs in the manner it deems proper under the circumstances. For
each dog that is released to the County Humane Society, the County Humane
Society shall pay to the City the sum as agreed for each day such dog has been
impounded in excess of three (3) days. (1987 Code § 4-145)
   G.   Claim For Excess Money By Owner: The owner of an impounded animal sold
as provided herein may claim the excess of the sale price of the animal above
the fees for impounding and keeping the same and a fee as set by motion or
resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for any expense it has had
in making the sale, at any time within three (3) months after the sale. If a
claim is so made and approved by the City Council, the City Clerk shall pay him
such excess; but if a claim is not so made, the excess shall belong to the
City. (1987 Code § 4-146; amd. 2004 Code)
5-6-18: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any ordinance or provision of this
chapter, or who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable
order made by the Health Officer pursuant to this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1987 Code § 4-170)
5-6-19: KEEPING FOWL:
   A.   No person shall keep any domestic or nondomestic fowl, including, but
not necessarily limited to ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas or pigeons other than
birds that are customarily considered a household pet, or laying chickens
within the City, except in areas zoned agricultural or in areas zoned R on a
lot or lots containing sufficient area to meet the setback requirements
established herein. Chickens, but not other fowl, may be kept in areas zoned R.
Not more than ten (10) chickens shall be kept on any residential lot(s). Such
chickens shall be kept within an enclosure sufficient to prevent the chickens
from escaping therefrom, and all coops, houses, roosts, yards and pens shall be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and disinfected in such a manner and to
the extent necessary to prevent odors or unsanitary conditions. No person shall
maintain, have or keep any pen, yard, building or enclosure for the purpose of
keeping or restraining chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, pigeons or
other domestic or nondomestic fowl of any kind within ten feet (10') of any
residence, other than the owner's residence, or within twenty five feet (25')
of the front line of the residence or of any open and used street, road or
avenue.
   B.   No person shall keep a rooster within the City limits, except in areas
zoned agricultural and on tracts of five (5) acres or more. No person shall
maintain, have or keep any pen, yard, building or enclosure for the purpose of
keeping or restraining roosters or male fowl of any kind within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of any residence, other than the owner's residence, or within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of the front line of the residence or any open
and used street, road or avenue.
   C.   Any person desiring to keep domestic or nondomestic fowl within the
City limits shall first obtain a permit from the City Clerk or her designee for
such activity, and such coops, houses, roosts, pens and yards shall be
inspected and approved by the City Code Officer, or its designee, prior to
keeping any fowl on the premises. The City Code Officer shall have the right to
inspect such coops, houses, roosts, pens or yards at any time, and shall have
the authority to revoke the permit for any violation of this Code.
   D.   No person shall keep fowl which may create a nuisance. A nuisance shall
include, but not be limited to any violation of this section or conduct or
behavior of such fowl which damages private or public property or crowing or
creating other noises in a fashion that would reasonably annoy the comfort,
health or peace or quiet of the people in the community. (Ord. 2018-03, 3-22-
2018)
5-6-20: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
 
CAT: Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
 
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-21: IDENTIFICATION:
Every person residing in the city and owning or having in possession any cat
over four months old shall have the cat bear identification.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-22: RABIES VACCINATION:
Every person residing in the city and owning or having in possession any cat
over four months old shall be required to have the cat inoculated for rabies.
Every veterinarian who vaccinates any cat shall collect his fee for the
vaccination from the owner or keeper of the cat and shall issue a certificate
of vaccination to such owner or keeper. He shall state in the certificate the
name of the owner or keeper, the date of vaccination and the fact of
vaccination.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-23: MAXIMUM NUMBER:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to have in possession or under
control more than three unaltered cats over the age of four months. However, a
person may have under control six felines, all of which are altered as provided
by this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-24: PARENTS’ LIABILITY:
The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any cat shall be
deemed to be the owner of such animal and shall be charged for all penalties
and shelter fees imposed by this article.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-25: NOISE:
Every person owning, possessing or harboring a cat shall prevent such cat from
whining or making other sounds common to its species in excessive, continuous
or untimely fashion which shall annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood, family or person.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-26: RUNNING AT LARGE:
No person shall permit his cat to run at large within the city limits at any
time. A cat shall be deemed running at large when off the premises of its owner
or keeper without being under adequate control of its owner or keeper.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-27: DISPOSITION OF FERAL OR VICIOUS CATS:
Any feral or vicious cat found running at large which, because of its
disposition or diseased condition, it is too hazardous to apprehend, may be
destroyed when so ordered by the chief of police or the animal control officer.
In an emergency, if the chief of police or animal control officer cannot be
contacted in time to avoid danger to any person, any police officer may destroy
such animal without first contacting the chief of police or animal control
officer.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-28: LICENSE REQUIRED GENERALLY; FEE:
Every person owning or harboring within the city any cat over the age of four
months shall pay an annual license user fee of $10.00 for each unaltered male
or female cat and $5.00 for each altered male or female cat having been
neutered or spayed. Senior citizens shall receive a 50 percent discount on
licenses. Such license user fee shall cover a period of one year from the date
of vaccination of the cat for rabies. Upon the expiration of a period of one
year from the date of vaccination of the cat, the license shall expire. The
license user fee shall become due and payable upon each cat attaining the age
of four months and upon the expiration of the period covered by the license.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
5-6-29: REQUIRED AFTER ACQUISITION:
It shall be the responsibility of any person acquiring a cat, whether newly
born or transferred from another owner, to obtain a new license, which shall be
valid for one year from the date the cat was vaccinated for rabies.
(Ord. 2023-01, 10-27-2022)
CHAPTER 7
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-7-1: Policy
5-7-2: Definitions
5-7-3: Unlawful Practice; Application Of Chapter
5-7-4: Sale Or Rental Of Housing
5-7-5: Financing Of Housing
5-7-6: Brokerage Services
5-7-7: Exemptions
5-7-8: Administration; Mayor
5-7-9: Education And Conciliation
5-7-10: Enforcement; Complaint Procedure
5-7-11: Investigations; Subpoenas; Evidence
5-7-12: Enforcement By Private Persons; Civil Action
5-7-13: Interference, Coercion Or Intimidation
5-7-14: Prevention Of Intimidation In Fair Housing Cases
5-7-15: Separability Of Provisions
5-7-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for
fair housing throughout the city. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE: An act that is unlawful under section
5-7-4,
5-7-5, or
5-7-6 of this chapter.
DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or
designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS:
   A.   One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years)
being domiciled with:
      1. A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals; or
      2. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
   B.   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
eighteen (18) years.
FAMILY: Includes a single individual.
HANDICAP: With respect to a person:
   A.   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
of such person's major life activities;
   B.   A record of having such an impairment; or
   C.   Being regarded as having such impairment, but such term does not
include current, illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or
occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a
home, residence or sleeping place by a person, by a family, or by a group of
persons living together, or vacant land available for the construction of a
housing accommodation.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. (Ord.
1992-05, 5-28-1992)
5-7-3: UNLAWFUL PRACTICE; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section and section
5-7-7 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in section
5-7-4 of this chapter shall apply to:
   A.   Application To Dwellings: All dwellings, except as exempted by
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Exemptions: Nothing in section
5-7-4 of this chapter shall apply to:
      1.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that
such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-
family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale
of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in
such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty four (24) month
period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not
own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to, or any right to, all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such
single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this title only
if such house is sold or rented: a) without the use in any manner of the sales
or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker,
agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and b) without the publication,
posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in
violation of subsection
5-7-4C of this chapter, but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
      2.   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently
of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his residence.
   C.   Business Of Selling Or Renting Dwellings: For the purposes of
subsection B of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of
selling or renting dwellings if:
      1.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
      2.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      3.   He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy
by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
5-7-4: SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING:
As made applicable by section
5-7-3 of this chapter and, except as exempted by subsection
5-7-3B and section
5-7-7 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
   A.   To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, handicap, familial status,
gender, age, color, religion, or national origin.
   B.   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, handicap, familial status,
gender, age, color, religion, or national origin.
   C.   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on race, handicap, familial status, gender, age, color, religion, or national
origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or
discrimination.
   D.   To represent to any person because of race, handicap, familial status,
gender, age, color, religion, or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
   E.   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, handicap,
familial status, gender, age, color, religion, or national origin. (Ord. 1992-
05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
5-7-5: FINANCING OF HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance, because of the race, handicap, familial status, gender, age, color,
religion, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with
him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purpose
of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation
to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given;
provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or
effectiveness of the exemptions contained in subsection
5-7-3B of this chapter. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
5-7-6: BROKERAGE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the
terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of
race, handicap, familial status, gender, age, color, religion, or national
origin. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
5-7-7: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association,
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association,
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, handicap, familial status, gender,
age, color, religion, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of
such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. (Ord.
1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
5-7-8: ADMINISTRATION; MAYOR:
   A.   Authorization: The authority and responsibility for administering this
chapter shall be in the mayor.
   B.   Delegation Of Duties: The mayor may delegate any of these functions,
duties, and powers to employees of the city or to boards of the city, including
functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating,
hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to
any work, business, or matter under this chapter. The mayor shall by rule
prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his hearing examiners to
other hearing examiners or to other officers in the city, to boards or officers
or to himself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
   C.   Programs And Activities: All executive departments and agencies shall
administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the mayor to further such purposes. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-
28-1992)
5-7-9: EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION:
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the mayor shall commence such
educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of this
chapter. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other
interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this chapter and his
suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor, with their advice, to
work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-
28-1992)
5-7-10: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Filing Of Complaint; Investigation; Information Confidential:
      1.   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person
aggrieved") may file a complaint with the mayor. Complaints shall be in writing
and shall contain such information and be in such form as the mayor requires.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, the mayor shall furnish a copy of the same to
the person or persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the
alleged discriminatory housing practice.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving a complaint, or within
thirty (30) days after the expiration of any period of reference under
subsection C of this section, the mayor shall investigate the complaint and
give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve
it. If the mayor decides to resolve the complaint, he shall proceed to try to
eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal
methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
      3.   Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be
made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter
without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of the mayor
who shall make public any information in violation of this provision shall be
deemed guilty of an offense. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Time Limit For Filing; Response To Complaint:
      1.   A complaint under subsection A of this section shall be filed within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which
the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may
be reasonably and fairly amended at any time.
      2.   A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and
with the leave of the mayor, which shall be granted whenever it would be
reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints
and answers shall be verified.
   C.   File Complaint With Secretary Of Department Of Housing And Urban
Development: If within thirty (30) days after a complaint is filed with the
mayor, the mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this
chapter, the person aggrieved may, within thirty (30) days thereafter, file a
complaint with the secretary of the department of housing and urban
development. The mayor will assist in this filing.
   D.   Civil Action: If the mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within thirty (30) days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may,
within thirty (30) days thereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate
court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights
granted or protected by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the
subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent
from engaging in such practice, and order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.
   E.   Burden Of Proof: In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section,
the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.
   F.   Trial: Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial,
the mayor shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary
compliance. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
5-7-11: INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; EVIDENCE:
   A.   Authority Of Mayor: In conducting an investigation, the mayor shall
have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents,
individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may
examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or
statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of
the investigation; provided, however, that the mayor first complies with the
provisions of the fourth amendment relating to unreasonable searches and
seizures. The mayor may issue subpoenas to compel his access to, or the
production of, such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same
limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or
served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court for the
district in which the investigation is taking place. The mayor may administer
oaths.
   B.   Issuance Of Subpoenas: Upon written application to the mayor, a
respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of
subpoenas by, and in the name of, the mayor himself. Subpoenas issued at the
request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such
respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request.
   C.   Witness Fees: Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the mayor shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in United States district courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by such
respondent.
   D.   Petition To Revoke Or Modify Subpoena: Within five (5) days after
service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the mayor to
revoke or modify the subpoena. The mayor shall grant the petition if he finds
that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or
place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any
matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly
onerous, or for other good reason.
   E.   Petition For Enforcement: In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a
subpoena, the mayor or other person at whose request it was issued may petition
for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts
business. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
   F.   Failure To Attend, Testify:
      1.   Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or
to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other
evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful
order of the mayor, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the mayor, shall make
or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report,
account, record, or other document submitted to the mayor pursuant to his
subpoena or other order, or shall wilfully neglect or fail to make or cause to
be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or
other documents, or shall wilfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means
falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
   G.   Litigation Conducted By City Attorney: The city attorney shall conduct
all litigation in which the mayor participates as a party or as amicus pursuant
to this chapter. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
5-7-12: ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS; CIVIL ACTION:
   A.   Civil Action: The rights granted by sections
5-7-3,
5-7-4,
5-7-5, and
5-7-6 of this chapter may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts
of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred;
provided, however, that the court shall continue such use brought pursuant to
this section or subsection
5-7-10D of this chapter from time to time before bringing it to trial if the
court believes that the conciliation efforts of the mayor are likely to result
in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice complained of
in the complaint made to the mayor and which practice forms the basis for the
action in court; and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance, or rental
consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the authority
of this chapter, and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant
without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil
action under the provision of this chapter, shall not be affected. (Ord. 1992-
5, 5-28-1992)
   B.   Action Of Court: The court may grant as relief, as it deems
appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining
order, or other order, and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and
punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees, in
the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the said plaintiff, in the
opinion of the court, is not financially able to assume said attorney fees.
(Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
5-7-13: INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION:
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of, his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by section
5-7-4,
5-7-5, or
5-7-6 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil
action. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
5-7-14: PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES:
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force,
wilfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   A.   Any person because of his race, handicap, familial status, gender, age,
color, religion or national origin and because he is, or has been, selling,
purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for
the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or
applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility
relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   B.   Any person because he is, or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      1.   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, handicap,
familial status, gender, age, color, religion or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section; or
      2.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   C.   Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate without discrimination on account of race, handicap, familial
status, gender, age, color, religion or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing
any denial of the opportunity to so participate;
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
5-7-15: SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to
other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1992-05, 5-28-1992)
CHAPTER 8
RACIAL PROFILING
SECTION:
5-8-1: Racial Profiling Prohibited; Policy Adopted
5-8-1: RACIAL PROFILING PROHIBITED; POLICY ADOPTED:
The city council hereby adopts a detailed written policy that prohibits racial
profiling, and clearly defines the elements constituting racial profiling, as
submitted by the Oklahoma human rights commission, and in compliance with 22
Oklahoma Statutes section 34.3. One copy of said policy shall be and remain on
file in the office of the city clerk. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CAMPING IN PUBLIC SPACES
SECTION:
5-9-1: Regulation Of Camping In Non-Designated Public Spaces And Loitering
5-9-2: Empowerment Of City Manager
5-9-3: Enforcement And Penalties
5-9-1: REGULATION OF CAMPING IN NON-DESIGNATED PUBLIC SPACES AND LOITERING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, sleep, or establish
temporary shelters in public spaces, including parks, sidewalks, and other
public areas, except in designated areas approved by the City Manager.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public spaces in a
manner that obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, or that
otherwise disrupts the normal use of such spaces. (Ord. 2025-06, 1-23-2025)
5-9-2: EMPOWERMENT OFF CITY MANAGER:
   A.   The City Manager is hereby empowered to establish and enforce opening
and closing times for all public buildings and public spaces within the City of
McLoud.
   B.   The City Manager shall post notices of the established opening and
closing times of all public buildings and public spaces at the City Hall
complex, and utilizing digital postings at his or her discretion. (Ord. 2025-
06, 1-23-2025)
5-9-3: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $750 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 60 days, or
both.
   B.   The City Manager, or their designee, is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance and to take necessary actions to ensure
compliance. (Ord. 2025-06, 1-23-2025)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
STATE TRAFFIC CODE; DEFINITIONS; PENALTY
SECTION:
6-1-1: Citation
6-1-2: Traffic Code Controlling
6-1-3: Adoption Of State Traffic Code
6-1-4: Application Of Regulations To Boundary Streets
6-1-5: Obedience To Traffic Code
6-1-6: Penalty
6-1-1: CITATION:
This title and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the TRAFFIC
CODE, CITY OF McLOUD, and may so appear upon all official documents, records or
instruments. (1987 Code § 15-101)
6-1-2: TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING:
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this title, the traffic
code shall be controlling in the use of city streets, alleys, thoroughfares,
parks, parkways or any other public right of way or municipally owned land, by
pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind, whether self-propelled or otherwise,
and whether moving or at rest. (1987 Code § 15-102)
6-1-3: ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE:
   A.   Motor Vehicle Code Adopted: The provisions of the state motor vehicle
code, 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-101 et seq., and the rules of the road, 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 11-101 et seq., are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the city limits as
fully as if set out at length herein.
   B.   Definitions Adopted: The provisions and definitions contained in 47
Oklahoma Statutes sections 1-101 through 1-186 are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, applicable to control of traffic and to this
title. (1987 Code § 15-104)
6-1-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS TO BOUNDARY STREETS:
The police force of the city may enforce this title and ordinances governing
and regulating the operation of motor vehicles and other traffic upon roads,
streets and highways that form any boundary line of the city. (1987 Code § 15-
105)
6-1-5: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CODE:
   A.   Committing Unlawful Act: It is an offense against the city for any
person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this
title.
   B.   Parental Responsibility: It is an offense against the city for the
parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this title.
   C.   Permitting Vehicle Violations: It is an offense for any person to
authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in his or her name to
be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any of the provisions of
this title. (1987 Code § 15-1401)
6-1-6: PENALTY:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this title containing the
traffic laws of the city shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 15-1402)
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Enforcement Officials; Authority
6-2-2: Licenses For Drivers And Vehicles
6-2-3: Insurance Or Certificate Required
6-2-4: Vehicle Accidents
6-2-5: Traffic Citations; Court Action
6-2-6: Directing Traffic
6-2-7: Obedience To Officials
6-2-8: Public Officials Obey Traffic Regulations
6-2-9: Permitting Unauthorized Person To Drive
6-2-10: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
6-2-11: Pushcarts, Animals And Animal Drawn Vehicles
6-2-12: Coasters, Roller Skates And Similar Devices
6-2-13: Persons Working On Streets; Exceptions
6-2-14: Maintenance And Construction Zones
6-2-15: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
6-2-16: Following Fire Apparatus
6-2-17: Crossing Fire Hose
6-2-18: Seat Belts And Child Restraints
6-2-19: Cellular Telephones
6-2-20: Texting
6-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS; AUTHORITY:
It is the duty of the officers of the police department or any officers that
are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the
city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.
Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department
by this title and any other traffic ordinances of the city. (1987 Code § 15-
201)
6-2-2: LICENSES FOR DRIVERS AND VEHICLES:
   A.   State Driver's License:
      1.   Possession Of License Required:
         a.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his possession at all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an
unrevoked or unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's license as required by the
laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted from such laws
by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this subsection A1
shall be convicted if he produces in court an operator's or chauffeur's license
issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest.
         b.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in
violation of any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued
to him with respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices
required on, a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the
licensee as the state may determine. (1987 Code § 15-215)
      2.   Use Of Invalid License: No person shall operate a motor vehicle when
his privilege to do so is canceled, suspended, revoked or denied. Any person
convicted of violating this subsection A2 shall be punished by a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as
prohibited by this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. (1987 Code §
15-216)
   B.   State Vehicle License: It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind
upon a street of the city without a state vehicle license as may be required by
law or to fail to display the state vehicle license as may be required by law.
(1987 Code § 15-217)
6-2-3: INSURANCE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 7-600 et seq.
   OPERATOR'S POLICY: An operator's policy of liability insurance which shall
insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law
for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
   OWNER'S POLICY: An owner's policy of liability insurance which:
      1.   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference
all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
      2.   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person,
except as provided in subsection 3 of this definition, using an insured vehicle
with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from
the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
      3.   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing
laws; and
      4.   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204.
   SECURITY: 1. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204;
      2.   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a
policy or bond; or
      3.   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 7-503, having the equivalency of limits required under 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204, as acceptable limits for a policy or bond.
   SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the state board for property
and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by the
compulsory insurance law of the state.
   B.   Security Verification Carried In Vehicle: The owner of a motor vehicle
registered in this state and operating the vehicle within the city's boundaries
shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current owner's security
verification form listing the vehicle, or an equivalent form which has been
used by the state department of public safety. The security verification form
shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by any law
enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, shall be shown upon request to
any person affected by the collision.
   C.   Exceptions: The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or
operator's security verification form or an equivalent form from the department
during operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such
form for vehicle registration purposes:
      1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the state department of public
safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
      3.   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the interstate commerce commission, or the Oklahoma corporation commission;
      4.   Any licensed taxicab; and
      5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   D.   Operator To Carry Security Verification: Every operator of a motor
vehicle registered in this state shall, while operating or using such vehicle
within the city's boundaries, carry either an operator's or an owner's security
verification form issued by a carrier, provided the operator is not excluded
from coverage thereon; or an equivalent form issued by the state department of
public safety, reflecting liability coverage.
   E.   Failure To Produce Verification Form: An owner or operator who fails to
produce for inspection a valid and current security verification form or
equivalent form which has been issued by the department upon request of any
peace officer of the department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   F.   Suspended Sentence: A sentence imposed for any violation of this
section may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
   G.   Dismissal Of Charge: Any person producing proof in court that a current
security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the
department reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at
the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
   H.   Action Of Court; Provide Abstract To State: Upon conviction, bond
forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court clerk shall forward an abstract
to the state department of public safety within ten (10) days reflecting the
action taken by the court. (1987 Code § 15-219)
6-2-4: VEHICLE ACCIDENTS:
   A.   Duty To Stop:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall
immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto
as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he has
given his name, address and the registration of his vehicle and shall, upon
request, exhibit his driver's license to the person injured or the driver or
occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided with, and shall render
to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying, or making arrangement for the carrying of, such persons to a
physician, surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical treatment if it is
apparent that this treatment is necessary, or if such is requested by the
injured person. Each such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic.
      2.   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is
apparent that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident
to a police officer or to the police department. If a driver makes out a
written report of the accident in the office of the police department as soon
as practicable after the accident, which report is to be forwarded to the state
department of public safety in accordance with state law, the driver shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section.
      3.   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements
of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 15-220)
   B.   Duty To Give Information, Render Aid: The driver of any vehicle
involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage
to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall:
      1.   Give his correct name, address, and registration number of the
vehicle he is driving;
      2.   Upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's
license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending
any vehicle collided with; and
      3.   Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance,
including the carrying, or making of arrangements for the carrying, of such
person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if
it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is
requested by the injured person. (1987 Code § 15-221)
   C.   Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which
collides with another vehicle which is unattended at the time shall immediately
stop, and shall then and there proceed to either locate and notify the operator
or owner of such vehicle of the correct name and address of the driver and
owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a
conspicuous place in or on the vehicle struck a written notice, giving the name
and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking
and a statement of the circumstances thereof. (1987 Code § 15-222)
   D.   Duty Upon Striking Fixtures Upon Highway: The driver of any vehicle
involved in an accident resulting only in property damage to fixtures or other
property legally upon or adjacent to a street or highway shall take reasonable
steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of
such fact, and of his name and address, the registration number of the vehicle
he is driving, and shall, upon request, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's
license and shall make a report of such accident when and as required
heretofore in this section. (1987 Code § 15-223)
6-2-5: TRAFFIC CITATIONS; COURT ACTION:
   A.   Issuance Of Tags:
      1.   The city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to supply police
officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original and at
least two (2) duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving notice to persons
violating any provision of this title.
      2.   Notice may be given by delivering the tags to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
      3.   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
Each tag shall bear the registration number of the vehicle.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody.
      5.   The city may require that the police officers use citation tags
furnished by the city and that such tags be serially numbered, and may regulate
the use and handling of the citation tags. (1987 Code § 15-224)
   B.   Failure To Obey Citation: It is unlawful and an offense for any person
to violate his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance
of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which
citation was originally issued. (1987 Code § 15-225)
   C.   Failure To Comply With Citations Attached To Parked Vehicle: If a
violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the
traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation
affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five (5) days, the clerk of
the municipal court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and
warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five
(5) days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion where two (2) or
more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the
traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued
without sending the letter provided in this section. (1987 Code § 15-226)
   D.   Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking:
      1.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
      2.   The presumption in subsection D1 of this section shall apply only
when the procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed. (1987 Code
§ 15-227)
   E.   Illegal Cancellation Of Citations: It is unlawful for any person to
cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other
than as provided by this chapter. (1987 Code § 15-228)
   F.   Disposition And Records Of Citations, Warrants And Complaints:
      1.   Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or any
traffic law of this city, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of
the citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original
to be delivered to the municipal court.
      2.   Upon the filing of the original citation in the municipal court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official
action by a judge of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a
fine.
      3.   The chief of police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued
by the municipal court which are delivered to the police department for
service, and of the final disposition of the warrants.
      4.   No member of the police department or other officer or public
employee shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy
thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation,
complaint, or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this chapter.
(1987 Code § 15-229)
   G.   Court Records, Abstract Sent To State:
      1.   The municipal court clerk shall keep a record of every traffic
citation deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of
every official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in
reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision of this title or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the municipal judge or clerk
of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall
prepare and immediately forward to the state department of public safety a
certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
      3.   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state
department of public safety and shall include the name and address of the party
charged, the number of his operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration
number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing,
the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine
or forfeiture. (1987 Code § 15-230)
6-2-6: DIRECTING TRAFFIC:
   A.   Hand Or Voice:
      1.   Officers of the police department or any officers designated by the
chief of police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire
or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
      2.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, or
other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity. (1987 Code § 15-202)
   B.   Unauthorized Persons: No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to
direct traffic, except in case of emergency where no officer is present. (1987
Code § 15-203)
6-2-7: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official. (1987 Code § 15-204)
6-2-8: PUBLIC OFFICIALS OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by
or used in the service of the United States government, any state, county,
city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is
unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this title,
except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute. This title
shall not apply to the military forces of the United States or organizations of
the national guard when performing any military duty. (1987 Code § 15-208)
6-2-9: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE:
   A.   Use Of Vehicle: No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any
vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any
person who is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to
operate such vehicle.
   B.   Use Of Driver's License: It is unlawful for any person to lend, sell or
otherwise authorize another person the use of a driver's license while such
other person is under an order of revocation or suspension or otherwise not
entitled to a valid driver's license. (1987 Code § 15-218)
6-2-10: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   City Council Authority: The city mayor or city administrator is
empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of
the traffic ordinances of the city and to make temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
   B.   Testing Traffic Control Devices: The city personnel may have traffic
control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. (1987 Code § 15-205)
6-2-11: PUSHCARTS, ANIMALS AND ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(1987 Code § 15-206)
6-2-12: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
No person upon roller skates, skateboards, or riding in or by means of any
coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall
be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall
not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by
ordinances of the city. (1987 Code § 15-207; amd. 2004 Code)
6-2-13: PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS; EXCEPTIONS:
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title, except those
relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to
persons, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work
upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles, and other
equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of
public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations shall be
protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flag persons. The
provisions of this title shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles
exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work. (1987 Code § 15-
209)
6-2-14: MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Close Street:
      1.   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized, as necessary, subject to control by the city administrator,
to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance, or construction.
      2.   In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel, contractor
or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices
and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to
traffic.
   B.   Driving Through Area Prohibited; Exceptions:
      1.   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
subsection A of this section and traffic control devices or barricades have
been erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through,
under, over, or around such traffic control devices or barricades, or otherwise
to enter the closed area.
      2.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons
entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or property.
      3.   Persons having their places of residence or places of business
within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at
their own risk.
   C.   Traffic Control Devices Required:
      1.   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or
utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel,
contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic control devices to warn and guide the public.
      2.   Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals,
markings, flag persons, or other traffic control devices which are placed to
regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance
area. (1987 Code § 15-210)
6-2-15: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Privileges Of Operators Of Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this subsection, but subject to
the conditions stated in this section.
      2.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the
following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or
ordinance or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm:
         a.   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
         b.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         c.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is
not endangered; or
         d.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specific directions.
      3.   The exemptions granted in this subsection to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
      4.   The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1987 Code §
15-211)
   B.   Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws
of the state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of
way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
      2.   This subsection shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway. (1987 Code § 15-212)
6-2-16: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1987 Code § 15-213)
6-2-17: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command. (1987 Code § 15-214)
6-2-18: SEAT BELTS AND CHILD RESTRAINTS:
   A.   Seat Belts Required:
      1.   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated
in the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
federal motor vehicle safety standard 208. For the purposes of this section,
"passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section
1102, except that "passenger car" shall not include trucks, pickup trucks,
truck tractors, recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles, or motorized
bicycles.
      2.   This subsection shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a
passenger car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written
verification from a physician licensed in the state that he is unable to wear a
safety belt system for medical reasons. The issuance of such verification by a
physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to, nor shall such physician
thereby incur, any liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person
injured by reason of such failure to wear a safety seat belt system.
      3.   Subsection A1 of this section shall not apply to an operator of a
motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S. postal service.
   B.   Child Passenger Restraints Required:
      1.   Every driver when transporting a child under four (4) years of age
weighing sixty (60) pounds or less in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways,
streets or highways of the city shall provide for the protection of the child
by properly using a child passenger restraint system. For purposes of this
subsection, "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or child
passenger restraint system that meets the federal standards as set by 49 CFR
section 571.213.
      2.   Children at least four (4) years of age but younger than thirteen
(13) years of age shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint
system or a seat belt. (1987 Code § 15-554; amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
         a.   A nonresident driver transporting a child in this state;
         b.   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
         c.   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
         d.   A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are
in use; and
         e.   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable
to be placed in such devices.
      4.   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if
it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
subsection and give an oral warning to said driver. The warning shall advise
the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to
install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor
vehicle. A person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall not be
subject to any criminal penalty. A violation of the provisions of this
subsection shall not be admissible as evidence in any civil action or
proceeding for damages. In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for
personal injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the
failure of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with
the provisions of this subsection shall not be used in aggravation or
mitigation of damages. (1987 Code § 15-554)
   C.   Routine Stops Allowed; Fine For Violation:
      1.   Law enforcement officers may make routine traffic stops of motorists
for the purpose of enforcing subsection A1 of this section. Any person
convicted of violating subsection A1 of this section may be punished by a fine
as set by resolution of the city council.
      2.   The state department of public safety shall not record or assess
points for violations of this section on any license holder's traffic record
maintained by said department of public safety. (2004 Code)
6-2-19: CELLULAR TELEPHONES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial motor
vehicle or for a public transit driver to operate a motor vehicle on any street
or highway within this state while:
      1.   Using a cellular telephone or electronic communication device to
write, send, or read a text based communication; or
      2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone while operating a commercial motor
vehicle.
For the purposes of subsections A1 and A2 of this section, using a handheld
mobile telephone is permissible by drivers of a commercial motor vehicle when
necessary to communicate with law enforcement officials or other emergency
services.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
   C.   The terms, definitions, exceptions and interpretations of this section
shall be the same as provided by state law 1  as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2015-16, 11-19-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-901c.
6-2-20: TEXTING:
Except as stated in section
6-2-19 of this chapter:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any
street or highway within this state while using a handheld electronic
communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text
message while the motor vehicle is in motion.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
   C.   The terms, definitions, exceptions and interpretations of this section
shall be the same as provided by state law 1  as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2015-15, 11-19-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-901d.
CHAPTER 3
SPEED REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Speed Limits Generally; Exceptions
6-3-2: School Zones
6-3-3: Basic Rule
6-3-4: Minimum Speed
6-3-5: Compliance With Posted Speeds
6-3-1: SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Compliance; Exceptions: No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed
per hour than that provided in this chapter upon any street or highway within
the city, except:
      1.   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this title;
      2.   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
      3.   When a different speed limit is established in this title.
   B.   Council Authority; Posting Signs: The city council, by motion or
resolution, may reduce or increase the speed limits provided in this title, and
when it does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of
streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit.
   C.   Maximum Limits Designated: Except when a special hazard exists that
requires lower speed for compliance with subsection A of this section, the
limits specified in this chapter or established as hereinafter authorized shall
be maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a
speed in excess of such maximum limits, as follows:
      1.   Miles per hour as posted on any street adjacent to any school during
the times posted when school is in session;
      2.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour in Janet Lane addition in the city;
and
      3.   Thirty five (35) miles per hour on other streets and on streets
adjacent to schools at other times than that specified immediately above;
provided, that the city council, by motion or resolution, may reduce or
increase this speed limit, and when it does so, appropriate signs shall be
placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed
limit. (1987 Code § 15-401)
6-3-2: SCHOOL ZONES:
   A.   No motor vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted
between the posted hours on any street in a designated school zone on days when
school is in session, unless a different speed limit or time is otherwise
designated and posted.
   B.   Speed limits in school zones shall be in effect during the hours of
seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. when school is in
session.
   C.   Designated school zones:
      1.   Fourth Street from Oklahoma Street to Park Street.
      2.   Park Street from Fourth Street to Sixth Street.
      3.   Sixth Street from Park Street north to Oklahoma Street.
      4.   Oklahoma Street from Fourth Street, west to Eighth Street.
      5.   Eighth Street from Oklahoma Street, south to Seikel Boulevard.
      6.   Seikel Boulevard from Eighth Street, west to Arena Road.
      7.   Such other streets as shall be designated by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 2005-10, 11-10-2005)
6-3-3: BASIC RULE:
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable
or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into consideration, among
other things, the conditions of the vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or
width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or near
the roadways, and the obstruction of view. No person shall drive any vehicle at
a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured
clear distance ahead. (1987 Code § 15-403)
6-3-4: MINIMUM SPEED:
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to
the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere
with the normal movement of other traffic, except when the slow speed is
unavoidable. (1987 Code § 15-404)
6-3-5: COMPLIANCE WITH POSTED SPEEDS:
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed
limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess
of the maximum nor slower than the minimum, except as required by an authorized
officer or in obedience to posted official signs. (1987 Code § 15-405)
CHAPTER 4
DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
SECTION:
6-4-1: Changing Lanes; Marking Lanes
6-4-2: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway
6-4-3: When Overtaking On Right Permitted
6-4-4: Overtaking Vehicle On Left
6-4-5: Limitations On Overtaking On Left; Exception
6-4-6: Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions
6-4-7: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
6-4-8: Following Too Closely
6-4-9: No Passing Zones
6-4-10: Funeral And Other Processions; Parades
6-4-11: School Zones; School Bus Regulations
6-4-12: Driving On Sidewalks; Safety Zones
6-4-13: Limitations On Backing Vehicle
6-4-14: Clinging To Vehicles
6-4-15: Entering, Leaving Controlled Access Highways
6-4-16: Reckless Driving
6-4-17: Negligent Or Careless Driving
6-4-18: Driving In Careful And Prudent Manner
6-4-19: Driving While Under Influence Of Liquor Or Drugs
6-4-20: Attention To Driving Required
6-4-21: Speed Contests
6-4-22: Starting Parked Vehicle
6-4-23: Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors
6-4-24: Obstructing Driver's View
6-4-25: Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicle
6-4-26: Unlawful Riding
6-4-27: Private Service Drives
6-4-28: Approaching Or Entering Intersection
6-4-29: Turning Left At Intersection
6-4-30: Approaching Yield Right Of Way Sign
6-4-31: Entering Through Highway
6-4-32: Facing Traffic Signals
6-4-33: Stop And Through Streets, Intersections
6-4-34: Entering Highway From Private Road Or Driveway
6-4-35: Entering Traffic From Parking
6-4-36: Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building
6-4-37: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
6-4-38: Failure To Dim Lights To Oncoming Traffic
6-4-39: Jake Brakes
6-4-1: CHANGING LANES; MARKING LANES:
   A.   Marked Traffic Lanes: Whenever any roadway has been divided into two
(2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules
consistent with this subsection, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane
until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety and has signaled for a change of course.
   B.   Unmarked Traffic Lanes: Where streets or roadways do not have marked
traffic lanes, vehicles shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight
course as nearly as practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side
to side unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as
necessary in slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving
vehicles or making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled
for a change of course.
   C.   Three Lane Roadways: Upon a roadway which has been divided into three
(3) lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and
such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation
for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively
to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted
to give notice of such allocation.
   D.   Slow Moving Traffic: Official signs may be erected directing slow
moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used
by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway. Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(1987 Code § 15-501)
6-4-2: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
   A.   Driving On Right; Exceptions: Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a
vehicle shall be driven to the right of the center of the roadway, except as
follows:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      2.   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      3.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      4.   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   B.   Divided Roadways: All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all
streets or highways which are divided into two (2) roadways.
   C.   Slow Moving Vehicles: Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less
than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions
then existing shall be driven in the right hand lane then available for
traffic, or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the
roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway. (1987 Code § 15-502)
6-4-3: WHEN OVERTAKING ON RIGHT PERMITTED:
   A.   Conditions For Overtaking On Right: The driver of a vehicle may
overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following
conditions:
      1.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      2.   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction; or
      3.   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
   B.   Driving Safely: The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in
safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or
main traveled portion of the roadway. (1987 Code § 15-503)
6-4-4: OVERTAKING VEHICLE ON LEFT:
   A.   Passing At Safe Distance: The driver of a vehicle overtaking another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a
safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the street or
roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
   B.   Overtaken Vehicle: Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1987
Code § 15-504)
6-4-5: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON LEFT; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
      2.   In every instance, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right
hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
   B.   Prohibitive Conditions: No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the
left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
      1.   When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the street
or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed;
or
      2.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel or when approaching within fifty feet (50') of or traversing
any intersection or railroad grade crossing. (1987 Code § 15-505)
6-4-6: PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right. Upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (1987 Code §
15-506)
6-4-7: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:
   A.   Designation By Council: The city council, by motion or resolution, may
designate any road, street, alley, or highway, or any separate roadway under
their jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause appropriate signs giving
notice thereof to be erected.
   B.   Sign Posting Required: Whenever the city personnel designates any
street or alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley, the city
personnel shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no
such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   C.   Compliance With Signs: Upon those streets and parts of streets and in
those alleys and parts of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   D.   Driving In Designated Direction: Upon roadways designated and
signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction
designated.
   E.   Rotary Traffic Islands: A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic
island shall be driven only to the right of such island. (1987 Code § 15-507)
6-4-8: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle
and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. (1987 Code § 15-508)
6-4-9: NO PASSING ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Determine: The state department of highways, as regards
state and federal highways, and the city personnel, as regards all other
streets, are hereby authorized to determine those portions of any highway where
overtaking and passing to the left would be especially hazardous, and may, by
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of
such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an
ordinarily observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
(1987 Code § 15-509; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Compliance Required: Where signs or markings are in place to define a
no passing zone as set forth in subsection A of this section, no driver shall
at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within the no passing zone or
on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark the no passing zone
throughout its length. (1987 Code § 15-509)
6-4-10: FUNERAL AND OTHER PROCESSIONS; PARADES:
   A.   Driving Through Procession: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in
this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (1987 Code § 15-510)
   B.   Drivers In Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and
shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (1987 Code §
15-511)
   C.   Identification: A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of such
identifying insignia as may be determined and designated by the police
department. (1987 Code § 15-512)
   D.   Permit Required For Certain Parades And Processions: No funeral,
procession, or parade containing forty eight (48) or more persons or twelve
(12) or more vehicles, except the military forces of the United States and the
military forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any
street, except as permitted by the chief of police and such other regulations
as are set forth herein which may apply. (1987 Code § 15-530)
6-4-11: SCHOOL ZONES; SCHOOL BUS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Overtaking, Passing In School Zones:
      1.   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in
motion and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on all days
when schools are in session.
      2.   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the
right half of the roadway has been divided into two (2) or more lanes, or on
one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being
driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane
movement. (1987 Code § 15-513)
   B.   Overtaking And Passing School Bus:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is
stopped to take on or discharge schoolchildren, and on which the red loading
signals are in operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school
bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed
past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for
the safety of such schoolchildren and other occupants. The red loading visual
signals shall be activated by the driver of the school bus whenever, and only
whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the street or highway for the purpose of
receiving or discharging schoolchildren.
      2.   The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with separate
roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a
different roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus
is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of, or adjacent to, such highway
and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
      3.   Occupants of the school bus shall have the right of way when
crossing the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus. (1987 Code § 15-
514)
   C.   School Bus Requirements; Color And Equipment:
      1.   The provisions of subsection B of this section shall be applicable
only if the school bus is painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear
thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not
less than eight inches (8") in height which can be removed or covered when the
vehicle is not in use as a school bus.
      2.   The school bus shall be equipped with four (4) red alternately
flashing warning signal lights, two (2) of which shall be located high on the
front and two (2) high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a
minimum of four inches (4") in diameter and shall be widely separated. (1987
Code § 15-515)
6-4-12: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS; SAFETY ZONES:
   A.   Sidewalks: No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any
sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (1987 Code § 15-
516)
   B.   Safety Zones: No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within
a safety zone or island. (1987 Code § 15-531)
6-4-13: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic. No
vehicle shall be backed into an intersection. (1987 Code § 15-517)
6-4-14: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboards, sled,
or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a
roadway. (1987 Code § 15-521; amd. 2004 Code)
6-4-15: ENTERING, LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access highway,
except at entrances and exits established by public authority. (1987 Code § 15-
522)
6-4-16: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle or animal:
   A.   In a manner which would be reasonably calculated to endanger the
rights, lives or property of others;
   B.   Which is without due caution or circumspection;
   C.   Which is at a careless, heedless or dangerous rate of speed; or
   D.   In such a manner as to cause the vehicle to be out of control of the
operator;
is guilty of reckless driving. (1987 Code § 15-523)
6-4-17: NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
   A.   Negligent Or Careless Driving: The driver of any vehicle shall not
drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked or stop any vehicle:
      1.   In a careless manner;
      2.   In a negligent manner;
      3.   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property;
      4.   In such a manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic
or use of the streets; or
      5.   In such a condition as to endanger or interfere with the lawful
traffic or use of the streets.
   B.   Violation Of Rules: Any person who violates any of the following rules
is guilty of careless driving:
      1.   Every driver shall operate his vehicle at a speed reasonable and
proper for existing conditions, and in no event in excess of the posted speed
limit.
      2.   Every driver shall remain alert and give full attention to the safe
operation of his vehicle while it is in motion.
      3.   No driver shall engage in any activity while driving that interferes
with the safe control of his vehicle.
      4.   No person shall engage in any activity or do any act which
interferes with a driver's safe operation of a vehicle. (1987 Code § 15-524)
6-4-18: DRIVING IN CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER:
Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in a
careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater than,
nor less than, is reasonable and proper, having due regard for the traffic,
surface, and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing.
(1987 Code § 15-525)
6-4-19: DRIVING WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
   A.   Drugs:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or be in actual
physical control of any motor vehicle upon any street or highway who is a
habitual user of, or who is under the influence of, any substance included in
the uniform controlled dangerous substance act 1  or who is under the influence
of any drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a motor
vehicle within the city. The fact that any person charged with a violation of
this provision is or has been lawfully entitled to use such controlled
substance shall not constitute a defense.
      2.   Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 15-526)
   B.   Liquor:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating drugs or liquor to drive, operate or be in actual physical control
of any motor vehicle upon a street or highway in the city.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle while his
ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of
alcohol.
      3.   Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 15-527)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 2-101 et seq.
6-4-20: ATTENTION TO DRIVING REQUIRED:
The operator of every vehicle, while driving, shall devote his full time and
attention to such driving. (1987 Code § 15-528)
6-4-21: SPEED CONTESTS:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle
speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
   B.   Barricades Or Obstructions: No person shall, for the purpose of
facilitating or aiding or as an incident to any motor vehicle speed contest
upon any street or highway, in any manner obstruct or place any barricade or
obstruction upon any street or highway.
   C.   Offenses: When three (3) or more persons assemble to witness or
participate in an unlawful speed contest, such assembly is unlawful assembly
and any person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an
offense. (1987 Code § 15-529)
6-4-22: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1987 Code § 15-
532)
6-4-23: OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers. (1987 Code § 15-533)
6-4-24: OBSTRUCTING DRIVER'S VIEW:
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1987 Code § 15-534)
6-4-25: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE:
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion. (1987 Code § 15-535)
6-4-26: UNLAWFUL RIDING:
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (1987 Code § 15-536)
6-4-27: PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES 1 :
No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area, except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise. (1987 Code § 15-537)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-5-10 of this title.
6-4-28: APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION:
   A.   When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection
from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the
vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right;
however, the driver of vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal
highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop
and yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or
which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   B.   The right of way rule declared in subsection A of this section is
modified at through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter. (1987 Code §
15-540)
6-4-29: TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION:
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this title, the driver may make the left turn, and the drivers of
all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction
shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn. (1987 Code §
15-541)
6-4-30: APPROACHING YIELD RIGHT OF WAY SIGN:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a "Yield Right Of Way" sign shall slow to a
reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding
the right of way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which
have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. (1987 Code § 15-542)
6-4-31: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY:
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this title at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (1987 Code § 15-543)
6-4-32: FACING TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or
signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the intersection at
the same time, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   If each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right
shall have the right of way.
   B.   If each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right
shall have the right of way.
   C.   If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from
the right shall have the right of way.
   D.   If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the
one required to take caution shall have the right of way.
   E.   In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection
shall have the right of way over one which has not entered the intersection.
(1987 Code § 15-544)
6-4-33: STOP AND THROUGH STREETS, INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Through Streets:
      1.   The city council may designate any street or part of a street a
through street.
      2.   Whenever the city council designates and describes a through street,
a stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and
maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that
portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times
by traffic control signals.
      3.   At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the
intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated,
stop signs may be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as
determined by the city personnel. (1987 Code § 15-545)
   B.   Determination Of Intersections: The city council, by motion or
resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon
other than through streets where particular hazards exist and to determine
whether:
      1.   Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place a stop is required; or
      2.   Vehicles shall yield the right of way to vehicles on a different
street as provided in this title, in which event it shall cause to be erected a
yield sign at every place where yield is required. (1987 Code § 15-546)
   C.   Sign Construction And Placement: Every stop or yield sign erected
pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word "Stop" or "Yield" in letters not
less than eight inches (8") in height for a stop sign and not less than seven
inches (7") in height for a yield sign. Every stop or yield sign shall at night
be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, by a fixed
floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting
elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or yield sign shall be located as
close as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then the sign shall be located
at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. (1987 Code § 15-547)
   D.   Entering Stop Intersection: Except when directed by a police officer or
traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. In the event there is no
crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line before entering
the intersection. If there is no marked stop line, then the driver shall stop
at the point nearest the intersecting road where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. A driver after having stopped shall yield the right of way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or road, or
which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard; but the driver
having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield the right of way to the vehicle so
proceeding. (1987 Code § 15-548)
   E.   Entering Yield Intersection: The driver of a vehicle approaching a
yield sign shall, in observance to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable
for the existing condition or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right
of way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving
and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another road so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may
then proceed, and drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection
shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding. A driver who enters a yield
intersection without stopping and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian
at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be considered
not to have yielded as required herein. The provisions of this subsection shall
not release the drivers of other vehicles approaching the intersection at such
a distance as not to constitute immediate hazard from the duty to drive with
due care to avoid a collision. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign
if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection before entering the intersection; if there is no
crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if there is
no stop line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (1987
Code § 15-549)
6-4-34: ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a
private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway. (1987 Code § 15-550)
6-4-35: ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING:
Any vehicle attempting to reenter traffic while parked at the curb shall yield
the right of way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear.
The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver
has given the appropriate signal which indicates his intention of turning from
the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the
line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists. (1987
Code § 15-551)
6-4-36: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway. (1987 Code § 15-552)
6-4-37: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (1987 Code § 15-553)
6-4-38: FAILURE TO DIM LIGHTS TO ONCOMING TRAFFIC:
   A.   Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within
five hundred feet (500'), such driver shall use a distribution of light, or
composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes
of the oncoming driver. The lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam,
specified in paragraph 1 of section 12-203.2, title 47, motor vehicles, shall
be deemed to avoid glare at all times, regardless of road contour and loading.
   B.   Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within two
hundred feet (200') to the rear, except when engaged in the act of overtaking
and passing, such driver shall use a distribution of light permissible under
paragraph 1, section 12-203.2, title 47, motor vehicles, other than the
uppermost distribution of light specified in subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 2004-11, 5-27-2004, eff. 5-27-2004)
6-4-39: JAKE BRAKES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a commercial or other
diesel vehicle within the city of McLoud to use a compression release engine
braking or similar system, commonly referred to as jake brakes, to slow or stop
the vehicle.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2015-17, 11-19-2015)
CHAPTER 5
TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Turning Markers Or Indicators
6-5-2: Designation Of Restricted Turns
6-5-3: Obedience To No Turn Signs
6-5-4: U-Turns
6-5-5: Turning Across Roadway To Park On Opposite Side
6-5-6: Position And Method Of Turning
6-5-7: Turning Movements And Required Signals
6-5-8: Giving Turn Signals
6-5-9: Turns Into Or From Alleys
6-5-10: Using Private Property To Avoid Street Or Traffic Device
6-5-1: TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS:
   A.   City Council Authority: The city council, by motion or resolution, is
authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to, or
be other than as prescribed by, law.
   B.   Compliance By Drivers: When authorized markers, buttons, or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indications. (1987 Code § 15-901)
6-5-2: DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS:
The city council is hereby authorized to determine those street intersections
at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns and shall
have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of the turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. Where
turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section, the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are
permitted. (1987 Code § 15-902)
6-5-3: OBEDIENCE TO NO TURN SIGNS:
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn
is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any
such sign. (1987 Code § 15-903)
6-5-4: U-TURNS:
   A.   Prohibited Places: The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle
so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city at the
following locations:
      1.   At intersections controlled by traffic control devices or signals
unless such turns are specifically authorized;
      2.   Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter's
direction; or
      3.   At any other location where an official "No-U-Turn" sign has been
placed and is maintained.
   B.   Manner Of Making U-Turns: When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be
made only when it can be made in safety and without interfering with other
traffic. No person shall make a U-turn except in the following manner:
      1.   By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right
curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal
for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn across
the intersection;
      2.   In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle;
      3.   By yielding the right of way at all times to all vehicles until such
turn is completed; and
      4.   Without constituting a hazard to, or interfering with, any other
vehicle. (1987 Code § 15-904)
6-5-5: TURNING ACROSS ROADWAY TO PARK ON OPPOSITE SIDE:
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to turn across the center of any
roadway, except at an intersection, for the purpose of parking the vehicle in
or on a street parking place on the opposite side of the road, street or
highway. (1987 Code § 15-905)
6-5-6: POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
   A.   Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
   B.   Left Turns On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the centerline
where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
   C.   Left Turns, On Other Than Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearby as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered. (1987 Code § 15-906)
6-5-7: TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS:
   A.   Proper Position: No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection
unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in
section
6-5-6 of this chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway,
or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
   B.   Signal Intention To Turn: A signal of intention to turn right or left,
slow or stop when required, shall be given continuously during not less than
the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning or
stopping.
   C.   Stop Or Decrease Speed: No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the
speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner
provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there
is opportunity to give the signal. (1987 Code § 15-907)
6-5-8: GIVING TURN SIGNALS:
   A.   Means Of Giving Turn Signals:
      1.   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either
by means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of
a type approved by the state highway commission, except as provided in
subsection A2 of this section. (1987 Code § 15-908; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by,
signal lamps or devices when:
         a.   The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects
twenty four inches (24") or more to the left of the center of the steering
wheel;
         b.   Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be
visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or
         c.   The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any
vehicle projects fourteen feet (14') or more beyond the center top of the
steering post. (1987 Code § 15-908)
   B.   Method Of Giving Hand And Arm Signals: All signals herein required
given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally;
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; and
      3.   Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear. (1987 Code § 15-909)
6-5-9: TURNS INTO OR FROM ALLEYS:
   A.   Left Turns:
      1.   No vehicle shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of
an alley, except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall
cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any
alley, except as provided in subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic
survey conducted by the traffic engineer shows that such turn may be made
safely and official signs are erected authorizing such turns.
   B.   Exceptions: The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to
bus terminals used by licensed and authorized bus lines. (1987 Code § 15-910)
6-5-10: USING PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID STREET OR TRAFFIC DEVICE 1 :
No person operating a motor vehicle shall drive through a commercial driveway,
commercial or municipal parking lot or any other private property for the
purpose of making a turnaround or for the purpose of avoiding the use of a
street or obedience to a traffic control device, except when authorized to do
so by police officers. (1987 Code § 15-911)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-4-27 of this title.
CHAPTER 6
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
6-6-1: Illegal Parking Declared Public Nuisance
6-6-2: Application Of Regulations
6-6-3: Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-6-4: Handicapped Parking
6-6-5: Authority To Establish Parking Time Limits
6-6-6: Seventy Two Hour Time Limit
6-6-7: Setting Brakes; Motor Turned Off
6-6-8: Angle Parking
6-6-9: Parallel Parking
6-6-10: Parking Within Marked Spaces
6-6-11: Permit For Loading, Unloading At Angle
6-6-12: Hazardous Or Congested Places
6-6-13: Blocking Intersection Or Crosswalk
6-6-14: One-Way Streets, Roadways
6-6-15: Adjacent To Schools
6-6-16: Parking Prohibited At Intersections
6-6-17: Blocking Streets, Driveways
6-6-18: Entry On Private Property; Trespass
6-6-19: Double Parking
6-6-20: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
6-6-21: Negligent Parking
6-6-1: ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter governing,
limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or
public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and
each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such violation
shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such
vehicle. (1987 Code § 15-701)
6-6-2: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary for
a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. (1987
Code § 15-702)
6-6-3: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Places Enumerated: No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
except in emergencies or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control
device in any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the
street;
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, except in a parking
space officially marked;
      5.   On a crosswalk;
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      7.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length has been indicated by signs or markings;
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance when properly signposted;
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street; (1987 Code § 15-711)
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway underpass; (1987 Code § 15-711; amd. 2004 Code)
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
      15.   On Main Street in the business district where a left or right turn
is made across a lane of traffic to park on the opposite side of the street.
Left or right turns are lawful only at intersections of streets or alleys; or
(1987 Code § 15-711)
      16.   On the shoulder, or within fifteen feet (15') of the edge or curb
of the pavement of any state or federally designated highway, except for
parking in marked or other designated parking places within commercial zoned
districts. (Ord. 2008-01, 2-28-2008)
   B.   Prohibition: No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his
control into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb.
(1987 Code § 15-711)
6-6-4: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
   A.   Parking In Handicapped Area: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space on private property
accessible to the public and where the public is invited or public property
that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles
of a physically disabled person unless such person has a physical disability
insignia as under the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 15-112, and
such insignia is displayed as provided in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 15-112
or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 15-726)
6-6-5: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PARKING TIME LIMITS:
The city council, by motion or resolution, may establish parking time limits or
prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have appropriate
signs placed on the streets. When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for
any person to park a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such time limits
shall be effective unless a sign is erected and in place at the time of the
alleged violation. (1987 Code § 15-703)
6-6-6: SEVENTY TWO HOUR TIME LIMIT 1 :
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than
seventy two (72) hours. This section shall not affect parking limits
established for shorter periods. (1987 Code § 15-704)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-12-10 of this title.
6-6-7: SETTING BRAKES; MOTOR TURNED OFF:
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. (1987 Code
§ 15-705)
6-6-8: ANGLE PARKING:
   A.   Council Determination: The city council, by motion or resolution, shall
determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be
permitted, and shall have such streets marked or signed. (1987 Code § 15-706)
   B.   Obedience To Signs Or Markings: On those streets which have been so
signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such
signs or markings. (1987 Code § 15-707)
6-6-9: PARALLEL PARKING:
   A.   Distance From Curb: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall
be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to,
and within eighteen inches (18") of, the right hand curb. Any vehicle stopped
or parked upon the left hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent
curbs shall be parked or stopped with the left hand wheels parallel to, and
within eighteen inches (18") of, the left hand curb. (1987 Code § 15-723)
   B.   Right Of Way To Parallel Parking Space:
      1.   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking
space where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by
another vehicle shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until
the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be
deemed to have the right of way to such parking space over any other vehicle
attempting to park therein.
      2.   The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of
an unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy shall be deemed to have the right of way to such parking space. (1987
Code § 15-725)
6-6-10: PARKING WITHIN MARKED SPACES:
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. (1987 Code § 15-708)
6-6-11: PERMIT FOR LOADING, UNLOADING AT ANGLE:
   A.   Special Permit Issuance: The city personnel is authorized to issue
special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose
of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and
conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or
lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such
person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The city
personnel may revoke such permits at any time.
   B.   Compliance With Terms Of Permit: It is unlawful for any permittee or
other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such
permit. (1987 Code § 15-709)
6-6-12: HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
   A.   City Determination: The city personnel is hereby authorized to
determine and regulate by proper signs the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would create an especially
hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
   B.   Compliance With Signs: When official signs are erected at hazardous or
congested places, as authorized in subsection A of this section, no person
shall violate such signs. (1987 Code § 15-710)
6-6-13: BLOCKING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed. (1987 Code § 15-712)
6-6-14: ONE-WAY STREETS, ROADWAYS:
   A.   One-Way Roadways:
      1.   If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
      2.   The city council may determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof. (1987 Code § 15-713)
   B.   Left Side Of One-Way Streets: The city personnel may have signs erected
upon the left hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or
parking of vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park
a vehicle in violation of any such signs. (1987 Code § 15-714)
6-6-15: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   City Determination: The city personnel may have signs erected
indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any
school property when such parking would, in their opinion, interfere with
traffic or create a hazardous situation.
   B.   Compliance With Signs: No person shall park a vehicle in violation of
any such signs. (1987 Code § 15-715)
6-6-16: PARKING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS:
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be prohibited
fifteen feet (15') in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection. (1987 Code § 15-716)
6-6-17: BLOCKING STREETS, DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position
as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1987 Code § 15-717)
6-6-18: ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; TRESPASS 1 :
   A.   Consent Required: No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon
real property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or
occupant's consent, except where such private property is provided as public
parking and the general use of the property is not restricted by signs or
proper markings.
   B.   Complaint By Owner: Where entry is made upon real property owned or
legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent, except
on unrestricted public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal
occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to
show that permission for such entry was given.
   C.   Posting Of Property By Property Owner: A property owner may clearly and
conspicuously designate by sign that parking on the property is prohibited, or
that parking is prohibited at specified times, and it is unlawful for any
operator of a vehicle to park such vehicle at any place or any time thus
prohibited. (1987 Code § 15-718)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-12-9 of this title.
6-6-19: DOUBLE PARKING:
   A.   Prohibitive Conditions: No driver shall double park or double stop a
vehicle under the following conditions:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of an intersection, except alley
intersections, or within ten feet (10') of an alley intersection;
      2.   Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the
street;
      3.   When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or
interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic;
      4.   When parking space adjacent to the curb is available;
      5.   When directed by a police officer to move on; or
      6.   In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two feet
(2') of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb.
   B.   Driver Requirements: A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle
only as authorized in this section. There must be a licensed driver in any
vehicle while it is double parked or double stopped.
   C.   Loading Or Unloading Passengers: A driver may double stop for the
purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers, subject, however, to all the general conditions
hereinabove set out.
   D.   Loading Or Unloading Merchandise: A driver may double park for the
purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or
unloading of merchandise, subject, however, to all the general conditions
hereinabove set out. No such vehicle shall be double parked longer than ten
(10) minutes. (1987 Code § 15-720)
6-6-20: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
   A.   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   B.   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things; or
   C.   Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1987 Code § 15-722)
6-6-21: NEGLIGENT PARKING:
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any vehicle
as follows:
   A.   In a careless or negligent manner;
   B.   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or
   C.   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or
use of the streets. (1987 Code § 15-724)
CHAPTER 7
LOADING ZONES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Curb Loading Zones, Designation
6-7-3: Zones Used Only For Designated Purpose
6-7-4: Parking In Loading Zones
6-7-5: Public Carrier Stops And Stands, Designation
6-7-6: Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands Restricted
6-7-7: Parking Of Buses And Taxicabs
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE:
   A.   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner or
his business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used during normal
business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight and
which bears a regular state commercial license tag; and
   B.   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during normal
business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight, and
which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear of
the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued to the vehicle.
FREIGHT LOADING ZONES: All curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade,
shipment or resale.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONES: All loading zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers, except bus stops,
taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles. (1987
Code § 15-801)
6-7-2: CURB LOADING ZONES, DESIGNATION:
   A.   Designation Of Zones: The city personnel, subject to any directions
given by the city council by motion or resolution, may determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and
maintained appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable.
   B.   Compliance With Signs: No person shall stand or park a vehicle in
violation of signs erected in accordance with this section.
   C.   Request For Zone; Costs To Applicant: If any loading zone is
established on request of any person, the signs shall not be placed until the
applicant pays to the city an amount of money estimated by the city council to
be adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the
same. (1987 Code § 15-802)
6-7-3: ZONES USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE:
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be
used as a passenger loading zone, except as may be specifically provided by
law. (1987 Code § 15-803)
6-7-4: PARKING IN LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Passenger Curb Loading Zones: No person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or period of time
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the
hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective,
and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. (1987 Code § 15-
804)
   B.   Freight Curb Loading Zones:
      1.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb
loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials during hours when
the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the
stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing
requirements and regulations provided by this chapter.
      2.   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone. (1987
Code § 15-805)
6-7-5: PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS, DESIGNATION:
The city personnel may establish loading zones for common carriers, including,
but not limited to, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places
and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by
appropriate signs. (1987 Code § 15-806)
6-7-6: USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop,
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and
while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter
the zone. (1987 Code § 15-807)
6-7-7: PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS:
   A.   Buses:
      1.   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
      2.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage,
except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided herein,
except in case of an emergency.
      3.   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or
passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with
the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches (18")
from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to
unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
   B.   Taxicabs: The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. (1987 Code § 15-808)
CHAPTER 8
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Authority To Install Devices
6-8-2: Uniform Requirements
6-8-3: Obedience To Official Devices
6-8-4: When Required For Enforcement Purposes
6-8-5: Traffic Control Signal Legend
6-8-6: Flashing Signals
6-8-7: Unauthorized Devices Prohibited
6-8-8: Defacement Of Devices
6-8-9: Play Streets
6-8-10: Crosswalks And Safety Zones, Designation
6-8-11: Traffic Lanes
6-8-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL DEVICES:
The city council, by motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained
traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the
traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such
ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic control
signs, signals, and devices as they may deem necessary to regulate traffic
under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn
traffic. (1987 Code § 15-601)
6-8-2: UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conformance With State Manual: All traffic control signs, signals, and
devices shall conform to the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
approved by the state highway commission. (1987 Code § 15-602; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Uniformity Of Signs: All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder
for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and
relative location throughout the city. All traffic control devices erected and
not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be
official traffic control devices. (1987 Code § 15-602)
6-8-3: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject
to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
title. (1987 Code § 15-603)
6-8-4: WHEN REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES:
No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a
particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (1987 Code § 15-604)
6-8-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and require the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians:
   A.   Green Alone, "Go":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right of way over such vehicular traffic; and
      2.   Pedestrian traffic facing a green signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a "walk" signal
indicator is operating.
   B.   Steady Yellow Or Amber Alone, "Caution":
      1.   The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the "red" or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter; and
      2.   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the "caution" signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the "red" signal flashes.
   C.   Red Alone, "Stop":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right
traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right of
way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall
be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green
signal indication on the cross street; and
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
"go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "walk" signal.
   D.   Steady Red With Green Arrow:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic lane
may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by
the arrow, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement
indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only
on the red with green arrow signal; and
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "walk"
signal.
   E.   Green Arrows Alone: Whenever vehicular traffic movements are controlled
by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal indication,
vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by the green
arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed. (1987 Code § 15-605)
6-8-6: FLASHING SIGNALS:
   A.   Red And Yellow Signals: Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is
illuminated, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      1.   Flashing Red: When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and
      2.   Flashing Yellow: When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   B.   Exception: This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(1987 Code § 15-606)
6-8-7: UNAUTHORIZED DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Placement: No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view
of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports
to be, or is an imitation of or resembles, an official traffic control device
or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   Commercial Advertising: No person shall place or maintain nor shall any
public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
   C.   Directional Information Allowed: This section shall not prohibit the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information which are of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.
   D.   Removal: Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device may be
removed without notice. (1987 Code § 15-607)
6-8-8: DEFACEMENT OF DEVICES:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or
in fact alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down,
remove or have in his possession any traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal or an inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.
   B.   Exempted Persons: This chapter shall not apply to any of the following
persons when acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      1.   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any governmental agency; or
      2.   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company. (1987 Code § 15-
608)
6-8-9: PLAY STREETS:
   A.   Authority To Establish: The city council shall have authority to
declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate
signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
(1987 Code § 15-609)
   B.   Use Restricted: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business
or whose residences are within such closed area; and then any such driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(1987 Code § 15-610)
6-8-10: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES, DESIGNATION:
The city council may:
   A.   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in the opinion of
the council, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as it may deem necessary; and
   B.   Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1987
Code § 15-611)
6-8-11: TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   Marking Lanes: The city council may have traffic lanes marked upon the
roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   B.   Driving Within Marked Lanes: Where such traffic lanes have been marked,
it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise
authorized by ordinance. (1987 Code § 15-612)
CHAPTER 9
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION; TRUCK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-9-1: Vehicles Injurious To Streets
6-9-2: Obstructive And Dangerous Vehicles
6-9-3: Equipment
6-9-4: Mufflers, Cutouts
6-9-5: Size And Load
6-9-6: Truck Routes Established; Truck Regulations
6-9-1: VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS:
No vehicle or object which injures, or is likely to injure, the surface of a
street shall be driven or moved on any street. (1987 Code § 15-301)
6-9-2: OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so
loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. (1987 Code §
15-302)
6-9-3: EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped
as required by law.
   B.   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city which is
not equipped as required by law.
   C.   It is unlawful to fail to use such equipment in the manner required by
law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by law.
   D.   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by
law upon a street of the city. (1987 Code § 15-303)
6-9-4: MUFFLERS, CUTOUTS:
No motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within
the city unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and
sufficient muffler. No muffler cutout or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be
used on any motor vehicle while operating within the city, except that exhaust
whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles. (1987 Code § 15-304)
6-9-5: SIZE AND LOAD:
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
length, height, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the chief of
police. (1987 Code § 15-305)
6-9-6: TRUCK ROUTES ESTABLISHED; TRUCK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Truck Routes; Establishment And Use: The city council may prescribe
routes through the city for the use of trucks in general, trucks of particular
kinds or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles,
passing through the city. Appropriate and adequate signs shall be placed along
such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such
signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for
which a route has been prescribed, as provided above, while passing through the
city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom, except in case
of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as
practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city.
   B.   Prohibition On 89th Street: Vehicles required by state law to be
licensed for fifteen (15) tons' capacity or over shall be prohibited from using
all of 89th Street in the city. City personnel shall post signs on 89th Street
stating the fifteen (15) ton load limit. (1987 Code § 15-538)
   C.   Weight And Axle Limitations:
      1.   Vehicles Of Three Ton Capacity Prohibited; Exception: Vehicles
required by state statute to be licensed for three (3) ton capacity or over
shall be prohibited from using any of the public streets, except state and
federal highways, and places of the city for travel, except for the purpose of
making local deliveries. When it is necessary for vehicles of the class herein
described to travel to and from a location on any of the city's public streets
and places for purposes of loading and unloading merchandise at such location,
the route traveled shall be as short and direct as possible from and to the
most available, legally designated truck route or state or federal highway.
      2.   Vehicles With More Than Two Axles Prohibited; Exception: No person
shall operate any vehicle which has more than two (2) axles upon any street so
designated; provided, however, that vehicles with more than two (2) axles may
be operated on such streets for the purpose of delivering or picking up
materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street at the
intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding no further
than the nearest intersection thereafter. (Ord. 1991-07, 6-13-1991)
   D.   Load Capacity Violations; Penalty: Any common, contract, or private
motor carrier or any shipper, firm, corporation or other person who transports
a load having a capacity greater than the axle or gross weights authorized by
subsection C of this section, or who loads or causes or requires a vehicle to
be loaded to the capacity is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a punishment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1991-08, 6-13-1991; amd. 2004 Code)
   E.   Securing Or Covering Loads On Vehicles:
      1.   Dropping Or Shifting Load: No vehicle shall be driven or moved on
any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of
its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping
therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing
traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in
cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
      2.   Covering Load: No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle
with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so
as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any
manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand,
cinders, or other loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason
of wind shall have the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or
escaping of the load from the vehicle.
      3.   Livestock; Poultry: This subsection shall apply to trucks loaded
with livestock, poultry or agricultural products only, except baled
agricultural products; provided, that any such truck shall be so constructed or
loaded as to prevent such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. (1987
Code § 15-539)
   F.   Truck Parking:
      1.   Certain Vehicles Prohibited: It is unlawful and an offense for any
person to park any of the following vehicles which exceed a weight limit of one
ton on any street, right of way or alley in a residential area in the city:
         a.   Truck;
         b.   Bus;
         c.   Tractor;
         d.   Trailer longer than twelve feet (12');
         e.   Truck trailer, semitrailer, or combination of any of the above;
or
         f.   Semitrailer parked on a dolly. (1987 Code § 15-719)
      2.   Trucks Transporting Hazardous Materials: It is unlawful to park,
store or otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle which is used for the
purpose of transporting or delivering flammable and combustible liquids as
defined by the fire prevention code of the American Insurance Association and
trucks or other vehicles which are used for the transportation and delivery of
liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the city, except as otherwise
permitted by the city. (1987 Code § 15-721)
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-10-1: Subject To Traffic Control Signals
6-10-2: Crosswalks
6-10-3: Crossing At Right Angles
6-10-4: Yield By Pedestrians
6-10-5: Walking Along Roadways
6-10-6: Soliciting Vehicle Occupants
6-10-7: Drivers Exercise Due Care
6-10-8: Crossing Prohibited
6-10-9: Obedience To Railroad Crossing Signals
6-10-1: SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided for in this
title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be
subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. (1987 Code § 15-1001)
6-10-2: CROSSWALKS:
   A.   Right Of Way:
      1.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping,
if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when:
         a.   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
         b.   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge
of the roadway as to be in danger.
The provisions of this subsection are not applicable under conditions where
pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety
or walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
      3.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any
unmarked crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake or pass such stopped vehicle. (1987 Code § 15-1002)
   B.   Use Right Half Of Crosswalk: Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a
crosswalk, shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the
crosswalk. (1987 Code § 15-1003)
6-10-3: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
crosswalk. (1987 Code § 15-1004)
6-10-4: YIELD BY PEDESTRIANS:
   A.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   B.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   C.   The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian
crossings are prohibited. (1987 Code § 15-1005)
6-10-5: WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   A.   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   B.   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway, or
its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction,
and shall yield to approaching vehicles. (1987 Code § 15-1006)
6-10-6: SOLICITING VEHICLE OCCUPANTS:
No person shall:
   A.   Stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride, donations,
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle;
   B.   Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and
engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or
the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a
street;
   C.   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
   D.   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample,
souvenir or gift; or
   E.   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt
to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose.
(1987 Code § 15-1007)
6-10-7: DRIVERS EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person on the roadway. (1987 Code § 15-1008)
6-10-8: CROSSING PROHIBITED:
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the center
thereof, except in a crosswalk. (1987 Code § 15-1009)
6-10-9: OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD CROSSING SIGNALS:
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed. (1987 Code § 15-1010)
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES; MOTOR SCOOTERS
SECTION:
6-11-1: Application Of Provisions
6-11-2: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
6-11-3: Proper Riding On Bicycles
6-11-4: Riding On Roadways And Bicycle Paths
6-11-5: Speed; Age Restriction
6-11-6: Emerging From Alley Or Driveway
6-11-7: Carrying Articles
6-11-8: Parking
6-11-9: Riding On Sidewalks
6-11-10: Lamps And Equipment
6-11-11: Use Limits On Motorcycles, Motor Scooters, Bicycles
6-11-12: Motorcycle Equipment; Headgear
6-11-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Bicycle Regulations: The provisions of this chapter
shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public
way; or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated in this chapter. (1987 Code § 15-1101)
   B.   Application Of Traffic Laws To Bicycles: Every person riding a bicycle
upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state and the
traffic provisions of this title applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of
laws and ordinances which by their nature are inapplicable to such persons.
(1987 Code § 15-1102)
6-11-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to the pedestrians. (1987 Code § 15-1103)
6-11-3: PROPER RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   Ride Upon Seat: No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   B.   Carrying Passengers: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at
one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. (1987 Code §
15-1104)
6-11-4: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
   A.   Riding To Right Side Of Roadway: Every person operating a bicycle upon
a roadway shall ride as near to the right hand side of the roadway as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle
proceeding in the same direction.
   B.   Riding Two Abreast: Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not
ride more than two (2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   C.   Use Of Bicycle Paths: If usable paths for bicycles are provided
adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use
the roadway. (1987 Code § 15-1105)
6-11-5: SPEED; AGE RESTRICTION:
   A.   Basic Rule: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (1987 Code § 15-
1106)
   B.   Motorcycles And Motor Scooters: No person shall operate any motorcycle
or any motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted. In
no event nor at any time may an operator under the age of sixteen (16) years
operate a motorcycle or motor scooter, including a motor driven bicycle, at a
speed greater than thirty five (35) miles per hour, or at any time or any speed
when prohibited by state law. (1987 Code § 15-520)
6-11-6: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway,
yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or
sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways. (1987 Code § 15-1107)
6-11-7: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars. (1987 Code
§ 15-1108)
6-11-8: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or
against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1987 Code § 15-1109)
6-11-9: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Business District: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within a business district.
   B.   Council Authority To Prohibit; Erect Signs: The city council, by motion
or resolution, is authorized to have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and when such signs
are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
   C.   Yield To Pedestrians: Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1987 Code §
15-1110)
6-11-10: LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Lights Or Reflectors: Bicycles in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on
the rear of a type which shall be visible from fifty feet (50') to three
hundred feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
   B.   Siren, Whistle Prohibited: A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor
shall any person use, any siren or whistle, except for an official police
bicycle when operated by an officer.
   C.   Brake: Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (1987
Code § 15-1111; amd. 2004 Code)
6-11-11: USE LIMITS ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR SCOOTERS, BICYCLES:
   A.   Carrying Passengers: No driver of a two (2) wheel or three (3) wheel
motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person upon or within such
vehicle on any street or highway, except as provided in this section:
      1.   If any two (2) wheel or three (3) wheel motor vehicle with a wheel
diameter of twelve inches (12") or greater, or any bicycle, shall have either a
double seating device with double foot rests or a sidecar attachment providing
a separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding
therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the
side car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age
of sixteen (16) or older to carry a passenger; and
      2.   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is
permissible.
   B.   Motorcycles And Motor Scooters Prohibited On Sidewalks: No motorcycle
or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the city.
   C.   Attaching To Moving Vehicles: No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or
motor scooter shall hold on to any moving vehicle for the purpose of being
propelled.
   D.   Riding On Seat: A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor
driven cycle, or motor bicycle shall ride only on the permanent and regular
seat attached thereto.
   E.   Passing Vehicles Between Lanes Of Traffic: No driver of a motorcycle or
motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling
in the same direction. Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted from the
provisions of this subsection. (1987 Code § 15-518)
   F.   Hours Restricted; Underage Persons: No person under the age of sixteen
(16) shall operate any motorcycle, motor bicycle, or motor scooter within the
city between and during the hours of sundown of one day and sunrise of the next
day. (1987 Code § 15-518; amd. 2004 Code)
6-11-12: MOTORCYCLE EQUIPMENT; HEADGEAR:
   A.   Required Equipment; Headgear: In addition to all other requirements,
motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with the following:
      1.   Handlebars which do not exceed twelve inches (12") in height,
measured from the crown or point of attachment.
      2.   Two (2) mirrors containing a reflective surface of not less than
three inches (3") in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and
positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of two hundred feet (200') to the rear of his vehicle.
      3.   Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and
hold the vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes. One
means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the
front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the rear
wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the
vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between
red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100')
to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon application
of the service brake.
      4.   A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the
maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided.
      5.   A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided
by the manufacturer.
      6.   One lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at
least three hundred feet (300') in the direction in which the vehicle is
proceeding, and one taillamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall
emit a red light plainly visible from at least three hundred feet (300') to the
rear. The lights required by this subsection shall be burning whenever the
vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to
one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to
insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles
on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') ahead.
      7.   A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect
the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator
shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him from
foreign objects. (1987 Code § 15-519)
      8.   For persons under eighteen (18) years of age driving or riding on
such vehicle, a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards
established by 59 CFR section 571.218, and which complies with standards
established by the state department of public safety. All crash helmets shall
consist of lining, padding and chinstraps and be of the type as not to distort
the view of the driver. While operating or riding on a vehicle covered
hereunder, the chinstraps shall be fastened. Such helmets shall be worn on the
head when operating or riding the motorcycle. (1987 Code § 15-519; amd. 2004
Code)
   B.   Exhaust System: No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter
with the exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than
that of the original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the
vehicle. (1987 Code § 15-519)
CHAPTER 12
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT 1
SECTION:
6-12-1: Purpose
6-12-2: Place Of Impoundment
6-12-3: Fees For Impoundment
6-12-4: Police Authority
6-12-5: Disabled Vehicles
6-12-6: Vehicles On Bridge
6-12-7: Arrest And Detention Of Driver
6-12-8: Traffic Hazard
6-12-9: Illegal Trespass By Vehicle
6-12-10: Overtime Parking
6-12-11: Blocking Fire Exits Or Hydrants
6-12-12: Parking In Intersection
6-12-13: Stolen Vehicles, Recovery By Police
6-12-14: Outstanding Traffic Citations
6-12-15: Impoundment Of Vehicles With Expired Tags
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
6-12-1: PURPOSE:
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public
peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used
generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and
abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection
of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions
placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and
protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (1987 Code § 15-1301)
6-12-2: PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Wrecker Services: Wrecker services placed on the wrecker service
rotation list as allowed for by the wrecker service rotation policy, resolution
1110, shall be located at an address within twenty (20) miles of the city
limits.
   B.   Removal To Nearest Place Of Impoundment: Every vehicle that is
impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be removed to the nearest
garage or place of safekeeping designated by the city personnel, and to no
other place. (1987 Code § 15-1302)
6-12-3: FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted by this code or the
statutes of the state of Oklahoma shall be stored and held safely until a
written order for its release, signed by an authorized officer of the city, has
been issued. Motor vehicles impounded for the following reasons shall require
that such order of release be conditioned on the payment of an impound fee in
the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by the person to whom the release
is issued:
      1.   Where the motor vehicle has an evidentiary value, has directly or
indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to
transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a
firearm, or is directly or indirectly associated with a drive by shooting;
      2.   When a police officer effects the arrest and removal of the owner or
operator of a vehicle from the vehicle;
      3.   When the vehicle bears a license plate that has expired for a period
in excess of ninety (90) days, bears a license plate that has been altered or
tampered with or bears a temporary tag issued more than thirty (30) days prior
to the impoundment, or bears no license plate that would be in conformance with
the Oklahoma vehicle license act 1 ; or
      4.   When the person operating the vehicle on public streets or public
property is driving under a suspended or revoked driver's license or is
operating a vehicle with an invalid driver's license or no driver's license.
   B.   This impound fee shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees that
may be assessed from citations issued to any person for violation of traffic
laws or other ordinance violations involving the impounded vehicle and in
addition to any fees owed to the towing service for the impoundment and
storage. The chief of police is hereby authorized to adopt rules and
regulations consistent with this chapter to implement this section. All fees
collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the police vehicle
equipment fund. (Ord. 2011-24, 8-25-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 1101 et seq.
6-12-4: POLICE AUTHORITY:
Members of the police department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an
authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required
in this chapter. (1987 Code § 15-1304)
6-12-5: DISABLED VEHICLES:
A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
   A.   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway and
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
or
   B.   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to
such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(1987 Code § 15-1305)
6-12-6: VEHICLES ON BRIDGE:
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube
or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard,
may be impounded. (1987 Code § 15-1306)
6-12-7: ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER:
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest
and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves,
or will leave, a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may
be impounded. (1987 Code § 15-1307)
6-12-8: TRAFFIC HAZARD:
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic shall be impounded. (1987 Code § 15-1308)
6-12-9: ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE:
   A.   Impoundment Upon Complaint: An unattended vehicle found to be in
violation of section
6-6-18 of this title may be impounded when the required complaint has been
properly made and filed as provided in this section.
   B.   Filing Of Complaint: If a violation of the provisions of section
6-6-18 of this title occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall
sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal
occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is
unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the
vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining
party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is
parked or standing.
   C.   Police Impoundment: Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner
or legal occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the
provisions of section
6-6-18 of this title have been violated, the police department shall cause the
vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. (1987 Code §
15-1309)
6-12-10: OVERTIME PARKING:
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in excess
of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of section
6-6-6 of this title, regarding more than seventy two (72) hours, shall be
impounded. (1987 Code § 15-1310; amd. 2004 Code)
6-12-11: BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS:
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded 1 . (1987 Code § 15-1311)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 5-4B-14B of this code.
6-12-12: PARKING IN INTERSECTION:
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection, with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. (1987 Code § 15-
1312)
6-12-13: STOLEN VEHICLES, RECOVERY BY POLICE:
   A.   Removal By Police: Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and
the registered owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one
hour, or cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identifying
media in the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of
stolen cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of
impoundment, and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the
location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police
department.
   B.   Owner Responsibility: If the registered owner is identified, located
and notified of the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given
the right to make his own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the
period of one hour from the time he is actually notified of its recovery, and
if the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time
specified, the vehicle may be impounded. (1987 Code § 15-1313)
6-12-14: OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
Any vehicle for which two (2) or more citations have been issued, for violation
of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if
parked in violation of any provision of this title. (1987 Code § 15-1314)
6-12-15: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES WITH EXPIRED TAGS:
After ninety (90) days from the expiration date for annual registration of a
vehicle, a police officer may seize and take into custody any vehicle owned
within this state not bearing or displaying a proper license plate required by
the state vehicle license and registration act 1 . The vehicle shall not be
released to the owner until it is duly registered and the license,
registration, or title fee and penalties due are paid in full, proof of
security or an affidavit that the vehicle will not be used on public highways
or public streets, as required pursuant to 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-600
et seq., is furnished, and the cost of seizure, including the reasonable cost
of taking the vehicle into custody and storing the vehicle, have been paid. In
the event the owner of any vehicle seized fails to pay such fees and penalties
due, together with cost of seizure and storage, and fails to provide proof of
security or an affidavit that the vehicle will not be used on public highways
or public streets, the state tax commission or its motor license agents shall
proceed to sell the vehicle in the manner required by state law and after
providing notice as required by state law. (1987 Code § 15-1315; amd. 2004
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 1101 et seq.
CHAPTER 13
GOLF CARTS, ATVS, LOW SPEED ELECTRICAL VEHICLES, AND MAINTENANCE VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-13-1: Definitions
6-13-2: Operating Restrictions
6-13-3: Penalties
6-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
 
                              A vehicle powered by an internal combustion
                              engine manufactured and used primarily for off-
                              highway use traveling on four or more low-
                              pressure tires, with seating for not less than 2
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV):    people seated side by side. Vehicles powered by
                              an internal combustion engine manufactured and
                              used primarily for off-highway use traveling on
                              four or more low-pressure tires and having a seat
                              designed to be straddled by the operator and
                              handlebars for steering are prohibited.
                              Any four-wheeled internal combustible or
                              electrical vehicle that is powered by an electric
                              motor that draws current from rechargeable
                              storage batteries or other sources of electrical
GOLF CART:                    current and whose top speed is greater than 20
                              miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per
                              hour designed primarily for operation on a
                              recreational golf course, which is not registered
                              with the State of Oklahoma.
                              Any four-wheeled electrical vehicle that is
                              powered by an electric motor that draws current
                              from rechargeable storage batteries or other
                              sources of electrical current and whose top speed
LOW-SPEED ELECTRICAL VEHICLE: is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater
                              than 25 miles per hour and is manufactured in
                              compliance with the National Highway Traffic
                              Safety Administration standards for low-speed
                              vehicles in 49 CFR 571.500.
                              A vehicle powered by either an internal
                              combustion engine or electrical vehicle that is
                              powered by an electric motor that draws current
                              from rechargeable storage batteries or other
MAINTENANCE UTILITY VEHICLE:  sources of electrical current and whose top speed
                              is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater
                              than 25 miles per hour utilized for
                              transportation of City employees or equipment
                              during routine maintenance of City-owned property
                              or facilities.
                              A vehicle powered by an internal combustion
                              engine, manufactured and used exclusively for
UTILITY VEHICLE:              off-highway use, equipped with seating for two or
                              more people and a steering wheel, traveling on
                              four or more wheels. (Ord. 2021-06, 1-19-2020)
 
6-13-2: OPERATING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Notwithstanding the definitions of the terms “motor vehicle” and
“motorcycle” contained in the Motor Vehicle License and Registration Act, 47
O.S. § 562, motor-driven cycles, known and commonly referred to as “minibikes,”
“trail bikes,” single passenger all terrain vehicles” (SATV) and other similar
trade names, shall not be permitted to be operated on the streets or highways
of the City of McLoud.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall also apply to those motor-driven
or operated vehicles known as “go-karts” and power lawn mowers and other motor
vehicles which are manufactured principally for use off the streets and
highways. However, this shall not prohibit occasional necessary movement of
such golf carts, go-karts, power lawn mowers and other vehicles on streets, and
shall not prohibit the use of minibikes and trail bikes used by participants in
parades.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting farm
vehicles from using the streets or highways.
   D.   Golf carts and utility vehicles (UV), side-by-side four wheelers and
small vehicles commonly known as “mini-trucks” are prohibited from operating on
federal and state highways and City streets within the limits of the City of
McLoud except as follows:
      1.   When the UV, multi passenger ATV or golf cart is operated by a
person 16 years of age or older who possesses a valid operator license, during
the daylight hours only. Daylight hours are determined to be 1/2 hour after
sunrise and 1/2 hour before sunset as listed by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. Vehicles travelling other than during the daylight
hours shall be equipped with headlights, brake lights and turn signal lights as
required for vehicles under State law, and may only be operated by persons 21
years or older possessing a valid State operator’s license.
      2.   UVs, multi passenger ATVs and golf carts may operate on a federal or
state highway only if making a perpendicular (90°) crossing of a federal or
state highway located within the limits of the City of McLoud.
      3.   Every person operating a UV, multi passenger ATV or golf cart upon a
street shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state
declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances
of this City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special
regulations in this section and except as to those provisions of laws and
ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
      4.   All such golf carts, multi passenger ATVs and UVs, while operating
in the limits of the City of McLoud, shall have a “slow moving vehicle” emblem
which shall be affixed to the rear portion of the aforementioned vehicle. Golf
carts, multi passenger ATVs and UVs shall be equipped with a lap safety belt,
if provided by the vehicle manufacturer, for each occupant of the golf cart,
multi passenger ATV or UV. Passengers under the age of six years old are
restricted from riding upon such golf cart, multi passenger ATV or UV unless
the driver of the golf cart or UV is 21 years of age or older. (5) All such
golf carts, multi passenger ATVs and UVs, while operating in the limits of the
City of McLoud, shall be restricted from operating on a street with a posted
speed limit greater than 45 miles per hour and shall not be driven at a speed
greater than 25 miles per hour.
   E.   City-owned maintenance utility vehicles may be operated anywhere within
the City limits of the City of McLoud while performing authorized City
functions. Operation of the maintenance utility vehicle on any street or
highway with speed limits posted greater than 45 miles per hour must be
authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee:
      1.   Permitted only while performing a specific task.
      2.   Required to be done during normal business hours.
      3.   The restriction of use will be determined by the City Manager or
his/her designee.
   F.   Any operator desiring to operate any golf cart, ATV or UV on any City
street of the City of McLoud will be required to:
      1.   Register the golf cart, ATV or UV with the designated agency of the
City
      2.   Purchase an annual City permit for such operation.
      3.   Carry liability insurance issued through a licensed insurance
company. (Ord. 2021-06, 1-19-2020)
6-13-3: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this section carries a fine of not less than
$50.00 or more than $200.00. In addition to the fine, violations may involve
suspension of privileges under this section for up to one year. (Ord. 2021-06,
1-19-2020)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Limited Access Facility System
7-1-2: Owner Or Occupant Responsible For Hazardous Conditions
7-1-3: Trees And Shrubbery
7-1-4: Obstructing With Merchandise; Approval Required
7-1-5: Interference With Pedestrian And Vehicular Traffic
7-1-6: Trash And Rubbish Deposits
7-1-7: Playing On Streets
7-1-8: Skateboarding, Bicycles, Roller Skates
7-1-9: Drainage Obstruction
7-1-10: Dangerous Objects In Streets
7-1-11: Penalty
7-1-1: LIMITED ACCESS FACILITY SYSTEM:
   A.   System Established; Costs Described: A system of limited access
facilities, consisting of the streets, avenues, boulevards and ways and parts
of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways hereinafter described, is hereby
established and created within the corporate limits of the city as now existing
or as the same may be hereafter extended, and in recognition of the general use
of the streets, avenues, boulevards, ways and parts thereof, and of the wear
and destruction of the same by heavy general traffic thereon, including
passenger automobiles, buses, trucks and other vehicles, and to the extent that
the costs of acquisition of rights of way and property necessary in the
establishment of the limited access facilities exceed the benefits to property
abutting thereon, such limited access facilities are hereby declared to be
improvements of a general nature, and such costs, to the extent that they
exceed the benefits to property abutting thereon, are hereby declared to be
costs of a general nature.
   B.   Streets And Public Ways Designated: The following streets, avenues,
boulevards and ways and parts of streets, avenues, boulevards, and ways within
the corporate limits of the city, as now existing or as the same may be
hereafter extended, are hereby designated as limited access facilities and as
arterial highways, the same being streets or highways especially designed for
through traffic, entrance into which at intersections may be limited, by
requiring all entering vehicles to be brought to a complete stop, and the city
council may otherwise protect the right of way of vehicles thereon, the
arterial highways being described as follows: (1987 Code § 14-110)
Arena Road, starting at 29th Street (SH 270), north one mile to 15th Street.
Kickapoo Road, starting at Arena Road, west one mile to Market Road.
Parkwood Road, starting at Arena Road, west one mile to Market Road.
Parkwood Road, starting at McLoud Road (SH 102), west one mile to Arena Road.
Redskin Street, starting at McLoud Road (SH 102), east one mile to Blackberry
Drive. (1987 Code § 14-110; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Use Regulated And Controlled: The use of limited access facilities
within the city shall be regulated and controlled by the traffic ordinances of
the city as now existing or hereafter enacted or amended. (1987 Code § 14-110)
7-1-2: OWNER OR OCCUPANT RESPONSIBLE FOR HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become
a hazard to persons using the sidewalk, or sidewalk area. (1987 Code § 14-107)
7-1-3: TREES AND SHRUBBERY:
   A.   Trimming Required:
      1.   The owner of any premises abutting on any street of the city shall
trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and
the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such
manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such premises
are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the
trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the owner.
Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage shall not be lower than ten feet (10') above the roadway of a street or
alley, nor lower than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
      2.   Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim
trees and shrubbery as provided in subsection A1 of this section, after
receiving five (5) days' notice from the head of the department in charge of
streets to do so, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. Every day
that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees or
shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a
separate offense. (1987 Code § 14-101)
   B.   Injuring: It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery
on a street or alley in the city; provided, that this shall not prohibit the
lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. (1987 Code §
14-102)
7-1-4: OBSTRUCTING WITH MERCHANDISE; APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to place upon or permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and
alleys of the city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other
obstruction, and leave same thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on
a business or trade, except as permitted in this section.
   B.   Request For Permission: Any person desiring to use any public sidewalk,
parkway, street, alley or other public area for the temporary placement of any
goods, wares, articles of merchandise, or other obstruction, or to use such
areas as a place for the temporary conducting of a business or trade, shall
first submit a written request for such to the city administrator. Such written
request shall contain, but shall not be limited to, information pertaining to
location, purpose, date of usage requested, and such other information as may
be deemed pertinent. Following review of the request, the city administrator,
if approving the request, shall direct the issuance of a letter of
authorization to the requestor setting forth such conditions of approval as are
determined to be in the public interest. (1987 Code § 14-103)
7-1-5: INTERFERENCE WITH PEDESTRIAN AND VEHICULAR TRAFFIC:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or obstruct the
sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian
traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in
any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
(1987 Code § 14-104)
7-1-6: TRASH AND RUBBISH DEPOSITS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep
into or upon the streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the city any paper,
rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other
refuse of any kind. (1987 Code § 14-105)
7-1-7: PLAYING ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to play on the main traveled portion of the
streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance. (1987
Code § 14-106)
7-1-8: SKATEBOARDING, BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES:
It is unlawful for any person to ride, propel or use a bicycle, roller skates,
skateboard, or similar object upon the sidewalks, alleys or parking areas
adjacent to any public school, public library or any commercially zoned
property without the advance authorization of the owner of such property. (Ord.
2008-03, 6-26-2008)
7-1-9: DRAINAGE OBSTRUCTION 1 :
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk, or alley by
placing any approach driveway or obstruction or substance whatever that will
obstruct or prevent the natural flow of water into the storm sewers or drains,
or dam the same so as to back any water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
gutter. (1987 Code § 14-108; amd. Ord. 2008-03, 6-26-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-2-5 of this title.
7-1-10: DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, or let fall and
remain, in or upon any street, any scrap iron, nail, tack, glass, stick, or
other thing which is likely to injure persons or damage property, or to render
a street unsafe for traffic. (1987 Code § 14-109; amd. Ord. 2008-03, 6-26-2008)
7-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 14-111; amd. Ord. 2008-03, 6-26-2008)
CHAPTER 2
STREET AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Approval Of Plans And Specifications
7-2-2: Developer Responsible For Construction And Materials
7-2-3: Construction Requirements And Specifications
7-2-4: Inspection; Maintenance By County
7-2-5: Driveway Construction Permit Requirements
7-2-1: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Approval Required: Prior to the commencement of construction of any
streets or roads as herein provided, the plans and specifications therefor
shall first be presented to the building inspector and maintenance staff of the
city for its approval. (1987 Code § 14-207; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Construction Before Approval Prohibited: It is unlawful to commence
construction of any street or road until such time as approval of the plans and
specifications has first been obtained. (1987 Code § 14-207)
7-2-2: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBLE FOR CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS:
The landowner or developer shall be required to furnish all the necessary tin
horns or culverts, shall provide the necessary drainage material and equipment
and shall be solely responsible for the construction of the roads or streets.
(1987 Code § 14-205)
7-2-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 1 :
   A.   Rights Of Way: All rights of way for roads or streets within any
division or subdivision of the city for residential or other similar purposes
shall be sixty feet (60') in width. (1987 Code § 14-201)
   B.   Road Surface Between Curbs: All streets which have curbs shall provide
for a minimum of thirty feet (30') road surface between curbs. (1987 Code § 14-
202)
   C.   Borrow Ditches, Streets Without Curbing: All roads and streets not
having curbing shall have a minimum of thirty (30) feet of traversable surface
and where borrow ditches are required, at least six (6) feet on each side
beyond the surface of the roadway shall be required for such borrow ditches.
   D.   The minimum material thickness of the traveled way shall be designed by
an engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma using the OSI method or other
approved method as recommended by the latest edition of the State of Oklahoma
County Roads Design Guidelines Manual but shall not be less than the following:
      1.   The surfacing of the traveled way shall have a three-inch (3")
minimum thickness of hot mix hot laid asphalt or a double bituminous material
if providing access to four (4) lots or less.
      2.   The base under the traveled way and under the shoulders shall be a
minimum of four (4) inches of compacted aggregate base if hot mix hot laid
asphalt is used as the surfacing OR the base under the traveled way and under
the shoulders shall be minimum of nine (9) inches of compacted aggregate base
if a double bituminous surface is used as the surfacing.
      3.   The subgrade under the base shall be six (6) inches of compacted
subgrade compacted to a 95% Proctor Density.
      4.   The surfacing of the shoulders may be a non-paved compacted
aggregate OR a paved surface of double bituminous material OR a paved surface
of hot mix hot laid asphalt.
   E.   Culverts and Tin Horns: All culverts and tin horns referred to in the
city shall be a minimum size of eighteen (18) inches in diameter unless
otherwise approved in writing by the City Manager or his designee. (1987 Code
§§ 14-203, 14-206; amd. Ord. 2013-16, 12-19-2013; Ord. 2021-01, 7-23-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 12, chapter 2 of this code.
7-2-4: INSPECTION; MAINTENANCE BY COUNTY:
   A.   Inspection By City And County: All streets and roads, after the same
have been completed, shall be inspected by the city and by the board of county
commissioners and approved by both before the same may be accepted for
maintenance.
   B.   Maintenance By County: The county commissioners may be authorized by
agreement with the city to maintain roads in the city as provided in the
agreement. (1987 Code § 14-208)
7-2-5: DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall obstruct, cut, remove, reconstruct,
damage, deface, injure, disturb, or in any other way interfere with in any
manner any drainageway, storm sewer or drain, road or street surface or paving,
curbing or sidewalk on any of the public roads, streets, highways, avenues,
boulevards, alleys, public grounds or places of the city for the purpose of
replacing, improving, modifying, or creating a driveway or approach to premises
abutting on such road, street, highway, avenue, boulevard, alley, public ground
or place without first obtaining a permit therefor. (1987 Code § 14-301)
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee:
      1.   An application for a permit shall be made upon application forms
furnished by the city and shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable permit fee
payable to the city clerk. The city administrator, upon application, will
review all applications for permits to ensure that they comply with this
section and all other applicable ordinances of the city.
      2.   Applications for permits shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following information concerning the proposed driveway or
approach:
         a.   Location of driveway or approach;
         b.   Surface material of abutting public roadway and proposed driveway
or approach;
         c.   Width of driveway or approach;
         d.   Size or diameter, length and type of culvert;
         e.   Depth of culvert placement; and
         f.   Proposed bedding or backfill material for culvert emplacement.
(1987 Code § 14-302)
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   If it appears from the application that there is reasonable
assurance that the construction of the driveway or approach will neither create
any substantial hazard in the use of the road, street, highway, avenue,
boulevard, alley, public ground, or place for public travel; nor that such
driveway or approach will unduly restrict the flow of stormwater into or
through any adjacent or abutting drainageway, storm sewer or drain, then the
permit may be issued.
      2.   If the application does not furnish information sufficient to allow
the city administrator to make the determination required in subsection C1 of
this section, then the application may be denied.
      3.   A conditional permit may be granted where the city administrator
determines that the application should be granted, subject to certain
conditions or restrictions on the proposed work. (1987 Code § 14-303)
   D.   Damages Recoverable For Noncompliance: If any person replaces,
improves, modifies, or creates a driveway or approach to premises abutting on
any public road, street, highway, avenue, boulevard, alley, public ground or
place without first having obtained the necessary permit therefor, the city may
proceed to take such reasonable measures so as to cause compliance with the
provisions of this section and to seek reimbursement from the person who has
failed to make proper application or, who, having received a permit for work
under this section, did not comply with the terms of the permit. (1987 Code §
14-304)
CHAPTER 3
PARKS AND RECREATION
SECTION:
7-3-1: Rules And Regulations
7-3-2: Powers Generally
7-3-3: Joint Establishment
7-3-4: Grants, Gifts And Bequests
7-3-5: Imposition Of Fees
7-3-6: Docks, Boathouses And Boats
7-3-7: Noncompliance; Penalty
7-3-8: Animals In Park, Penalties
7-3-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such
rules, regulations, and other requirements as it deems necessary or expedient
in connection with the use of all park and recreational facilities owned or
operated by the city. (1987 Code § 11-101)
7-3-2: POWERS GENERALLY:
   A.   The city may establish, provide, maintain, construct, set apart, and
conduct, either singly or jointly in cooperation with one or more of the other
governmental units specified herein, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers,
athletic fields or grounds, swimming pools, social and community centers, and
other facilities and activities in public schools, parks, buildings and
facilities now owned or acquired. For such purpose, the city council may
dedicate and set apart for the use as playgrounds, recreation centers, and
other recreational purposes any lands or buildings, or both, owned or leased by
the governmental unit and not dedicated or devoted to another public use.
   B.   The city may, in such manner as may now or hereafter be authorized or
provided by law for the acquisition of lands or buildings for public purposes
by the city, acquire or lease lands or buildings, or both, within or beyond the
corporate limits for playgrounds, recreation centers, and other recreational
purposes.
   C.   When the city council shall dedicate, set apart, acquire or lease
buildings for such purpose, it may, on its own initiative, provide for their
conduct, equipment and maintenance by making an appropriation from the general
revenues of the city.
   D.   The city council may establish, provide, maintain, construct, and
conduct recreation activities on local nongovernmental properties as well as on
publicly owned facilities.
   E.   Unauthorized Vehicle in Parks: No motorized vehicle shall be operated,
ridden, driven or parked within any public park, except in such places
specifically designated as places for such vehicles. Such places shall be
designated by appropriate signs erected by the city. However, this section
shall not apply to city-owned/operated vehicles, or authorized vehicles for
repair or maintenance. The city manager or designee may authorize the use of
motor vehicles, including golf carts, in public parks for special events,
including disc golf, when in his/her judgment such use is reasonable and
unlikely to cause damage to the park. (1987 Code § 11-104; amd. 2004 Code; Ord.
2019-09, 9-26-2019; Ord. 2020-03, 4-16-2020)
7-3-3: JOINT ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Authority: The city and other governmental units may jointly establish
and conduct such a system of recreation, including recreation centers, parks,
swimming pools, playgrounds, and any and all other recreation facilities and
activities.
   B.   Agreement Regarding Program And Expenses: The city council and other
entity operating such a joint program or programs may provide by agreement
among themselves for all matters connected with the program and determine what
items of cost and expense shall be paid by each.
   C.   Nature Of Activities: All such facilities and activities shall be
governmental in nature and no liability for negligence shall accrue against any
participating governmental unit. (1987 Code § 11-105)
7-3-4: GRANTS, GIFTS AND BEQUESTS:
   A.   Authority: The city may accept any grant or devise or real estate, any
gift, bequest of money, other personal property or any donation to be applied
for either temporary or permanent use for playground, recreational centers, and
recreational purposes, but if the acceptance thereof for such purpose will
subject such city to additional expense for improvement, maintenance or
otherwise, the acceptance of any grant, devise or gift shall be subject to the
approval of the city council.
   B.   Disposition: Monies received for such purpose, unless otherwise
provided by the terms of the gift or bequest, shall be deposited with the
treasurer of the city to be a special account of the recreation center or
activity and shall be considered as a continuing fund to be used for such
purpose and shall not be considered as a part of the cash surplus on hand of
the city for the purpose of making appropriations and levying taxes for the
city. (1987 Code § 11-106)
7-3-5: IMPOSITION OF FEES:
The city shall provide by rules, from time to time, the fees charged for any
such park or recreational privileges on any property or facility for
recreational purposes owned or operated by the city. (1987 Code § 11-102)
7-3-6: DOCKS, BOATHOUSES AND BOATS:
The city may construct, build and equip docks, boathouses, and boats for
recreation, may fix and collect fares, rent, toll, or other revenue for the use
of such facilities. The right of the city to own, maintain, and operate such
docks, boathouses, and boats for recreational purposes is hereby declared to be
a public right and use, and such right and facilities to constitute a public
benefit. (1987 Code § 11-107)
7-3-7: NONCOMPLIANCE; PENALTY:
   A.   Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any person to use any park or
recreational facilities owned or operated by the city without having complied
with the rules and regulations promulgated by the city council in connection
therewith.
   B.   Penalty: Anyone violating any of the rules and regulations, or failing
to comply with such, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 11-103)
7-3-8: ANIMALS IN PARK, PENALTIES:
   A.   No person shall allow a dog, or other domesticated animal to run at
large in any park or other public area, including Wes Watkins Lake.
   B.   The owner, or person in charge, of any dog or other domesticated animal
in any park or other public area, including Wes Watkins Lake, shall be
responsible to collect and properly dispose of any feces deposited by such
animal in the park or other public area, including Wes Watkins Lake.
   C.   The fine for violation of Section B shall be $20.00 for each violation.
The fine for violating Section A shall be as otherwise specified in the City
ordinances. (Ord. 2021-05, 10-22-2020)
CHAPTER 4
LIBRARY
SECTION:
7-4-1: Library Service
7-4-2: Multicounty Library District
7-4-3: Participation Authorized
7-4-4: Governing Board
7-4-1: LIBRARY SERVICE:
It is the desire of the city council to provide good library service to the
city residents by participating in a multicounty library organized under the
state library code. (1987 Code § 11-201)
7-4-2: MULTICOUNTY LIBRARY DISTRICT:
The city is located within the proposed district to be served by a multicounty
library created under the laws of the state in accordance with the library
code. (1987 Code § 11-202)
7-4-3: PARTICIPATION AUTHORIZED:
In order to participate in such multicounty library district, the city has
passed a resolution and enacted this chapter for participation in such
multicounty library district. (1987 Code § 11-203; amd. 2004 Code)
7-4-4: GOVERNING BOARD:
   A.   Membership; Appointment: The governing board of this library district
shall consist of one member to be appointed by the governing body of each city
and town of two thousand (2,000) population or more, according to the latest
federal census and one member to be appointed by the board of county
commissioners of each county. (1987 Code § 11-204)
   B.   City Representation: The city, jointly with the governing boards of
Pottawatomie County and the other cities and towns concerned, hereby requests
to join with and be a part of the Pioneer multicounty library system, and
agrees to appoint one person to represent the city on the multicounty library
governing board. Additional counties may be added to the district upon their
application to, and approval by, the state department of libraries board. (1987
Code § 11-205)
CHAPTER 5
CEMETERIES
ARTICLE A. CEMETERY BOARD; ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
7-5A-1: Board Created; Terms
7-5A-2: Powers And Duties
7-5A-3: Cemetery Expenses And Collections
7-5A-4: Cemetery Care Fund; Land Purchases; Investments
7-5A-5: Perpetual Care Fund; Trustees
7-5A-6: Reports To City Council
7-5A-7: Lien For Upkeep Charges; Enforcement
7-5A-1: BOARD CREATED; TERMS:
A board of cemetery trustees is created to consist of three (3) members. The
term of each member shall be six (6) years, except that when the board is first
appointed, one member shall serve a term of two (2) years, one member shall
serve a term of four (4) years, and one member shall serve a term of six (6)
years. (1987 Code § 11-301)
7-5A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of cemetery trustees shall have charge of, and control of, the city
cemetery, and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Make rules and regulations governing the management, improvement and
establishment of the cemetery;
   B.   Fix the price for which lots shall be sold or for which an interment
shall be made; and
   C.   Appoint all officers necessary for the control and management of
cemeteries, including a cemetery superintendent, subject to the approval of the
city council. (1987 Code § 11-302)
7-5A-3: CEMETERY EXPENSES AND COLLECTIONS:
   A.   Monies Paid To City Treasury: All monies received by the board of
cemetery trustees from the sale of lots or from interments, or from any other
source, shall be paid to the city treasurer, who shall deposit the same in the
city treasury.
   B.   Payment Of Warrants: Expenses incurred by reason of the upkeep, repair
and adornment of the municipal cemetery may be paid by the city treasurer upon
proper warrants authorized by the board. (1987 Code § 11-303)
7-5A-4: CEMETERY CARE FUND; LAND PURCHASES; INVESTMENTS:
   A.   Fund Established: When lots are sold or charges made for interments,
not less than twenty five percent (25%) of all monies received from the sale of
lots and interments shall be segregated and set aside as a permanent fund to be
known as the "cemetery care fund".
   B.   Use Of Fund: The cemetery care fund shall be expended in purchasing
lands for cemeteries and for making capital improvements when necessary. The
balance of the fund may be invested, without approval of any court, by the body
having control of the cemeteries, in the manner provided by 62 Oklahoma
Statutes section 348.1 for investment of municipal funds. Only the interest
from the investments shall be used in improving, caring for and embellishing
the lots, walks, drives, parks and other necessary improvements on such
cemeteries. (1987 Code § 11-304)
7-5A-5: PERPETUAL CARE FUND; TRUSTEES:
   A.   Special Care Of Specified Lots; Use Of Funds: Donations, deposits or
bequests may be made in trust for the special care of specified lots, monuments
or mausoleums in the cemetery. These funds shall be segregated and set aside as
a permanent fund to be known as the "perpetual care fund". A separate account
shall be kept of each amount so deposited, donated and bequeathed for special
care of specified lots. The perpetual care fund may be invested in like manner
as the cemetery care fund, and only the interest derived from the fund shall be
used in the care, maintenance and repair of such lots, monuments and
mausoleums, unless otherwise specified by the donor. (1987 Code § 11-350)
   B.   Trustee; Appointment And Duties: Any town which owns a cemetery, or
twenty five (25) of the lot owners in the cemetery, may petition the district
court in the county where the cemetery is situated for the appointment of a
trustee to be the trustee of the perpetual care fund. The trustee of the fund
shall receive the perpetual care funds, as provided in subsection A of this
section, and any other funds which may be donated, deposited or bequeathed to
the cemetery or any part thereof, as a perpetual care fund. The trustee shall
invest, manage and control the fund under the direction of the judge of the
district court. (1987 Code § 11-351)
   C.   Receipts And Cemetery Records: Every trustee of a perpetual care fund
shall execute and deliver to the donor a receipt showing the amount of money
received, and the use to be made of the net proceeds from the money. The
receipts shall be attested by the clerk of the court granting letters of
trusteeship, and a copy thereof shall be signed by the trustees of the cemetery
board. The receipts so attested shall then be filed with and recorded by the
court clerk in a book to be known as the "cemetery records", in which shall be
recorded all reports and other papers, including orders made by the court or
judge relative to cemetery matters. (1987 Code § 11-352)
   D.   Loans; Approval: The perpetual care fund trustee may loan monies
received by him under the direction and with the approval of the court, but
only as such loans may be secured by first mortgages upon Oklahoma real estate.
No loan shall be made or approved unless it be made to appear to the court that
the real estate is ample security for the loan applied for, and that the title
to the real estate is good of record and in fact in the party making
application for the loan. (1987 Code § 11-353)
   E.   Bond And Oath Of Trustee: The trustee of the perpetual care fund,
before entering on the discharge of his duties or at any time thereafter when
required by the court or judge, shall give bond in such amount as may be
required by the court, to be approved by the court clerk, conditioned for the
faithful discharge of the duties imposed upon the trustee by law. The trustee
shall take and subscribe an oath the same in substance as the condition of the
bond. The oath and bond shall be filed with the court clerk. (1987 Code § 11-
354)
   F.   Clerk Advise Court On Sufficiency Of Trustee's Bond: The court clerk,
at the time of filing each receipt as provided in subsection C of this section,
shall immediately advise the court or judge as to the amount of the principal
fund in the hands of the trustee, the amount of bond filed, and whether or not
the bond is good and sufficient for the amount given. The court or judge may
require, if it seems best, a new and additional bond of the perpetual care fund
trustee. (1987 Code § 11-355)
   G.   Trustee Reports: Every perpetual care fund trustee shall make a full
report to the district court of his doings in the matter of his trusteeship in
the months of January and July following his appointment, and in January and
July of each successive year. In each of the reports, he shall apportion the
net proceeds received from the sum total of the permanent fund and make proper
credit to each of the separate funds assigned to him in trust. (1987 Code § 11-
356)
   H.   Removal Or Death Of Trustee: A perpetual care fund trustee may be
removed by the court or judge thereof at any time for cause. In the event of
removal or death, the court or judge must appoint a new trustee and require his
predecessor or his personal representative to make full accounting for all the
property belonging to the trustee. (1987 Code § 11-357)
7-5A-6: REPORTS TO CITY COUNCIL:
The board of cemetery trustees shall, on the first Mondays in January and July
of each year, make a full report to the city council of all lots sold,
interments made, and all monies received and expended by the board in and about
the cemetery. (1987 Code § 11-305)
7-5A-7: LIEN FOR UPKEEP CHARGES; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Lien; Exception: The city shall have a lien on any unused lot when a
written contract provides for upkeep payments on such lot and the upkeep
payments have been unpaid for a continuous period of five (5) years. Where more
than one lot has been used in that group of lots, the provisions of this
section shall not apply.
   B.   Enforcement Of Civil Action: After filing the lien with the clerk of
the district court in the county in which the cemetery lot is situated, the
lien may be enforced by civil action. The practice, pleading and proceedings
for foreclosure in such action shall conform to the rules prescribed by the
code of civil procedure as far as they may be applicable. (1987 Code § 11-306)
ARTICLE B. RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-5B-1: City Council Authority
7-5B-2: Acquisition And Control Of Land
7-5B-3: Burial Lots
7-5B-4: Interment Of All Races And Faiths
7-5B-5: Disinterments; City Council Approval
7-5B-6: Removal Of Unknown Remains To Other Gravesites
7-5B-7: Hours Established
7-5B-8: Cemetery Rules And Regulations
7-5B-9: Penalty
7-5B-1: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Purchase And Regulate Cemeteries: The City Council has the power to
purchase, lay out and regulate cemeteries. The powers over cemeteries which are
granted to a City Council in this subsection include, but are not limited to,
cemeteries used or dedicated for interment of animal remains. (1987 Code § 11-
310)
   B.   Establish Rules And Regulations:
      1.   The City Council may pass rules and ordinances to regulate, protect,
and govern the cemetery, the owners of the lots therein, visitors therein, and
to punish trespassers therein.
      2.   The City Council may limit the number of lots which may be owned by
the one person, corporation or association at the same time, and may prescribe
rules for enclosing, adorning and erecting monuments and tombstones on cemetery
lots.
      3.   No religious test shall be made as to the ownership of lots, the
burial therein, or the ornamentation of graves or lots.
      4.   The City Council may prohibit any division of the use of lots and
any improper adornment thereof.
      5.   The officers of the City shall have full jurisdiction and power to
enforce such rules and ordinances as if they related to the City itself. (1987
Code § 11-314)
7-5B-2: ACQUISITION AND CONTROL OF LAND:
   A.   The City may acquire, by purchase, donation, or otherwise, and control
lots or parcels of land within and without the limits of the City as the
Council deems necessary for cemetery purposes. When lots or parcels are so
acquired, the title shall vest in the City.
   B.   The City Council may subdivide or plat any of the lots or lands into
suitable parcels for burial purposes and make such disposition thereof as will,
in the judgment of the City Council, best serve the purpose for which they were
acquired. Any lands so acquired shall thereafter be exempt from taxation, and
the City Council may pay and discharge any assessments against the lands for
the improvement of streets or the construction of sewers.
   C.   The City Council shall provide for the grading, fencing, ornamenting
and improving of all burial and cemetery grounds owned by the City and the
avenues leading thereto, and may construct walks and plant and protect
ornamental trees and shrubs therein, and provide for paying the cost thereof.
(1987 Code § 11-311)
7-5B-3: BURIAL LOTS:
   A.   Conveyance Of Lots; Abandoned Lots:
      1.   Lots in the cemetery shall be conveyed by certificate signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the Seal of the City.
      2.   The certificate shall show the price for which the lots are sold and
specify that the person to whom it is issued is the owner of the lot or lots
described therein by number, as laid down in the plat, for the purpose of
interment.
      3.   The certificate shall vest in the purchaser and his heirs a right to
the lot or lots, for the sole purpose of interment under the regulations of the
city council or board of cemetery trustees.
      4.   The certificate shall be entitled to record in the office of the
county clerk of the county in which the lot is situated without further
acknowledgment, and the description of lots by number shall be sufficient for
the purpose of record.
      5.   All abandoned lots or spaces of lots shall revert to the city. (1987
Code § 11-312)
   B.   Conveyance Or Devise Of Lot Held In Trust:
      1.   Any burial lot in the cemetery owned by the city may be conveyed or
devised by the owner back to, and held by, the city in perpetual trust for the
purpose of its preservation as a place of burial.
      2.   The lot so conveyed shall thereafter remain forever inalienable by
act of the parties, but the right to use the same as a place of burial of the
dead of the family of the owner and his descendants from generation to
generation shall remain, unless the deed of conveyance in trust shall provide
that interments in such lot shall be confined to the bodies of specified
persons, in which case the lot shall be forever preserved as the burial place
of the persons specified in the deed and shall never be used for any other
purpose whatever. However, no conveyance in trust shall be made without the
consent of the city council or board of cemetery trustees of the city. (1987
Code § 11-313)
   C.   Rules And Regulations Furnished To Lot Purchasers: The rules and
regulations governing the city cemetery shall be a part of each and every deed
for any lot in the cemetery and the city clerk shall make available to the
purchaser of each lot a copy of these rules and regulations upon request, and
the cemetery board and the city reserve the right and the power and authority
to change or alter any of the rules hereinafter set out, and to add additional
rules. (1987 Code § 11-315)
   D.   Lots Divided As Shown By Plat: No lot, parcel, or part of any of the
land constituting the cemetery shall be divided into parcels or subdivisions,
except as shown by the plat of the cemetery on file in the office of the county
clerk. (1987 Code § 11-317)
   E.   Prices Of Lots: Prices for cemetery lots will be as set by the city
council by motion or resolution. (1987 Code § 11-339)
   F.   Time Of Payment: All purchases for lots may be for a full lot, or any
number of spaces. Single spaces will be provided in the cemetery. All lots must
be paid in full at time of purchase. (1987 Code § 11-327)
   G.   Issuance Of Deeds: The city will issue a deed for all lots purchased.
(1987 Code § 11-318)
   H.   Lot Improvements; Deed Required: No improvements shall be made on any
lot or burial space until a deed has been issued and delivered. (1987 Code §
11-319)
   I.   Death Of Owner; Heirs Recognized: In the event the owner of a lot dies
intestate, his or her heirs, according to the laws of the state, shall be
recognized as the owner or owners of the lot. (1987 Code § 11-333)
   J.   Limitation On Family Purchases: No individual family shall be permitted
to buy more lots than for their family use. (1987 Code § 11-334)
7-5B-4: INTERMENT OF ALL RACES AND FAITHS:
The cemetery shall be maintained for interment of all races and faiths. (1987
Code § 11-329)
7-5B-5: DISINTERMENTS; CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL:
No disinterment will be allowed without the consideration and approval of the
city council, cemetery board, and properly filed papers through the state
department of health. (1987 Code § 11-335)
7-5B-6: REMOVAL OF UNKNOWN REMAINS TO OTHER GRAVESITES:
When the bodily remains of an unknown person are discovered in an unidentified
and unmarked grave of the city cemetery, the remains may be removed to some
other gravesite within the cemetery, at the expense of the city, if no record
exists as to a sale or conveyance of the lot and the city is without knowledge
that a body had been buried in the gravesite, in the event the lot is sold to
another person. An application for approval of the disinterment and removal of
the bodily remains shall be first filed with, and approval obtained from, the
State Health Department. (1987 Code § 11-307)
7-5B-7: HOURS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Admission: Hours of admission to the cemetery shall be from official
sunrise until sunset. The cemetery shall be closed at all other times. This
rule may be altered to fill the needs of any emergency that shall arise, due to
a late interment, or to strengthen the rule to avoid vandalism. In this event,
a lock will be placed on the gates at nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., and the Police
Chief, Mayor, and City Clerk will retain a key. (1987 Code § 11-316)
   B.   Interments: All interments must be made between official sunrise until
sunset, excepting in the case of emergency, then only with permission of the
City Council or a certificate of the County Health Officer. (1987 Code § 11-
321; amd. 2004 Code)
7-5B-8: CEMETERY RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Cemetery Plot, Lot And Right Of Interment:
      1.   Persons desiring to purchase a deed or plot, known as the right of
interment privilege must be issued a certificate upon payment for the burial
plot. The City Clerk will issue the deed along with the Cemetery Rules and
Regulations.
      2.   The deed will be signed and approved by City Manager or Mayor and
attested by City Clerk.
      3.   The lot will not be used for any other purpose other than the burial
of human remains or cremains.
      4.   The Cemetery Board does not require a vault to surround a casket.
      5.   The City requires 48-hour notice to mark a burial plot for a funeral
or placement of a monument, unless sooner interment is required by law or
religion.
      6.   Temporary markers are required for each burial to be placed at the
west end of the grave and can be purchased from the funeral home making burial
arrangements.
      7.   There is a limit of eight (8) cremains per grave.
      8.   Burials of remains shall be under the supervision of a licensed
funeral home. Burial of cremains may be performed without the supervision of a
licensed funeral home with prior notice and approval of the City.
      9.   All burials, except cremains, must be directed by the funeral home
of choice by the family.
      10.   No more than two (2) casket burials are allowed per lot. If stacked
burial is desired, then an outer burial container is required for the first
interment.
      11.   No burial or interment will be performed until all administrative
fees have been paid in full.
      12.   No for sale signs will be allowed on any lot. If a family wishes to
sell their lot, they must contact the City Clerk to advise of their wishes, and
the City can mark the lot on their map for sale.
      13.   If a family wishes to transfer a lot to another individual, they
must contact the City Clerk to make the appropriate transfer papers. All money
transferred will be between the individual families.
      14.   The funeral home is responsible for opening and closing the plot.
      15.   Burial measurements:
Distance between graves on walkway              6 feet
Distance between graves                         3 feet
Road width                                      12 feet
Street width                                    60 feet
Head is placed facing east                       
Monument is placed on the west end, facing east  
Grave width                                     5 feet
Grave length                                    10 feet
 
      16.   Plot cost four hundred dollars ($400.00), or as established by
motion or resolution of the City Council from time to time - twenty five
percent (25%) to Cemetery Fund; seventy five percent (75%) to City Maintenance
Fund.
   B.   Monuments, Markers And Benches:
      1.   Construction: Base and type:
         a.   All monuments or grave markers placed in the cemetery must either
be granite, marble or standard bronze.
         b.   All markers and monuments must be placed on a standard base
(concrete or marble pad) of such strength as to support the weight.
         c.   All monuments must have a thirty six inch (36") base and six inch
(6") apron, flush with the ground.
         d.   Aprons will be required on all sides for easy care, weed eating,
or mowing.
         e.   Benches must be installed on concrete pads no smaller than the
bench seat size.
         f.   Benches must be made entirely of granite.
         g.   Exceptions: VA upright monuments provided by the VA.
         h.   Exceptions: VA flat markers which are installed flush with the
existing surface level.
         i.   All monuments, benches and markers must be installed by the
contracted monument installers.
         j.   Any monument company setting a monument will be responsible for
the construction of such base or foundation and will reconstruct such base if
the monument or marker tilts or gives way at no cost to the City or the
purchaser.
         k.   Failure to notify the cemetery of any monument, bench or marker
installation, and not paying the setting fee, will result in the removal of the
marker, bench, or monument and not be re- installed until the fee is paid.
      2.   Height Limitation:
         a.   No monument or marker shall be erected on any lot or space that
exceeds five feet (5') in height, including any portion of the base extending
above the natural level of the ground.
         b.   Tombstones will be set parallel to walkways.
      3.   Setting Location:
         a.   All markers and monuments will be set according to the plans set
forth in this section.
         b.   All markers, benches, and monuments are to be installed on the
west end of the lot.
         c.   Veterans flat markers may be installed flush with the existing
surface level on the east end of the lot if another marker, bench, or monument
already exists on the west end.
         d.   All benches must be installed on the west end of the lot and
installed parallel with all other markers and monuments.
   C.   Fencing: No fencing or enclosing of the City or any authorized lots.
      1.   No lot, part, or parcel of the cemetery shall be enclosed by any
fence.
      2.   No curbing or coping will be allowed around a lot.
      3.   No gravel allowed on or around grave site.
      4.   No hedge or shrubs are allowed.
      5.   No trees or vines are allowed.
      6.   No other obstruction or structure will be allowed unless approved by
the Cemetery Board.
      7.   The City, acting by and through its Cemetery Board, reserves the
right to tear down and remove from the cemetery anything placed on the lots in
violation of this section.
   D.   Mausoleums Or Crypts: Mausoleums or crypts (above ground) are
prohibited.
      1.   All burials will be under ground.
   E.   Fee: Administrative fee for all installations will be two hundred
dollars ($200.00), or as established by motion or resolution of the City
Council from time to time.
   F.   Sidewalks And Walkways:
      1.   No walkways are allowed between graves.
   G.   Maintenance Of Cemetery Grounds:
      1.   The City is not responsible for any damage to monuments or markers
which may occur in normal upkeep of the cemetery.
      2.   All graves will be leveled flush with the ground and no mounds will
be permitted after natural settling has occurred.
      3.   The City will see that all graves that have sunken, are filled and
properly maintained.
      4.   The City or any of its authorized agents grant the authority to
plant trees or shrubbery and reserves and retains the right to prune or cut
back any such tree or shrub as deemed necessary, without permission of the
owner of the lot.
      5.   All obnoxious weeds and grasses will be kept from the confines of
the cemetery.
      6.   Any discolored, dilapidated, unsightly, or dangerous items to
visitors or that interfere with mowing will be removed and discarded and are
not the responsibility of the City.
   H.   Floral Arrangements:
      1.   The City reserves and retains the authority and power to remove from
any and all graves all floral designs and flower pieces when they become wilted
and unsightly in the sole judgment of the City or its authorized agents and
employees.
      2.   All artificial designs will be left until such time as they are
gathered by family or come apart.
      3.   In no case shall the City or the members of the Cemetery Board be
responsible for any such article removed.
      4.   All floral arrangements must be confined to permanently mounted
granite or marble vases.
      5.   Any decorations must be affixed to a monument, bench, or marker.
      6.   Those items affixed or that are placed on the contract pad will be
removed.
      7.   No shepherd's hooks or hanging baskets will be allowed.
      8.   Flags may be placed on gravesites during holidays and special
occasions.
      9.   Holiday grave blankets will be allowed from December 1 - 31,
Memorial Day florals from June 10 - 12th.
   I.   Rules Of Cemetery:
      1.   Gates will be open at sunrise and locked at sunset.
      2.   The cemetery will be locked on October 31st.
      3.   Hours of cemetery management will be Monday - Friday, eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
      4.   If an emergency arises, please call the Police Department or 911.
      5.   Employees and contractors/vendors are not permitted to perform any
work for the burial except as requested by the City Manager.
      6.   Persons visiting the cemetery shall use only the roads and avenues
for vehicles.
      7.   Parking for overflow during funerals may be made outside the
cemetery front gate along the road.
      8.   Any persons conducting themselves in a disorderly manner will be
removed.
      9.   No profanity will be allowed at any time.
      10.   All persons within the boundaries of the cemetery shall avoid any
conduct unbecoming of a sacred place.
      11.   No persons shall be allowed to enter the cemetery while
intoxicated.
      12.   No alcohol is allowed on cemetery or City property.
      13.   Children under the age of twelve (12) must be accompanied by an
adult or guardian. Children may not be left unattended.
      14.   No climbing on monuments, walls, or trees.
      15.   Littering is prohibited.
      16.   No pets are allowed in the cemetery grounds with the exception of
service dogs.
   J.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person who violates any provision of this section, performs any
unlawful act as defined in this article, fails to perform any act required is
guilty of an offense and shall be issued a citation and pay a fine. Such
punishment shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the City with
reference to violations. (Ord. 2018-09, 7-26-2018)
7-5B-9: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or performs any unlawful
act as defined in this chapter, or fails to perform any act required in this
chapter, is guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Such punishment shall be in addition to any other remedy
available to the City with reference to violations of any portion of this
chapter. (1987 Code § 11-340)
CHAPTER 6
RAILROADS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Improvement Of Streets And Alleys
7-6-2: Sidewalk Construction And Maintenance
7-6-3: Climbing On Trains
7-6-1: IMPROVEMENT OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Tracks Within Or Adjacent To Streets: When a railway occupies any
portion of a street with its tracks running in a general direction of such
street, either on or adjacent thereto, the railway company shall improve the
space between its tracks and two feet (2') on either side thereof in the same
manner that the remainder of the street is to be, or has been, improved, or
with such other satisfactory material as the city council, by motion or
resolution, may approve.
   B.   Tracks Within Or Adjacent To Alleys: In case any railway company shall
occupy an alley with its track or tracks, such company shall improve, gutter,
drain, and grade such alley, and shall surface or pave it with the same
material which is to be, or has been, used on the alley, or with such other
satisfactory material as the city council, by motion or resolution, may
approve.
   C.   Crossing Streets:
      1.   When the tracks of any railroad company cross any street that is
being or has been paved, the company shall pave as much of the street as is
occupied by its track or tracks and two feet (2') on each side, using the same
material as is to be, or has been, used on the street, or such other
satisfactory material as the city council, by motion or resolution, may
approve.
      2.   When more than one track crosses a street within a distance of one
hundred feet (100'), measuring from inside rail to inside rail, the railroad
company shall grade, gutter, drain, and curb the street area between its
tracks, and surface or pave it with the same material which the city is to use,
or has used, on the street.
   D.   Maintenance: Railroad companies shall keep all such improvements made
by them in a good state of repair at all times. (1987 Code § 16-101; amd. 2004
Code)
7-6-2: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their rights of way, using
the same material as is used in adjacent sidewalks insofar as this is
practicable under the circumstances. They shall construct sidewalks on both
sides of the streets when both sides are used by pedestrians. The company shall
keep such sidewalks in a good state of repair at all times. (1987 Code § 16-
102)
7-6-3: CLIMBING ON TRAINS:
It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner attach
himself to, any railway train, locomotive, or railway car, while such is in
motion within the city, unless such person is acting in line of duty, or to
board any train or railroad car, including a passenger, freight, or other car,
except with a proper ticket or the permission of the person in charge of the
train or car or in line of duty. (1987 Code § 16-103)
CHAPTER 7
CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE
SECTION:
7-7-1: Short Title
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: Granting Of Permit
7-7-4: Term
7-7-5: Use Of Streets And Dedicated Easements
7-7-6: Maintenance Of System
7-7-7: Service
7-7-8: Insurance/Indemnity
7-7-9: Cancellation And Expiration
7-7-10: Enforcement Of Terms And Conditions
7-7-11: Equal Protection
7-7-12: Notices, Miscellaneous
7-7-13: Payment To City
7-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the McLOUD CABLE TELEVISION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
BASIC SERVICE: Those audio and visual signals carried on the service tier of
the cable system which includes local off air television signals. Basic service
shall not include any other tier of service or any premium or pay per view
channels or services.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, PL 98-549, 47 USC
section 521 supp., as it may be amended or superseded.
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 1) video
programming, or 2) other programming service, and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers,
microwaves, waveguides, laser beams or any other conductors, converters,
equipment or facilities designed, constructed, or operated for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying, modifying and distributing audio, video, and
other forms of communication or electronic signals for the purpose of providing
cable services to and from residential and business subscribers and locations
within the jurisdictional limits of the grantor.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the grantor.
GRANTEE: Falcon Cable Media, a California limited partnership DBA Charter
Communications, and its permitted successors and assigns.
GRANTOR: The city of McLoud, Oklahoma.
GROSS REVENUES: Any revenue received by the grantee from the operation of the
cable system to provide cable services within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the grantor, provided, however, that such phrase shall not include any taxes,
fee or assessment of general applicability collected by the grantee from
subscribers for pass through to a government agency, including the FCC user
fee, franchise fees or unrecovered bad debt.
PERMIT: The authorization granted hereunder of a franchise, privilege, permit,
license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within
the jurisdictional limits of the grantor.
SCHOOL: At any educational level operated within the city by any accredited
public, private or parochial school system, but limited to elementary, junior
high school, and high school (K-12).
STREETS AND DEDICATED EASEMENTS: The public streets, avenues, highways,
boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways,
waterways, alleys, all other rights of way and easements, and the public
grounds, places or water within the jurisdictional boundaries of grantor.
SUBSCRIBER: A lawful purchaser of any cable service delivered over the cable
system. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-3: GRANTING OF PERMIT:
The grantor hereby grants to grantee a nonexclusive permit for the use of the
streets and dedicated easements within the grantor for the construction,
operation and maintenance of the cable system, upon the terms and conditions
set forth herein. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-4: TERM:
The permit shall be for a term of fifteen (15) years, commencing sixty (60)
days after adoption of the ordinance codified herein by the city council.
Subsequent renewals shall be pursuant to the renewal provisions of the cable
act as it shall provide. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-5: USE OF STREETS AND DEDICATED EASEMENTS:
Grantee shall have the right to use the streets and dedicated easements of the
grantor for the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system.
   A.   Grantee, at its own cost, shall have the right pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to construct, erect, suspend, install, renew,
maintain and otherwise own and operate throughout the streets and dedicated
easements of the grantor, as now laid out or dedicated and all extensions
thereof and additions thereto in the grantor, the cable system, either
separately or in conjunction with any public utility operating within the
grantor. The permit shall further include the right, privilege, easement and
authority to construct, erect, suspend, install, lay, renew, repair, maintain
and operate such poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, ducts,
trenches, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances for the purpose of
distribution to inhabitants within the jurisdictional limits of the grantor.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the permit shall and does
hereby include the right to repair, replace and enlarge and extend the cable
system, provided that grantee shall utilize the facilities of utilities
whenever practicable.
   B.   Grantee shall have the right to remove, trim, cut, and keep clear of
the cable system, the trees in and along the streets and dedicated easements of
the grantor, provided that in the exercise of such right, the grantee shall not
cut, remove, trim, or otherwise injure such trees to any greater extent than is
necessary for the installation, maintenance, and use of the cable system.
   C.   Grantee in the exercise of any right granted to it by the permit shall,
at no cost to the grantor, promptly repair or replace any facility or service
of the grantor which grantee damages, including, but not limited to, any street
or dedicated easement or sewer, electric facility, water main, fire alarm,
police communication or traffic control. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-6: MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM:
   A.   Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care in the maintenance and
operation of the cable system so as not to endanger the life, health, or
property of any citizen of the grantor or the property of the grantor. The
cable system shall at all times be kept in good repair and in a safe and
acceptable condition.
   B.   Grantee shall install and maintain the cable system so as not to
interfere with the equipment of any utility of the grantor or any other entity
lawfully and rightfully using the streets and dedicated easements of the
grantor.
   C.   All conductors, cables, towers, poles and other components of the cable
system shall be located and constructed by grantee so as to reasonably minimize
interference with access by adjoining property owners to the streets and
dedicated easements. No pole or other fixtures of grantee placed in the streets
and dedicated easements shall interfere with the usual travel on such public
way. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-7: SERVICE:
   A.   Grantee shall provide to its subscribers broad categories of video
programming services.
   B.   Grantee shall extend the cable system to new developments within the
jurisdictional limits of the grantor, subject to a minimum density requirement
of forty (40) homes per cable mile.
   C.   Grantee shall provide basic service and one free outlet to each of the
following public facilities located within one hundred twenty five feet (125')
of existing service lines of the grantee and within the jurisdictional limits
of the grantor: city hall, each fire station and police station, public
libraries and schools. No monthly service fee shall be charged for such outlet.
Grantee shall provide basic service to new construction hereafter for similar
public facilities; provided they are within one hundred twenty five feet (125')
of the existing service lines of grantee. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-8: INSURANCE/INDEMNITY:
   A.   From and after the effective date hereof, grantee shall maintain in
full force and effect at all times for the full term of the permit, at the
expense of the grantee, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy,
written by a company authorized to do business in the state, protecting against
liability for loss or bodily injury and property damage occasioned by the
installation, removal, maintenance or operation of the cable system by grantee
in the following minimum amounts:
      1.   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage in any one
occurrence.
      2.   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate for general liability insurance.
      3.   Workers' compensation coverage in accordance with state law.
   B.   The grantor and its officials and employees shall be named as
additional insureds on said policy. The grantor shall be notified by the
insurance company at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration or
cancellation of such insurance policy or policies.
   C.   Grantee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold the grantor, including its
agents and employees, harmless from any claims or damages resulting from the
actions of grantee in constructing, operating or maintaining the cable system.
Grantor agrees to give the grantee written notice of its obligation to
indemnify grantor within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant
to this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee shall not be
obligated to indemnify grantor for any damages, liability or claims resulting
from the wilful misconduct or negligence of grantor or for the grantor's use of
the cable system. (Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-9: CANCELLATION AND EXPIRATION:
   A.   Unless earlier terminated in accordance with this chapter, the permit
shall expire fifteen (15) years after the effective date hereof.
   B.   Prior to revocation or termination of the permit, the city council
shall give written notice to the grantee of its intent to revoke the permit on
the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the grantee, including one or more
instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the permit.
The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The grantee
shall have sixty (60) days from such notice to either object in writing and to
state its reasons for such objection and provide any explanation or to cure the
alleged noncompliance. If the city council has not received a satisfactory
response from grantee, it may then seek to revoke the permit at a public
hearing. The grantee shall be given at least thirty (30) days' prior written
notice of such public hearing, specifying the time and place of such hearing
and stating its intent to revoke the permit.
   C.   At the hearing, the grantor shall give the grantee an opportunity to
state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses,
after which it shall determine whether or not the permit shall be revoked. The
public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript shall be made
available to the grantee within ten (10) business days. The grantee may appeal
such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to
review the decision of the grantor de novo.
   D.   Upon termination of the permit, grantee agrees to remove the cable
system from the streets and dedicated easements of the grantor. (Ord. 2004-15,
9-9-2004)
7-7-10: ENFORCEMENT OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
Either the grantor or grantee may institute proceedings in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce the terns and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-
15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-11: EQUAL PROTECTION:
The grantor shall not authorize or permit any person providing video
programming services and/or cable services to enter into any part of the
grantor's streets on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to
such persons than those applied to the grantee pursuant to this permit, in
order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over
another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. (Ord. 2004-
15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-12: NOTICES, MISCELLANEOUS:
   A.   Every notice served upon the grantor shall be delivered or sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to:
City of McLoud
Attn: City Clerk
107 N. Main
P.O. Box 300
McLoud, Oklahoma 74851
and every notice served upon grantee shall be delivered or sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to:
Charter Communications
Attn: General Manager
707 W. Saratoga
Shawnee, Oklahoma 74801
With a copy to:
Charter Communications
Attn: Corporate Government Affairs
12405 Powerscourt Drive, 4th Floor
St. Louis, Missouri 63131
   B.   All provisions of this chapter shall apply to the respective parties,
their successors and assigns.
   C.   If any particular section of this chapter shall be held invalid, the
remaining provisions and their application shall not be affected thereby. (Ord.
2004-15, 9-9-2004)
7-7-13: PAYMENT TO CITY:
Grantee shall pay to the grantor, within ninety (90) days after each calendar
year, an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the gross revenues for such
calendar year. The grantor shall have the right to review the previous year's
books of the grantee to ensure proper payment of the fees payable hereunder.
(Ord. 2004-15, 9-9-2004)
CHAPTER 8
BOATING AND WATER SAFETY CODE
SECTION:
7-8-1: Citation
7-8-2: Code Controlling
7-8-3: Adoption Of Oklahoma Boating Safety Act
7-8-4: Application Of Regulations
7-8-5: Obedience To The Boating And Water Safety Code
7-8-6: Penalty
7-8-1: CITATION:
This chapter and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
BOATING AND WATER SAFETY CODE, CITY OF MCLOUD, and may so appear upon all
official documents, records or instruments. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-24-2010)
7-8-2: CODE CONTROLLING:
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this chapter, the
boating and water safety code shall be applicable in all areas of Wes Watkins
Lake within the city limits of McLoud. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-24-2010)
7-8-3: ADOPTION OF OKLAHOMA BOATING SAFETY ACT:
   A.   Boating Safety Act Adopted: The provisions of the Oklahoma boating
safety act, 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 4200 et seq., and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto are hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the city limits as fully
as if set out at length herein.
   B.   Definitions Adopted: The provisions and definitions contained in 63
Oklahoma Statutes section 4200 are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference, applicable to control of water and boating safety and to this
chapter. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-24-2010)
7-8-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The police department and any authorized rangers or employees of the city may
enforce this chapter and ordinances governing and regulating the operation and
use of watercraft within the limits of the city. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-24-2010)
7-8-5: OBEDIENCE TO THE BOATING AND WATER SAFETY CODE:
   A.   Committing Unlawful Act: It is an offense against the city for any
person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this
chapter.
   B.   Parental Responsibility: It is an offense against the city for the
parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Permitting Violations: It is an offense for any person to authorize or
knowingly to permit any boat or watercraft registered in his or her name to be
operated, used or occupied in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-24-2010)
7-8-6: PENALTY:
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-12, 6-24-2010)
TITLE 8
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITIES GENERALLY
SECTION:
8-1-1: Application For Utility Service
8-1-2: Utility Fees And Billings In General
8-1-3: Payment Of Bills; Adjustments For Undue Hardship
8-1-4: Failure To Pay Bills; Service Disconnection
8-1-1: APPLICATION FOR UTILITY SERVICE:
   A.   Contract; Fees And Deposits: Every person, firm or corporation desiring
to have their premises connected to any of the City’s utilities, water, sewer,
or trash collection, shall make application and sign a contract upon a printed
form to be furnished for that purpose, and shall pay the regular fees and
deposits for installation of the service.
   B.   No utility account may be established, for a new structure, or an
existing structure after a change in use or occupancy, unless such structure
shall have first been inspected by the City of McLoud or its designated
representative to verify compliance with the building and safety codes of the
City of McLoud
   C.   Return Of Deposit: The deposit shall be returned to the user when the
contract is terminated, providing all bills for services are paid in full.
(Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2023-06, 3-23-2023)
8-1-2: UTILITY FEES AND BILLINGS IN GENERAL:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills:
      1.   All fees and charges in connection with any customer's use of the
sanitary sewer system, the water facility system, or the operation of the
City's collection and disposal of refuse and garbage are billed in accordance
with applicable rates set as provided in subsection B of this section.
      2.   All fees and charges owing for any of these utility services shall
be billed on one monthly bill submitted to the customer each month. (Ord. 2003-
07, 8-28-2003)
      3.   Meters are read on the 15th/16th day of the month (or the first
business day thereafter) with exceptions made for inclement weather or other
cause as deemed necessary by the City. Billing for the prior period shall be
mailed on or about the 1st business day of the following month. (Ord. 2018-06,
6-28-2018)
   B.   Charges Set By City Council:
      1.   The City Council shall establish rates, charges, deposits, and fees
for utility services by ordinance, motion, or resolution, as the case may be. A
copy of the current rates and charges shall be available in the City Clerk's
Office. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2013-10, 6-27-2013)
      2.   In addition to such other fees as are charged for sewer, water and
solid waste there shall be charged to each resident or owner receiving sewer,
water or solid waste services the sum of five dollars ($5.00) or such greater
or lesser sum as shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Such
fees shall be segregated within the general accounts of the City of McLoud/
McLoud Public Works Authority for the sole purpose of expansion, replacement
and repairs to the existing water and sewer systems of the City, including
replacement of water meters, water wells and storage facilities, repairs and
extensions to the sewer and water system or the payment or retirement of any
debt used to finance such expansion, repair and/or replacement. (Ord. 2013-10,
6-27-2013)
8-1-3: PAYMENT OF BILLS; ADJUSTMENTS FOR UNDUE HARDSHIP:
   A.   Monthly Billings; Payment Required: All bills for utility services
shall be rendered monthly, and as soon after the meter reading date as
practical. Reasonable care will be exercised for delivery of utility bills.
Failure to receive such bills shall not relieve the consumer from payment of
bills within the prescribed period, nor exempt him from the responsibility
imposed for delinquency of accounts.
   B.   Time Of Payment; Delinquencies; Service Disconnection: All charges for
utility services shall be due and payable at the City offices, at the time and
date indicated on the bill. The City will accept partial payments; however, all
accounts not paid in full will become delinquent. Delinquent accounts will be
subject to disconnection. Water service will be reestablished after the bill is
paid in full.
   C.   Adjustments For Undue Hardship: Authorized agents of the City are
empowered from time to time to make adjustments in the charges for utility
services and in the bills rendered to customers, when an investigation by any
person reveals that: 1) the charges are excessive due to legitimate reasons or
causes; 2) in the judgment of the authorized agent, the full charge would place
an undue and unfair hardship on the consumer; or 3) for any other reason the
agent deems appropriate. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
8-1-4: FAILURE TO PAY BILLS; SERVICE DISCONNECTION:
   A.   Actions And Penalties For Nonpayment: Upon failure of any customer to
pay any part of a utility bill for any utility services by the due date on the
bill, the following actions and penalties may result: (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
      1.   A late payment penalty, as established by the City Council by motion
or resolution, shall be added to each utility bill not paid in full on or
before the 15th day of the month or the first business day thereafter if the
15th is not a business day. The late payment penalty shall be added by four
thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. the date the payment is due.
      2.   Full payment of the utility bill must be made on or before the 25th
day of the month, or the next business day if the 25th is not a business day.
Upon failure to make the payment in full or make payment arrangements in
writing, on or before the due date, the City, after mailing or posting notice
of intent to disconnect or discontinue utility services, may disconnect or
discontinue utility service. Customers may request, in writing, a hearing
before the City Manager, regarding the termination or discontinuance of
service. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-28-2018)
      3.   The authorized agents of the City may discontinue furnishing water
to any customer refusing or neglecting to pay all or any part of a utility
bill, upon providing written notice to the customer of the intent of the City
to disconnect water service.
   B.   Reconnection Or Reestablishment Of Service: If any utility service is
discontinued or disconnected pursuant to this section, the City, or its agents,
shall not reconnect or reestablish the service until the full amount of any
outstanding utility service bill is paid, plus any applicable charges or
expenses incurred in reconnecting or reestablishing the service. Payments must
be made with cash, cashier's check, or money order. No personal checks will be
accepted after the twenty second of the month.
   C.   Added Charge For Disconnecting Service: If an occupant has been
notified that utility service will be discontinued and City personnel have been
dispatched to disconnect service, there shall be an additional fee added to the
bill. All bills, penalties, and fees collected, as hereinabove specified, shall
be paid to the Utility Clerk. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing
the City from instituting suit for the recovery of any delinquent accounts.
   D.   Payment Of Entire Utility Bill Required: The City Clerk may not accept
payment of a water bill without payment of the sewer service charge; nor shall
the Clerk accept payment of a sewer bill without payment of the water bill. The
failure to pay any utility bill in accordance with subsections A and B of this
section shall be grounds for discontinuing any or all of the utility services
furnished to the customer whose bill is delinquent. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
   E.   Transfer Fee: Every person, firm or corporation desiring to have their
utility service transferred to another location shall submit a request for
transfer upon a printed form to be furnished for that purpose, and shall pay
the transfer fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for that service. (Ord. 2010-
06, 11-24-2009)
CHAPTER 2
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Lease Of Systems
8-2-2: Mandatory Connection To City Water And/Or Sewer
8-2-3: Separate Service
8-2-4: Right Reserved To Interrupt Water Service
8-2-5: Damaging Equipment
8-2-6: Tampering With Meters Unlawful
8-2-1: LEASE OF SYSTEMS:
   A.   Lease To Public Works Authority: The city has leased the operation of
its water and sewer systems to the McLoud public works authority, including
setting rates for use of the systems and all regulations governing them. For a
copy of current rates and rules, see the minutes of the McLoud public works
authority.
   B.   Rates And Rules Adopted By Reference: The rates and rules of the McLoud
public works authority are adopted and incorporated herein by reference; fully
applicable, as if set out at length herein. Violations are punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
8-2-2: MANDATORY CONNECTION TO CITY WATER AND/OR SEWER:
   A.   Conditions For Connection: Each occupied residence and each occupied
business or commercial building in the city shall connect to the city water
and/or sewer system when such city water service or sewer system is available
within one hundred feet (100') or less of the property line of the residence or
business to be served or within three hundred feet (300') of the improvements
to be served. (Ord. 2010-07, 2-25-2010)
   B.   Exceptions: Occupied residences or business or commercial buildings
having approved water supply and/or sewer or septic systems, as of the
effective date hereof, shall not be required to connect to the city water and/
or sewer system. This exception shall, however, apply to such residences,
business or commercial buildings in the event the water supply and/or sewer or
septic system shall cease to be approved by any governmental authority having
regulatory authority. (Ord. 2013-09, 6-27-2013)
   C.   Penalty For Failure To Connect: Any person, firm, corporation, or
entity violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable for a fine of not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). Each day that
any violation of any provision of this section is allowed to exist shall be,
and constitute, a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-07, 2-25-2010)
8-2-3: SEPARATE SERVICE:
Every separate premises supplied must have its own separate service connection
with the mains or lines, and the premises so supplied shall not be allowed to
supply water or sewer to any other premises. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
8-2-4: RIGHT RESERVED TO INTERRUPT WATER SERVICE:
The city reserves the right to shut off the supply of water, without notice,
for repairs, extensions, nonpayment of rates, or for any other reason; and no
liability shall attach therefrom. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
8-2-5: DAMAGING EQUIPMENT:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to destroy or injure any water
pipe, hydrant, faucet, pole, or other sewer or water equipment erected or
placed by or belonging to the city. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
8-2-6: TAMPERING WITH METERS UNLAWFUL:
The tampering with water meters or meter boxes of the city, the placing of any
bypass connection on or around the meters, or the use of any other device
tending to interfere with the proper registration of same, is unlawful. The
name that appears on the water billing will be held liable for any illegal
tampering with water meters. (Ord. 2003-07, 8-28-2003)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION:
8-3-1: Purpose
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Collection And Disposal Rates
8-3-4: Reservation Of Right
8-3-5: Container Requirements
8-3-6: Enclosed Receptacles
8-3-7: Restricted Use Of Dumpsters
8-3-8: Penalty
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to preserve and protect the health of the
public within the corporate limits of the city. (1987 Code § 17-201)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
GARBAGE: Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both; including the
refuse matter from kitchens, pantries, dining rooms, or other parts of hotels,
restaurants, boarding houses, tenement houses, dwelling houses, market houses,
public institutions, private hospitals, all animal refuse from slaughterhouses,
all animal matter or refuse matter from butcher shops, the refuse animal matter
from fish stores, or other businesses or occupations.
REFUSE: Ashes, cinders, paper, broken ware, discarded shoes and clothing, tin
cans or vessels, iron or other metallic vessels, or their parts or iron or
other metallic scraps, wooden or paper boxes, cartons or other parts and such
refuse as may be termed the natural accumulation of resident families. (1987
Code § 17-202)
8-3-3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL RATES:
The owner or occupant on any and all premises in the city shall pay a
collection rate for the collection of garbage and refuse as set by the city
council by motion or resolution. (1987 Code § 17-206)
8-3-4: RESERVATION OF RIGHT:
   A.   Collection: The city reserves to itself the right and privilege to
collect, remove and dispose of and to provide for the collection, removal and
disposal of all garbage, rubbish, refuse, waste, trash and unwholesome and
unsanitary matter within the city, either by contracting with some suitable
person(s) for the removal of such or by removing the garbage, rubbish, refuse,
waste, trash and unwholesome and unsanitary matter by city employees, at its
discretion, or by some combination thereof. (Ord. 2010-11, 5-27-2010)
   B.   Superintendent Of Sanitation Department: If the city does not elect to
enter into a contract for the collection and removal of garbage, refuse and
rubbish as contemplated in this chapter, the city manager shall designate an
appropriate department to enforce this chapter and all other sections of this
code and city ordinances relating to sanitation. The person in charge thereof
shall inspect the work of garbage and rubbish collection and observe premises
in general to see that all regulations which relate to the placing, keeping and
removing of garbage and rubbish are strictly enforced. This section shall not
take away any of the authority or lessen the duty of any other city officer to
enforce this chapter or any other section of this code or city ordinance
relating to sanitation. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-22-2010)
8-3-5: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Standards For Receptacles; Placement Of Receptacles For Collection: All
owners, occupants or other persons in charge of any premises, including
residences, apartments, business and industrial establishments, hospitals,
educational institutions and all other establishments of any kind whatsoever in
the city, shall place all garbage in containers to be supplied by the
contractor for the city's pick up service, or otherwise approved by the city.
Commercial solid waste containers that are compatible with the loading
mechanisms of garbage trucks used by the city or its approved contractor(s) may
be used, upon approval by the department in charge thereof. Fifty five (55)
gallon drums and similar receptacles are specifically prohibited. (Ord. 2010-
11, 5-27-2010)
   B.   Containers: Containers shall be placed curbside at least three feet
(3') from any mailbox, gas meter, fire hydrant or any other utility equipment
or structure located above ground and within two feet (2') of the curb or road.
Placement of the containers in alleys is specifically prohibited. Containers
shall be removed from the road or curb and returned to the premises of the
owner within a reasonable time following trash collection, but not to exceed
twenty four (24) hours. The city manager may waive or modify such requirement
for residents with physical limitations or disabilities provided the containers
are placed so as not to impede traffic or create a hazard to others. (Ord.
2013-06, 5-23-2013)
   C.   Parking: No person shall park a vehicle, in such manner as to interfere
with the collection of solid waste between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. along a road where garbage is to be picked up
that day. (Ord. 2010-09, 4-22-2010)
   D.   Sanitary Condition: It is the duty of the owner of the containers to
keep them clean at any and all times and to maintain them in a sanitary
condition. (1987 Code § 17-203)
   E.   Address: Any occupant or resident of premises that regularly receives
mail at other than the physical address of the premises, shall, upon request,
furnish such mailing address to the city for billing purposes. (Ord. 2010-11,
5-27-2010)
8-3-6: ENCLOSED RECEPTACLES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to deposit for collection on any
street, alley, or parking of the city or on any private property, any refuse,
rubbish or trash which is not in containers required herein. Each day such is
permitted to remain loose in an alley, street or parking shall constitute a
separate offense. (1987 Code § 17-205)
8-3-7: RESTRICTED USE OF DUMPSTERS 1 :
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation, other
than the authorized user, to deposit garbage or refuse for collection in any
commercial dumpster located within the city limits. (1987 Code § 17-207)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-3-9 of this code.
8-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to provide
the necessary garbage receptacles as herein required shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day's continuance or failure to
comply herewith shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for each day.
(1987 Code § 17-208)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Code Adopted; Amendments
9-1-2: Building Official
9-1-3: Permits; Fee
9-1-4: Fire Limits
9-1-5: Penalties
9-1-6: Fences
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office
of the City Clerk of the City of McLoud, being marked and designated as the
2012 International Building Code, and all future modifications or amendments
thereto, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of McLoud in the
State of Oklahoma; for the control of building and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this
section.
   B.   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
Section 1612.3 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-17, 11-21-2013)
9-1-2: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Powers And Duties: The building official of the City shall have the
powers and duties prescribed for the "building official" by the City's Building
Code; provided, that his powers and duties may be exercised by his authorized
representatives under his supervision and control.
   B.   Act As Inspectors: The term "building inspector", whenever used in the
ordinances of the City, means the building official. The terms "electrical
inspector", "plumbing inspector", and "gas inspector", wherever used in the
ordinances of the City, also each refer to and mean the building official,
unless a separate electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, or gas inspector is
appointed. (1987 Code § 5-104)
9-1-3: PERMITS; FEE:
   A.   Permits Required: No building or other structure shall be built,
enlarged, altered, demolished, moved or removed without a building permit as
required by the City Building Code. Prior to commencing any earth disturbing
activity, temporary erosion control measures shall be installed, and an earth
change permit shall be acquired from the City Clerk.
   B.   Applications For Permits: A person desiring a building or earth change
permit shall submit an application and required fees therefor to the City
Clerk. The applicant shall submit with the application and provide such
information as shall reasonably be required by the Clerk to determine whether
the permit shall be issued in conformance to the requirements of the codes of
the City of McLoud. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-24-2019)
   C.   Permit Issuance; Payment Of Fees:
      1.   If the application is in accordance with the requirements of the
ordinances and laws, the Clerk shall issue the permit upon the payment by the
applicant of a building permit fee which may be set by motion or resolution of
the City Council. A current copy of the fee schedule shall be kept in the
Office of the City Clerk.
      2.   Nonprofit religious corporations and churches or religious societies
organized pursuant to 18 Oklahoma Statutes section 562 shall pay a percent of
the building permit fee as determined by motion or resolution of the City
Council. (1987 Code § 5-105)
9-1-4: FIRE LIMITS:
The fire limits shall include all that part of the incorporated City lying
within the City limits. (1987 Code § 5-107)
9-1-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in
any business, trade or vocation for which a license, permit, or certificate of
registration is required by this title, without having a valid license, permit,
or certificate of registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything
required by this title or by any Code adopted by this title, or who shall
otherwise violate any provision of the chapters in this title or of any Code
adopted by this title, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made
by any of the officers provided for in this title, shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1987 Code § 5-1101)
   B.   Relief In Courts: No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this title
shall interfere with the right of the City also to apply to the proper courts
of the State for a mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate action against
such person, firm or corporation. (1987 Code § 5-1102)
9-1-6: FENCES:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in the Code or building regulations of the
City of McLoud, all fences in any area zoned as residential shall conform to
the following standards:
      1.   Fences shall be constructed of suitable materials and maintained in
good working condition, and may be chain link, wooden or synthetic stockade,
wrought iron, wooden or synthetic picket, stone or brick masonry. Fences shall
include a top rail when that is customary, such as with chain link. Fences may
be of other material and design if approved in advance by Code Enforcement.
      2.   The following materials or designs are prohibited: T-post, barbed
wire, razor wire, hog wire, chicken wire or similar materials. Fences designed
or constructed to create the impression or appearance of a compound are
prohibited.
      3.   Fences shall not be over eight feet (8') high on the rear or sides
of any lot(s), and shall not be over five feet (5') high on any portion of the
fence extending beyond the front of the residence.
   B.   This prohibition shall not apply to any fence in existence upon the
effective date of this section, except in the event of a sale or transfer.
Nothing herein shall be considered to restrict or limit the authority of the
City to require the removal or repair of existing fences when authorized by
other sections of the Code or building regulations, or when such fence is
determined to be a nuisance or hazard to the public health and safety.
   C.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2017-07, 7-27-2017)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Plumbing Code Adopted
9-2-2: Additions, Insertions And Changes To Plumbing Code
9-2-3: Plumbers; Registration And Fees
9-2-4: Plumbing Work; Permit And Inspection
9-2-5: Street Excavations; Permit Required
9-2-6: Penalty
9-2-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated as the
international plumbing code - administrative provisions (see international
plumbing code, 2012 edition) as published by the International Code Council,
including all amendments or modifications thereto, be and is hereby adopted as
the code of the city of McLoud for regulating the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city of
McLoud and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of such international plumbing code, 2012 edition, published by the
International Code Council, on file in the office of the city of McLoud are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section. (Ord. 2013-19, 11-21-2013)
9-2-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES TO PLUMBING CODE:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
   (Ord. 2013-19, 11-21-2013)
9-2-3: PLUMBERS; REGISTRATION AND FEES:
   A.   Definitions Pursuant To Statute: The phrases and words "journeyman
plumber", "plumber's apprentice", "plumbing contractor", and "plumbing", when
used in the ordinances, regulations and other official acts and communications
of the city, shall have the meanings respectively prescribed for them by 50
Oklahoma Statutes section 1003, the state plumbing license law, unless the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   B.   Certificate Of Registration Required: It is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business, trade, or occupation of a plumbing contractor
(otherwise known as a master plumber), or of a journeyman plumber, or of a
plumber's apprentice, in the city unless he is registered with the city and has
a current and valid certificate of registration issued by the city.
   C.   State Licenses Required: Only persons who have current and valid
licenses as plumbing contractors or as journeyman plumbers issued by the
construction industries board, as provided by the state plumbing license law,
may register as such with the city. Only persons who have current and valid
certificates of registration as plumber's apprentices issued by the
construction industries board, as provided by the law, may register as such
with the city.
   D.   Issuance; Term Of Registration:
      1.   Applicants for certificates of registration, as plumbing contractor
or journeyman plumber, after complying with the laws of the state and with the
city code, and after payment of the registration fee, shall be registered by
the city clerk.
      2.   The registration shall expire on June 30 each year, but may be
renewed from year to year. Plumbing contractors desiring to renew their
registration shall furnish the same evidence of compliance with state licensing
laws.
   E.   Expiration Of Registration: All plumbing contractors' registrations not
renewed within ninety (90) days after the date of expiration thereof shall be
canceled, and a new application for registration must be made and the fee for a
new registration paid.
   F.   Fee: The fee for registration and renewal of registration shall be as
set by the city council by motion or resolution.
   G.   Revocation Of Registration; Notice; Hearing: The city council, upon at
least ten (10) days' notice and adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may
revoke the city registration of any plumbing contractor or journeyman plumber
for violating any provisions of the ordinances or regulations of the city
relating to the installation of plumbing or for any other cause specified in
the state plumbing license law. (1987 Code § 5-203; amd. 2004 Code)
9-2-4: PLUMBING WORK; PERMIT AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as provided by the International Plumbing Code,
no plumbing work shall be undertaken without a permit issued by the City.
   B.   Fee Schedule; Payment:
      1.   The schedule of permit fees may be set forth by resolution or motion
of the city council. Such payment will be made upon application.
      2.   Nonprofit religious corporations and churches or religious societies
organized pursuant to 18 Oklahoma Statutes section 562 shall pay a percent of
the plumbing permit fee as determined by motion or resolution of the city
council.
   C.   Inspection: Inspection of such work must conform to the guidelines set
forth in the city code. (1987 Code § 5-204; amd. Ord. 2023-07, 4-27-2023)
9-2-5: STREET EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED 1 :
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall dig or excavate within, along, through
or under any street, alley, sidewalk, or crossing or any other public place
within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city clerk,
and no such permit shall be issued to persons other than those having been
licensed by the city for any such work to the effect that such person restore
or repair any and all damage to any street, alley, or sidewalk in as good
condition as the same was before any such work started.
   B.   Application For Permit: The application for such work shall be as
required by the city. (1987 Code § 5-205)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 7, chapter 2 of this code.
9-2-6: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Electrical Equipment Defined
9-3-2: Conformity With Regulations, Standards
9-3-3: Special Rulings By City Council
9-3-4: Electrical Installations; Permit Requirements
9-3-5: Certificate Of Inspection; Fee
9-3-6: Electricians; Registration And Bond; Exceptions
9-3-7: Right Of Entry For Inspection
9-3-8: Plumbing Completion Required Before Wiring
9-3-9: Inspection And Repair Of Wiring In Moved Buildings
9-3-10: Penalty
9-3-1: ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DEFINED:
The term "electrical equipment", as used in this chapter, refers to electrical
conductors, metallic raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures, appliances,
apparatus, and any electrical material of any nature, kind, or description, to
be installed within or on any building or structure. (1987 Code § 5-301)
9-3-2: CONFORMITY WITH REGULATIONS, STANDARDS:
   A.   Electrical Code Adopted; Amendments:
      1.   A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated as
the NEC 2011 NFPA 70: national electrical code international electrical code
series as published by the International Code Council including all amendments
or modifications thereto be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city of
McLoud for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of electrical systems in the city of McLoud and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such in NEC
2011 NFPA 70: national electrical code international electrical code series, on
file in the office of the city of McLoud are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subsection A.
      2.   The following sections are hereby revised:
Article 90.1A Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-25, 11-21-2013)
   B.   Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.; Equipment: All electrical equipment
installed or used shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
the statutes of the state and any orders, rules and regulations issued by the
authority thereof, and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons
or to property. Unless by this chapter, by a statute of the state or any
orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof, a specific type or
class of electrical equipment is disapproved for installation and use,
conformity with the standards of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., shall be
prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to
persons or to property. (1987 Code § 5-303)
9-3-3: SPECIAL RULINGS BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council, by motion or resolution, shall have the authority to make
special rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the safeguarding of life and
property and the improvement of electrical installations. In all cases, persons
engaged in the installing of electrical equipment and holding an electrical
license must be notified by letter of these decisions. (1987 Code § 5-304)
9-3-4: ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to install or repair any electrical
wiring, fixtures, or apparatus in or on any building or structure in the
corporate limits of the city or make extensions to any existing electrical
installations without first securing a permit from the city.
      2.   Repair jobs in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall also
require a permit.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for electrical permits shall be
made to the city clerk; and the applicant shall provide such plans,
specifications, and other data as may be reasonably required.
   C.   Payment Of Fees:
      1.   Established By City Council: The fee for an electrical permit shall
be as prescribed by motion or resolution passed by the city council.
      2.   Nonprofit Organizations: Nonprofit religious corporations and
churches or religious societies organized pursuant to 18 Oklahoma Statutes
section 562 shall pay a percent of the electrical permit fee as determined by
motion or resolution of the city council. (1987 Code § 5-305; amd. Ord. 2022-
06, 10-28-2021)
9-3-5: CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION; FEE:
   A.   Issuance Of Certificate; Conditions:
      1.   On the completion of the work covered by a permit in accordance with
all ordinances and laws, the city shall issue a certificate of inspection.
      2.   In the event an inspection is not made within five (5) working days
(Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded) after proper notification, the
builder or owner is authorized to proceed.
      3.   In this certificate, the city shall certify that the work is in
accordance with the rules governing the respective class to which it belongs,
as specified by this chapter.
      4.   Whenever a permit is issued for an addition to old work, which old
work does not conform to the rules as laid down in this chapter, upon the
satisfactory completion of the addition, the city shall issue a statement that
the new work complies with the rules.
   B.   Payment Of Inspection Fee:
      1.   The city council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe an
inspection fee to be paid to the city when electrical installations are
inspected by the electrical inspector.
      2.   Nonprofit religious corporations and churches or religious societies
organized pursuant to 18 Oklahoma Statutes section 562 shall pay a percent of
the electrical inspection fee as determined by motion or resolution of the city
council. (1987 Code § 5-306)
9-3-6: ELECTRICIANS; REGISTRATION AND BOND; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Certificate Required; Fee:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade or
vocation of electrical contractor, journeyman electrician or apprentice
electrician without a certificate of registration as such secured from the
city.
      2.   The initial fee for a registration certificate, and any renewal, to
be paid to the city clerk, shall be as set by the city council.
      3.   A registration certificate must be renewed within ninety (90) days
following expiration of the certificate. After the expiration, an application
for a new certificate must be requested and the initial fee paid again.
      4.   No person may be registered with the city as contractor, journeyman
or apprentice unless he possesses a valid and current state license issued by
the state and pays the registration fee in such sum as set by the city council
by motion or resolution.
      5.   This certificate is not transferable to any other individual or
company.
   B.   Bond Requirements:
      1.   Every person receiving a certificate as an electrical contractor
shall file with the city clerk a bond in such sum as set by the city council,
executed with a surety company authorized to do business in the state.
      2.   The bond shall be conditioned that the principal will install all
electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances, and equipment in accordance with the
law and the ordinances and other regulations of the city relating to electrical
installations and in a workmanlike manner; that the principal shall, without
further cost to the person for whom the work was done, remedy any defective or
faulty work caused by poor workmanship or inferior or nonstandard material; and
that the city may be fully indemnified and held harmless from any and all
costs, expenses or damage resulting from the performance of his work as an
electrical contractor or apprentice electrician, as the case may be.
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   For the installing of bell, telephone or signal systems not using
over twelve (12) volts, no registration or bond will be required. The
installation of same must comply with all other requirements of the ordinances
of the city.
   D.   Revocation Of Certificate; Hearing: After adequate opportunity for a
hearing, the city council may revoke the certificate of an electrical
contractor, an apprentice electrician, or a journeyman electrician. (1987 Code
§ 5-307; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 3-23-2023)
9-3-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Right Of Entry: The building official or the duly authorized
representatives of the service company in the discharge of their duties, may
enter any building or premises at any reasonable time.
   B.   Refusal To Allow Entrance: The refusal of any owner, agent, or occupant
of such building to allow such entrance for inspection purposes shall be deemed
an offense and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. (1987 Code § 5-308)
9-3-8: PLUMBING COMPLETION REQUIRED BEFORE WIRING:
No wiring of any kind shall be installed in any structure until all plumbing
and pipe fittings are completely roughed in in order that the proper distances
from conductors to ground may be maintained. (1987 Code § 5-309)
9-3-9: INSPECTION AND REPAIR OF WIRING IN MOVED BUILDINGS:
   A.   Inspection Required: When a building or portion of a building
containing electrical wiring is moved from its foundation, the owner shall have
the electrical wiring and equipment in the building inspected and repaired
where necessary, providing proper grounding wires.
   B.   Wiring Permit; Request Inspection: The electrical contractor shall
obtain a wiring permit and request inspection. (1987 Code § 5-310)
9-3-10: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Fire Code Adopted; Amendments
9-4-2: Enforcement
9-4-3: Limits For Storage Of Flammable Liquids, Explosives
9-4-4: Modifications
9-4-5: New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies; Permits
9-4-6: Appeals
9-4-7: Penalty
9-4-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Code Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and
designated as the 2012 international fire code amending all amendments or
modifications thereof is hereby adopted as the code of the city of McLoud in
the state of Oklahoma; for regulating and controlling the limits for storage of
flammable liquids, explosives, modifications, new materials, processes or
occupancies, permits, appeals and penalties, in the city of McLoud city limits;
and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
international fire code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code
Council on file in the office of the city of McLoud are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. (Ord. 2013-
22, 11-21-2013)
   B.   Definition: Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire code
hereby adopted it shall be held to mean the city of McLoud. (1987 Code § 13-
103; amd. Ord. 2013-22, 11-21-2013)
   C.   Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-22, 11-21-2013)
9-4-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department.
(1987 Code § 13-102)
9-4-3: LIMITS FOR STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, EXPLOSIVES:
The limits referred to in the fire code, in which storage of flammable liquids
in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in which
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established
as the city limits. (1987 Code § 13-104; amd. Ord. 2013-22, 11-21-2013)
9-4-4: MODIFICATIONS:
The chief of the fire department, with approval of the city council, shall have
power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted in his own
discretion or upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of
the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department
and for applications requesting change, a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant. (1987 Code § 13-105)
9-4-5: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS:
The chief of the fire department, and two (2) persons appointed by the city
council, shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in
the code. The chief of the fire department shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (1987 Code § 13-107)
9-4-6: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within thirty
(30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (1987 Code § 13-106)
9-4-7: PENALTY 1 :
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1987 Code § 13-108)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-1-5 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
9-5-1: Residential Code Adopted; Amendments
9-5-2: Penalty
9-5-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office
of the city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated as the
2012 international residential building code, including all amendments or
modifications thereto is hereby adopted as the code of the city of McLoud in
the state of Oklahoma; for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings
and townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height in the city of McLoud,
and provisions that do not give preferential treatment to particular types or
classes of materials, products or methods of construction, and providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such international
residential building code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code
Council on file in the office of the city of McLoud are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.
   B.   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-20, 11-21-2013)
9-5-2: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 6
FUEL AND GAS CODE
SECTION:
9-6-1: Fuel And Gas Code Adopted; Amendments
9-6-1: FUEL AND GAS CODE ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in
the office of the city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated
as the 2012 international fuel and gas code including all amendments or
modifications thereof is hereby adopted as the code of the city of McLoud in
the state of Oklahoma; for manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, installing,
or repairing of any system, container, apparatus, or appliance to be used for
the transportation, storage, dispensing or utilization of liquefied petroleum
gas, or to transport, handle, or store such gas, unless such person has
complied with, and complies with, all provisions of the law and ordinance in
the city of McLoud providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor.
   B.   Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-21, 11-21-2013)
CHAPTER 7
SWIMMING POOL CODE
SECTION:
9-7-1: Swimming Pool Code Adopted
9-7-2: Fences And Gates Required
9-7-3: Penalty
9-7-1: SWIMMING POOL CODE ADOPTED:
The latest edition of the swimming pool code issued by the Building Officials
and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted and not less
than one copy is now on file in the office of the city clerk. The code is
incorporated herein as though fully set forth herein, and the provisions
therein shall be controlling in the building, use, and maintenance of all
swimming pools within the area of the jurisdiction of the city. (1987 Code § 5-
701)
9-7-2: FENCES AND GATES REQUIRED:
   A.   Definition: The term "swimming pool", for the purposes of this chapter,
shall mean those tanks or other structures that are designed and maintained
primarily for swimming purposes and are so constructed that any portion thereof
has a depth of more than eighteen inches (18") below the surface of the ground;
or in the case of aboveground pools, such term shall mean any aboveground pool,
the top surface of the walls or deck of which are less than thirty six inches
(36") above the surface of the ground.
   B.   Fence: All private outdoor swimming pools shall be enclosed by a
substantial fence no less than forty eight inches (48") in height, so
constructed as to prevent, within reason, any person from gaining access
beneath or through the fence, and which has a similarly substantial gate of the
same height as the fence with facilities for locking the gate when the pool is
unguarded.
   C.   Gate: Whenever a gate is contained in any enclosure required under this
section, the gate shall be kept closed and locked at all times, except when
open for the purpose of ingress and egress. (1987 Code § 5-702)
9-7-3: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES FOR THE HANDICAPPED
SECTION:
9-8-1: Minimum Guidelines Adopted
9-8-2: Penalty
9-8-1: MINIMUM GUIDELINES ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference for the purpose of establishing standards
ensuring that certain buildings and facilities are designed, constructed, or
altered so as to be readily accessible to, and usable by, physically
handicapped persons that certain set of standards known as part 1190 of title
36 of the code of federal regulations "Minimum Guidelines And Requirements For
Accessible Design", as adopted by the U.S. architectural and transportation
barriers compliance board for the purposes of implementing section 502(b)(7) of
the rehabilitation act of 1973 (29 USC 792(b)(7)) and as published at 47 FR
33862 on August 4, 1982, copies of which have been and now are filed in the
office of the city clerk; and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein. From the date on which this section shall
take effect, the provisions of the standards shall govern all applicable
construction, alteration, equipment, use and occupancy, and location of
buildings and other structures and facilities within the corporate limits of
the city. (1987 Code § 5-801)
9-8-2: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 9
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1
SECTION:
9-9-1: License Required; Fee
9-9-2: Placement And Construction Regulations
9-9-3: Billboards
9-9-4: Exceptions
9-9-5: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also provisions under the various zoning districts in title 11 of this
  code.
9-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   License Required: No person shall erect or maintain any billboard or
poster board for advertising purposes until he shall first have obtained a
license from the city clerk. (1987 Code § 5-903)
   B.   Fee: Before any license shall be issued for any billboard or poster
board, the owner or operator of same shall first pay to the city clerk a fee
for each board located within the city. (1987 Code § 5-904)
9-9-2: PLACEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Distance Above Sidewalks: It is unlawful and an offense for any person
to erect or maintain any sign or other structure for advertising purposes over,
across or upon any sidewalk or street in the city, unless the same be placed
not less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalk.
   B.   Fastening: Such sign shall be securely fastened by iron or other
metallic rods or braces to the adjoining wall and braced against wind pressure
in all directions.
   C.   Extending Beyond Curb Line: No sign shall extend beyond the curb line
of the property, nor over, on or across any part of any street or alley, except
that portion which is used for sidewalks. (1987 Code § 5-901)
   D.   Signs On Walks, Walls: No person shall place or stand any sign for
advertising purposes on any walk or against any wall, except as provided in
this section. (1987 Code § 5-902)
9-9-3: BILLBOARDS:
   A.   Unsafe Construction; Display Of Obscenity: No billboard shall be
erected in an unsafe manner or in any sense dangerous to life or property, nor
shall such billboard be used to display any obscene or immoral pictures or
language.
   B.   Licensee's Name Required: Each billboard shall have printed thereon in
clear view, the licensee's name. (1987 Code § 5-905)
9-9-4: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to billboards or sign boards attached to the
surface of a permanent building and designed to give publicity to any business
carried on in such building, or to billboards used to advertise the sale or
lease of the property upon which they shall be erected, and not exceeding
thirty six (36) square feet in area. (1987 Code § 5-907)
9-9-5: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 10
OIL AND GAS WELLS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Definitions
9-10-2: Permits Required; Fees
9-10-3: Insurance And Bond
9-10-4: Location Of Wells Restricted To Zones
9-10-5: Earthen Slush Pits
9-10-6: Tanks Containing Flammable Substances
9-10-7: Muffling Of Internal Combustion Engines
9-10-8: Maintenance Of Premises
9-10-9: Approved Safety Equipment And Methods
9-10-10: Equipment Requirements
9-10-11: Blasting Prohibited
9-10-12: Penalty
9-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, are hereby defined to have the
following meanings:
CIRCULATING MUD PIT: The working pit from which drilling muds are continuously
recirculated during the drilling process into and from the drilling hole for
the purpose of flushing therefrom the drill bit cuttings and as a lubricant to
reduce torque, drag, heat, friction, and differential sticking during the
drilling process.
DISPOSAL WELL: Any well drilled or actually used for injection of saltwater or
other substances into the earth at a point other than, or different than, the
point of extraction or production thereof from the earth.
MUD: The drilling fluid used and recirculated through the drilling hole as a
lubricant to reduce torque, drag, heat, friction and differential sticking and
to flush drill bit cuttings from the hole during the drilling process.
MUD PROGRAM: The planned usage of drilling fluid lubricants, specifying with
particularity the type, name and physical and chemical composition and
characteristics of all ingredients thereof, together with such laboratory and
other technical data as may be necessary or required by the building official
to evaluate the same as pollutive, deleterious or otherwise.
OIL AND GAS WELL: Means and includes any well drilled, operated or maintained
for the production of oil, gas, casinghead gas or any of them or their
byproducts or derivatives.
RESERVE PIT: Any excavation, pit, or receptacle designed or actually used to
receive, store or hold rocks, drill bit cuttings, shale, sand, fresh water,
drilling mud containing no saltwater, oil, oil derivatives, caustics, acids, or
other chemicals harmful to soil, vegetation, animal or human life, and similar
nondeleterious matter.
SLUSH PIT: Any excavation, pit or receptacle designed or actually used to
receive, store or hold waste oil, oil derivatives, sand, saltwater, or other
waste products or deleterious substances produced or used in the drilling,
swabbing, cleaning or reworking of any oil, gas or disposal well. (1987 Code §
5-1001)
9-10-2: PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   Drilling:
      1.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to drill an oil, gas
or disposal well within the corporate limits of the city without first having
procured a permit to do so.
      2.   Application For Permit: Every person desiring to drill an oil, gas
or disposal well in the city shall file a written application for a permit to
do so with the city clerk. Such application shall be in the form required by
the planning commission and shall be signed by the applicant or his agent
authorized to sign the same. Such application shall specify the quarter section
thereof so as to identify the well location within a particular ten (10) acre
tract. All equipment to be utilized in the drilling, operating or maintenance
of the well shall be specified in the application, with surface casing stating
seven hundred fifty feet (750') and a copy of insurance and bonds shall be
attached in writing thereto for approval by the planning commission and city
clerk. (1987 Code § 5-1002)
      3.   Fee: At the time of filing an application for a permit under this
section, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in such amount as set
by motion or resolution of the city council to defray the expense of inspecting
the location and drilling operations and, if the well is completed as a
producing well, in payment of the annual permit fee for the initial year of
production and operation. No portion of any such fee shall be refunded for any
reason. (1987 Code § 5-1002; amd. 2004 Code)
      4.   Issuance: A permit required by this subsection A shall be issued by
the city clerk if the application has been approved by the planning commission
and if the applicant has complied with section
9-10-3 of this chapter. (1987 Code § 5-1002)
   B.   Seismographic Exploration:
      1.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to conduct
seismographic exploration, survey, or testing within the corporate limits of
the city without first having procured a permit to do so.
      2.   Application For Permit: Every person desiring to conduct
seismographic operation, survey or testing in the city shall file a written
application for permit to do so with the city clerk. Such application shall be
in the form required by the planning commission and shall be signed by the
applicant or his agent authorized to sign the same. Such application shall
specify the quarter section, township and range, and the location within the
quarter section thereof so as to identify the testing or survey site.
      3.   Fee; Term Of Permit: At the time of filing an application for permit
under this subsection, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the
amount set by the city by motion or resolution. A permit required by this
subsection shall be issued by the city clerk if the application has been
approved by the planning commission. The permit shall expire ninety (90) days
after issuance and may not be extended or transferred in any manner whatsoever.
(1987 Code § 5-1003)
   C.   Operation, Maintenance, Cleaning Or Reworking:
      1.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
operation, maintenance, cleaning, swabbing or reworking of any completed and
operating oil, gas or disposal well, unless a current annual permit has been
issued for such well. Such permit shall be obtained from the city clerk on the
anniversary date of the drilling permit issued under the provisions of
subsection A of this section for wells drilled after August 2, 1977. For those
wells drilled before August 2, 1977, the initial annual permit shall be
obtained within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, and
subsequent permits shall be obtained on the anniversary date of such initial
permit.
      2.   Issuance; Fee: An annual permit required by this subsection shall be
issued by the city clerk upon payment of a fee as set by the city council. No
such permit shall be issued unless applicant is in full compliance with section
9-10-3 of this chapter. (1987 Code § 5-1004)
9-10-3: INSURANCE AND BOND:
   A.   Insurance Required: No person shall drill, operate or maintain any oil,
gas or disposal well within the city unless there is on file with the city
clerk a certificate of insurance issued by some corporate insurer licensed to
do business in the state evidencing current insurance coverage for the owner of
such well and his driller, agents and employees, conditioned for the payment of
all damages due to injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the
drilling, operation or maintenance of the well or any structure, machinery,
pipeline or appurtenance used in connection therewith. Such coverage shall be
in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
   B.   Bond Required:
      1.   Prior to the issuance of any permit, any person who drills or
operates any well for the exploration, development or production of oil or gas,
or as an injection or disposal well, within this city shall furnish a blanket
bond or blanket irrevocable letter of credit in the principal sum of at least
$250,000.00; provided, however, that, upon completion of the well, the City
manager may reduce such bond to $25,000.00 provided the person(s) posting the
Bond shall repaired any damage caused to roads, bridges and other public
property and shall not have violated any of the provisions of this Code. For
good cause, the city manager may require the filing of a blanket bond or letter
of credit in an amount higher than $25,000.00 but not to exceed $100,000.00 by
the applicant. The term “good cause” shall include, but shall not be limited
to, a showing that the operator or applicant has previously violated any of the
provisions of this Code.
      2.   The bond or letter or credit must be executed by a reliable
insurance company or bank authorized to do business in this state, as surety or
creditor. The applicant must be shown as principal or debtor, and the bond or
letter of credit must run to the city for the benefit of the city and all
persons concerned.
      3.   Each bond or letter credit submitted shall cover all wells drilled
or operated by said person within the city.
      4.   The bond or letter of credit must become effective on or before the
date the same is filed with the city and remain in full force and effect for at
least 12 months subsequent to the expiration of the permit term.
      5.   The bond or letter of credit must be conditioned on the requirement
that:
         a.   The applicant must promptly pay all fines, penalties and other
assessments imposed upon the applicant by reason of his breach of any of the
terms, previsions or conditions of this Code;
         b.   The applicant must promptly restore the streets, sidewalks and
other public property of the city’s that may be disturbed or damaged during the
applicant’s operations to their former conditions;
         c.   The applicant must promptly clear all premises of all litter,
trash, waste and other substances and must, after abandonment, grade, level and
restore said property to the same surface condition, as far as possible, as
existed prior to commencing operations;
         d.   The applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any
and all liability attributable to granting the permit;
         e.   The applicant shall promptly pay all sums with respect to
deductibles on covered losses under insurance policies required by this
chapter; and
         f.   The applicant shall comply with all of the terms of this chapter
concerning the abandonment and plugging of all such wells.
      6.   When the drilling operation has been completed in compliance with
all requirements of this chapter, the cash deposit shall be refunded or the
letter of credit released by the city upon the deposit with the city clerk-
treasurer of a surety bond in the amount set by the city, conditioned upon
plugging of the well and the restoration of the land’s surface, such plugging
and restoration to be performed within 90 days of the abandonment in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission and city
ordinances.
      7.   Upon noncompliance with the conditions of this section, the cash
deposit evidenced by the letter of credit or the surety bond shall be forfeited
and the applicant shall provide reimbursement to the landowner for the plugging
of the well and restoration of the land’s surface. (1987 Code § 5-1005; amd.
2004 Code; Ord. 2020-02, 3-19-2020)
9-10-4: LOCATION OF WELLS RESTRICTED TO ZONES:
Oil, gas or disposal wells shall be located in the A-1 or A-2 zones where no
home or other dwelling is located within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed well site, as such zones are defined by the zoning ordinance, as
amended from time to time, and in no other zone, unless a zoning variance is
obtained as provided by the zoning ordinance. (1987 Code § 5-1006)
9-10-5: EARTHEN SLUSH PITS:
   A.   Oil Field Waste Prohibited: Earthen disposal facilities (pits) shall
not be constructed, built, maintained, or used by any person or company to
dispose of oil field waste in any location within the city. (1987 Code § 5-
1007)
   B.   Earthen Pits Allowed: Earthen reserve pits which contain no saltwater,
oil, oil derivatives, caustics, acids or other deleterious substances harmful
to soil or vegetation, or injurious to animal or human life shall be allowed to
be constructed or used in connection with the drilling, swabbing, cleaning out
or reworking of oil or gas wells within the city and the contents thereof need
not be transported from the premises to a disposal facility, provided the same
are leveled and the surface of the ground restored as nearly as possible to its
original condition within ninety (90) days after completion of the drilling,
swabbing, cleanout or reworking operations. (1987 Code § 5-1008)
9-10-6: TANKS CONTAINING FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES:
Storage tanks or other types of tanks containing flammable substances at any
location within the city shall have earthen embankments constructed around them
of sufficient size and height to be able to adequately contain one and one-half
(11/2) times the volume of such tanks in the event of a rupture thereof at the
floor of such tank. No drain plugs, opening or siphons shall be placed in the
walls or dikes which will permit the escape of any liquids through the same. In
no event shall any such tank be located nearer than one hundred feet (100') to
a dwelling or business structure, street or highway within the city. (1987 Code
§ 5-1009)
9-10-7: MUFFLING OF INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES:
No stream, gasoline, natural gas, diesel or other internal combustion engine of
any kind shall be operated within one hundred feet (100') of any dwelling or
business structure within the city unless the same is adequately muffled. (1987
Code § 5-1010)
9-10-8: MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES:
The premises upon which any oil, gas or disposal well is drilled, operated or
maintained shall be kept free of all accumulations of rubbish, litter, unused
equipment or materials, excess rotary mud, saltwater, waste oil or oil
byproducts and other waste, insofar as the same may be reasonably done in the
conduct of operations covered by this chapter. (1987 Code § 5-1011)
9-10-9: APPROVED SAFETY EQUIPMENT AND METHODS:
Approved equipment, standard devices and ordinary methods such as are commonly
known and used in the oil and gas drilling producing industry for the safety
and protection of property from damage due to drilling and operating activities
shall be used at all locations within the city. (1987 Code § 5-1012)
9-10-10: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Surface And Production Casing:
      1.   Surface: At least seven hundred fifty feet (750') of surface casing
shall be set in each well after notification of intention to do so has been
given the conservation department of the state corporation commission, whose
representative shall be entitled to inspect the installation thereof and direct
the type and amount of cement to be used in cementing the same in the hole.
(1987 Code § 5-1013)
      2.   Production: Production casing of a size not less than four and one-
half inches (41/2") outside diameter, in good condition, shall be set no higher
than the top of the producing formation and cemented with a sufficient amount
of cement to obtain a minimum of five hundred feet (500') of annular fill above
the casing. All of such production casing shall be tested by pressure methods
for either drilling the cement plug or performing, if the cement is not
drilled. (1987 Code § 5-1014)
   B.   Master Gate; Blowout Preventers; Flow Lines; Valves: All drilling wells
shall be equipped with a master gate, or its equivalent, adequate blowout
preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressure
involved. (1987 Code § 5-1015)
   C.   Valves And Wellhead Equipment; Flow Tubing: Upon completion of any
flowing well, the wellhead equipment shall have on the tubing at least one
master valve plus a flow valve and a valve on the casing annulus. All wells
shall be equipped with flow tubing of a size at least two inches (2") inside
diameter extending from not less than fifty feet (50') from the top of the
lowest producing formation. (1987 Code § 5-1016)
   D.   Tubing And Pressure Gauge For Disposal Wells: All disposal wells shall
be equipped with at least two inch (2") inside diameter tubing set on a packer,
and a pressure gauge shall be installed on the casing annulus at all times.
(1987 Code § 5-1017)
9-10-11: BLASTING PROHIBITED:
No blasting shall be allowed around or within any existing well. (1987 Code §
5-1018)
9-10-12: PENALTY:
See section
9-1-5 of this title for penalty provisions. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 11
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-11-1: Mechanical Code Adopted
9-11-2: Amendments To Mechanical Code
9-11-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated as the
international mechanical code - administrative provisions (see international
mechanical code, 2012 edition) as published by the International Code Council,
including all amendments or modifications thereof be and is hereby adopted as
the code of the city of McLoud for regulating the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city
of McLoud and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of such international mechanical code, 2012 edition, published by the
International Code Council, on file in the office of the city of McLoud are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-18, 11-21-2013)
9-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO MECHANICAL CODE:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-18, 11-21-2013)
CHAPTER 12
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
9-12-1: Existing Building Code Adopted
9-12-2: Amendments
9-12-1: EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated as the 2012
international existing building code, including all amendments or modifications
thereof is hereby adopted as the code of the city of McLoud in the state of
Oklahoma; for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses
not more than three (3) stories in height in the city of McLoud, and founded on
principles intended to encourage the use and reuse of existing buildings that
adequately protect public health, safety and welfare; provisions that do not
unnecessarily increase construction costs; provisions that do not restrict the
use of new materials, products or methods of construction; and provisions that
do not give preferential treatment to particular types or classes of materials,
products or methods of construction, and providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such international existing building code,
2012 edition, published by the International Code Council on file in the office
of the city of McLoud are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-23, 11-21-2013)
9-12-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-23, 11-21-2013)
CHAPTER 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
9-13-1: Property Maintenance Code Adopted
9-13-2: Amendments
9-13-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of the city of McLoud, being marked and designated as the 2012 IPMC
code and commentary - as published by the International Code Council including
all amendments or modifications thereto be and is hereby adopted as the code of
the city of McLoud to provide a basic volume of knowledge and facts relating to
existing structures as it pertains to the regulations regarding property
maintenance set forth in the 2012 international property maintenance code in
the city of McLoud and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such is on file in the office of the city of McLoud are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-24, 11-21-2013)
9-13-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of McLoud
(Ord. 2013-24, 11-21-2013)
TITLE 10
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE A. PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
10-1A-1: Creation; Membership; Terms
10-1A-2: Quorum
10-1A-3: Organization; Officers
10-1A-4: Personnel Hiring Authority
10-1A-5: Expenditures
10-1A-6: Powers And Duties
10-1A-7: General Purpose Of Comprehensive Plan
10-1A-8: Subdivision Of Land
10-1A-9: Zoning Provisions
10-1A-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Appointment; Terms: A city planning commission is hereby created. It
shall consist of five (5) appointive members, all of whom shall be citizens of
the city. The mayor shall serve as ex officio member of the commission. The
five (5) appointive members shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of
the city council, and shall serve for terms of three (3) years, or until their
successors take office.
   B.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of the term
shall be filled for the unexpired terms.
   C.   Compensation: The members shall serve without compensation, except for
necessary expenses. (Ord. 2003-09, 11-13-2003)
10-1A-2: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business; provided, however, that no action shall be taken which
is binding upon the commission, unless concurred in by not less than a majority
of all members comprising the commission. (Ord. 2003-09, 11-13-2003)
10-1A-3: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS:
   A.   Election Of Officers; Terms: The planning commission shall elect a
chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary and may create and fill such other
offices as it may deem necessary. The term of the chairman, vice chairman and
secretary shall be one year with eligibility for reelection.
   B.   Meetings: The planning commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month.
   C.   Rules And Records: The planning commission shall adopt rules for the
transactions of business and keep a record of its regulations, transactions,
findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. (1987 Code
§ 12-103)
10-1A-4: PERSONNEL HIRING AUTHORITY:
   A.   Authority; Budgetary Limits: The planning commission shall have the
power, subject to the approval of the city council, to employ planners,
engineers, attorneys, clerks and other help deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the commission, within the limits of appropriation fixed by the
city council.
   B.   Compensation Of Employees: The salary and compensation of such
employees shall be fixed by the city council, and shall be paid out of the city
treasury as other officers and employees, and the necessary expenses incurred
by the commission shall be paid out of the city treasury as other legal expense
of the city government. (1987 Code § 12-104)
10-1A-5: EXPENDITURES:
The planning commission shall make application to the city council for the
funds that may be necessary for such commission to expend in order to carry out
its duties as herein specified. The planning commission shall make application
to the city council for an appropriation to be set up for its use in carrying
out its duties. (1987 Code § 12-112)
10-1A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The planning commission shall have the power and duty to prepare and
recommend to the city council for adoption a comprehensive plan for the
physical development and betterment of the city.
   B.   In conducting its work, the commission may consider and investigate any
subject matter pertaining to the development, betterment and zoning of the city
and make recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption
thereof by the city council.
   C.   The commission may make or cause to be made surveys, studies, maps and
plans for the conduct of its activities, and before final action is taken by
the city council on the location or design of any public buildings, statues or
memorials, parks, or boulevards, streets, alleys, playgrounds, public grounds,
bridges, or any change in the location of any street or alley, the question
shall be submitted to the commission for investigation and report.
   D.   The commission may recommend extending, amending or changing any
portion of the comprehensive plan. (1987 Code § 12-105)
10-1A-7: GENERAL PURPOSE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall
make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the present conditions
and future growth of the city, and with due regard to its relation to
neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted development of the city and
its environs which will be in accordance with present and future needs, best
promote health, safety and morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare. (1987 Code § 12-106)
10-1A-8: SUBDIVISION OF LAND:
The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the city council for
adoption, rules and regulations governing subdivisions of land within the city
limits. All plans, plats and replats of land laid out in two (2) or more lots,
plats or parcels, or streets or alleys, or other ways intended to be dedicated
for public use shall be first submitted to the commission for its
recommendations. The commission shall check the proposed dedication or
subdivision to ensure compliance with the comprehensive plan. The disapproval
of any plan, plat or replat by the city shall be deemed the refusal of the
dedication thereon. No plat or replat of subdivision of land, or dedication of
street or alley or other easement shall be entitled to record unless it bears
the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, certifying the approval
and acceptance by the city council. (1987 Code § 12-108)
10-1A-9: ZONING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Zoning Commission:
      1.   Planning Commission Serve As: The city planning commission shall
serve as a zoning commission for the city.
      2.   Limitation Of Zoning Authority: The authority of the city planning
commission to serve as a zoning commission for the city in any actions taken by
the commission under this code, shall all be subject to the provisions of title
11 of this code, and the actions of the commission as a zoning commission are
specifically subject to the appellate authority and jurisdiction of the board
of adjustment as established in article B of this chapter. (1987 Code § 12-111)
   B.   Uniformity Of Zoning Regulations:
      1.   The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the city
council a zoning plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories,
the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be
occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of
population, the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade,
industry, residences or other purposes.
      2.   The planning commission may recommend the division of the city into
districts of such number, size and area that may be deemed best suited to carry
out the zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or
kind of building throughout the district, but the regulations from one district
may differ from those of other districts. (1987 Code § 12-109)
   C.   Purpose Of Zoning Plan: Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance
with the comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets,
to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to promote health and the
general welfare, to promote adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding
of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate
provisions of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and the public
requirements, such regulations to be made with a reasonable consideration,
among other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of
buildings, and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(1987 Code § 12-110)
ARTICLE B. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
10-1B-1: Creation; Membership; Terms
10-1B-2: Meetings And Procedures
10-1B-3: Appeals
10-1B-4: Variances
10-1B-5: Exceptions
10-1B-6: Exercise Of Powers
10-1B-7: Appeal To District Court
10-1B-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Appointment; Terms:
      1.   There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustment consisting of
five (5) members, citizens of the city, each to be appointed by the mayor, with
the approval of the city council, for a term of three (3) years.
      2.   For the first appointment under the provisions of this article,
however, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year; two (2) members
shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; and two (2) members shall be
appointed for a term of three (3) years. All appointments thereafter shall be
for a term of three (3) years.
      3.   One member of the board shall be appointed from the membership of
the city planning commission and one member shall be appointed from the
membership of the city council.
   B.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for
the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
   C.   Chairman: The board shall elect a chairman from its membership to serve
for a term of two (2) years. (1987 Code § 12-121)
10-1B-2: MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Rules; Organization:
      1.   The zoning board of adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and
at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his
absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and require the attendance
of witnesses by subpoena.
      3.   The board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
city clerk and shall be a public record.
   B.   Voting: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant or any
matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance or code, or
to effect any variation in such ordinance or code. (1987 Code § 12-122)
10-1B-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Procedure; Notice; Filing Fee:
      1.   Appeals to the zoning board of adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected
by any decision of the administrative officer.
      2.   Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the
decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and with the
city clerk, notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor, and by paying a
filing fee, as set by the city council, at the office of the city clerk at the
time the notice is filed.
      3.   The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit
to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his
opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on the cause shown.
   C.   Hearing; Notice: The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, give public
notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or by attorney. (1987 Code § 12-123)
   D.   Errors: The board of adjustment shall have the powers to hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the administrative officer in the
enforcement of the zoning regulations set forth in title 11 of this code. (1987
Code § 12-124)
10-1B-4: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: The zoning board of adjustment shall have the power to
authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of the
zoning regulations in title 11 of this code as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of the zoning regulations will, in any individual case, result
in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the zoning regulations shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
   B.   Grant Of Variance; Findings: Such variances may be granted in such
individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of
adjustment that:
      1.   At the time of the original adoption of the zoning regulations,
there were extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the
particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or
topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a
specific piece of property.
      2.   The strict application of the zoning regulations to this particular
and exceptional piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, not
self-imposed by the owner or developer.
      3.   Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of
property involved and not generally prevalent in the area.
      4.   Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the
public good or impair the purposes and intent of the zoning regulations.
Provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or
building or structure that is prohibited by the zoning regulations set forth in
title 11 of this code. (1987 Code § 12-125)
10-1B-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The zoning board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide special
exceptions to the terms of this title, and titles 11 and 12 of this code, upon
which the board is required to pass under this title, and titles 11 and 12 of
this code. Upon appeal, the board is empowered to permit the following
exceptions:
   A.   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record;
   B.   To interpret the provisions of this title, and titles 11 and 12 of this
code, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street
layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is on file
in the office of the city clerk; and
   C.   To grant exceptions to the off street parking requirements set forth in
title 11, chapter 9 of this code when it is determined that the size and shape
of the lot to be built on is such that off street parking provisions could not
be complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic
congestion in the adjacent streets. (1987 Code § 12-126)
10-1B-6: EXERCISE OF POWERS:
In exercising its powers, the zoning board of adjustment may, in conformance
with the provisions of this title, and titles 11 and 12 of this code, reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals from
rulings made under this title, and titles 11 and 12 of this code, the board
shall, in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the
proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the
congestion of the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other
hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and
upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and
general welfare of the people of the city. Every ruling made upon any appeal to
the board shall be accompanied by written findings of fact based upon the
testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall specify the
reason for granting or denying the appeal. (1987 Code § 12-127)
10-1B-7: APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT:
   A.   Filing Notice Of Appeal:
      1.   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of
the zoning board of adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly
or severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city, to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the
city clerk and with the board of adjustment within ten (10) days from the
filing of the decision of the board, which notice shall specify the grounds of
such appeal.
      2.   Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the board
shall transmit to the court clerk the original or certified copy of all the
papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision
or ruling of the board.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal to the district court from the board of
adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken
certifies to the court clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
district court or superior court upon application or notice to the
administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions
of this title, and titles 11 and 12 of this code, and upon notice to the
chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken, and upon
due cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify the decision brought up for review. (1987 Code § 12-128)
CHAPTER 2
MANUFACTURED HOMES; MOBILE HOME PARKS
ARTICLE A. MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION:
10-2A-1: Intent
10-2A-2: Definitions
10-2A-3: Zoning Clearance Permit
10-2A-4: Permit Fees
10-2A-5: Temporary Use Permit; Requirements
10-2A-6: Use As Permanent Structure; Compliance With Regulations
10-2A-7: Legal Nonconforming Use; Abandonment
10-2A-8: Freestanding Manufactured Homes; Placement
10-2A-9: Structural Alterations; Approval
10-2A-10: Front Width; Depth Requirements
10-2A-11: Installation Standards
10-2A-12: Penalty; Remedial Action
10-2A-1: INTENT:
   A.   It is the intent of this article to provide an alternative to site
built housing by permitting the use of "manufactured structures", as defined
herein, in certain specified zoning districts in which similar construction on
site is permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein
to assure acceptable similarity in exterior appearance between such off site
manufactured structures and structures that have been or might be constructed
under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent or nearby lots in the same
zoning districts.
   B.   It is the further intent of this article to encourage the provision of
alternative modest income housing in certain residential areas by permitting
the use of "manufactured structures", as defined herein, in certain specified
districts, when they are shown to meet the requirements and procedures set
forth herein. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below or elsewhere in this code, words or phrases
used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meanings they have
in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application:
ADD-A-ROOM UNIT: A unit of a manufactured structure, not designed as a part of
the original structure, which may have less occupied space than a manufactured
structure section.
ANCHORING SYSTEM: A system of straps, cables, turn buckles, chains, ties, or
other approved materials used to secure a manufactured structure or mobile home
as directed by the manufactured home construction and safety standards (HUD
code) or the local building code.
APPROVED: Acceptable to the appropriate authority having jurisdiction, by
reason of investigation, accepted principles, or tests by nationally recognized
organizations.
BUILDING CODE: The officially adopted building code in effect within the city.
ELECTRICAL CODE: The officially adopted electrical code in effect within the
city.
EXPANDO UNIT: An expandable manufactured unit.
FREESTANDING: A single manufactured structure located on a parcel of land
outside the boundaries of a mobile home park.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS CODE: Title VI of the
1974 housing and community development act, department of housing and urban
development (commonly referred to as the HUD code).
MANUFACTURED STRUCTURE: A structural unit fabricated on or after June 15, 1976,
in an off site manufacturing facility, for installation or assembly at the
building site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with
the federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards code.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable structure larger than three hundred twenty (320)
square feet, designed to be used as a year round residential dwelling, and
built prior to the enactment of the federal mobile home construction and safety
act of 1974, which became effective for all mobile home construction June 15,
1976.
OCCUPIED SPACE: The total area of earth horizontally covered by the structure,
excluding accessory structures, such as, but not limited to, garages, patios
and porches.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION: Any structural system for transposing loads from a
structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost line without
exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
PLUMBING CODE: The officially adopted plumbing code in effect within the city.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A transportable vehicular structure not built to the
manufactured housing construction and safety standards designed for travel,
recreational camping or vacation purposes, either having its own motor power or
mounted onto, or drawn by, another vehicle and including, but not limited to,
travel and camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes.
RURAL AREA: A nonurban area having a predominant agricultural land use.
SECTION: A unit of a manufactured structure at least ten (10) body feet in
width and thirty (30) body feet in length.
SIDING/SKIRTING: A type of wainscoting constructed of fire and weather
resistant material such as aluminum, asbestos board, treated pressed wood or
other approved materials, enclosing the entire undercarriage of the
manufactured structure.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT: A device for permitting a use within a zoning
district other than a principally permitted use.
URBAN AREA: Any land zoned for residential use and less than five (5) acres in
size. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000; amd. Ord. 2008-02, 3-27-2008)
10-2A-3: ZONING CLEARANCE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Requirements: Zoning clearance permit requirements are as
follows:
      1.   Permit Required; Application: Prior to the location, relocation or
establishment of any manufactured structure outside of a mobile home community
(park), the property owner or authorized representative shall secure a zoning
clearance permit, which states that the building and its location conform with
the ordinances of the city. Each application for a zoning clearance permit
shall be accompanied by:
         a.   A plot plan drawn to scale showing the boundaries of the land and
the location of where the manufactured home will be placed on the property.
         b.   Photographs of all sides of the structure and a written
description that includes outside dimensions of the structure.
         c.   Health department approval for water supply and sewer disposal
where applicable.
      2.   Compliance With Standards; Permit Issuance: After receipt of the
information required for a zoning clearance permit, the building official shall
review the standards set out in this article. If the applicant has met all
required standards, then within five (5) working days after receipt of all
information required herein, a permit will be issued.
      3.   Freestanding Manufactured Homes; Rural Area: Freestanding
manufactured homes shall be permitted in the McLoud rural area, but only in A-
1 zoned districts.
      4.   Conditional Approval; Completion Of Minor Changes: If after receipt
of the information required for the zoning clearance permit, the building
official finds that the applicant has not fully met the standards set in this
code, and the changes or additional actions needed are deemed by the designated
administrator to be relatively minor or simple, then within five (5) working
days after receipt of all the information, a conditional approval can be issued
with the conditions which must be met prior to occupancy spelled out, and the
reasons for change clearly stated in writing. If the applicant agrees in
writing to the further conditions, the effect being an amendment to the
application to conform to the requirements, approval is given and the applicant
proceeds. If the applicant does not agree in writing, the application is
denied, with reasons stated in writing.
      5.   Permit Denial: If any of the major elements are clearly out of line
with the standards, within five (5) working days after receipt of all the
information, issuance of the zoning clearance permit will be denied, with a
written statement specifying the reasons for the denial.
   B.   Failure To Obtain Permit: Failure to obtain either a zoning clearance
permit or a certification of occupancy as required in this article shall be a
violation of this article and punishable under the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-4: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Computation: All fees will be computed based upon the building permit
fee schedule set by the city.
   B.   Payment Required Before Permit Issuance: Building permits will not be
issued until all fees have been collected. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-5: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conditions For Issuance: Subject to conditions, fees, and standards
otherwise required by this article, a temporary use permit may be issued:
      1.   To an applicant in the process of building a conventional dwelling
to locate a manufactured structure or mobile home on a building lot during the
course of construction of the dwelling, such permit shall not be issued until
after a building permit on the dwelling has been issued; or
      2.   To an applicant to use a manufactured structure or mobile home as a
caretaker's quarters or construction office at a job site.
   B.   Term Of Permit; Renewal: A temporary use permit may be issued by the
building official. The permit will be issued to run concurrent with the
building permit for the conventional building. The temporary permit may be
renewed if the building permit is renewed, and with approval from the city
council to do so.
   C.   Expiration Of Permit; Removal Of Appurtenances: At the time the
temporary permit expires, the manufactured structure or mobile home and all
appurtenances shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) days.
   D.   Utility Connections: Manufactured structures or mobile homes used for
temporary uses shall have an approved water supply, sewage disposal system, and
utility connections. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-6: USE AS PERMANENT STRUCTURE; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
The establishment, location, and use of manufactured structures as permanent
structures approved individually, by specific materials, or by design, shall be
permitted, subject to the requirements and limitations applying generally to
uses in the district, and provided such structures shall meet the following
requirements and limitations as set forth in this article, the comprehensive
plan and other ordinances of the city. This article shall only apply to
freestanding manufactured homes located outside of manufactured/mobile home
communities (parks). (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-7: LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE; ABANDONMENT:
A manufactured home placed on a tract of land and deemed to be a legal
nonconforming use prior to adoption of this article shall continue to be a
legal nonconforming use. If the nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned
for six (6) consecutive months, the land thereafter must be used in conformity
with all provisions of this code. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-8: FREESTANDING MANUFACTURED HOMES; PLACEMENT:
Freestanding manufactured homes shall be permitted in the McLoud rural area, on
land zoned A-1. Freestanding manufactured homes shall not be permitted in any
other zoning districts, except for commercial and educational use or sale on
manufactured home and travel trailer sales lots. Any freestanding manufactured
home placed on a tract of land, with a primary use as a private residence, will
not exceed three (3) years of age when placed on the property. (Ord. 2000-12,
11-9-2000)
10-2A-9: STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS; APPROVAL:
Due to its integral design, any structural alteration or modification of a
manufactured structure or mobile home after it is placed on the site must be
approved by the building official of the city. All structural additions shall
comply with the city's building, electrical, plumbing and other applicable
codes. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-10: FRONT WIDTH; DEPTH REQUIREMENTS:
Manufactured homes must have a minimum front width of twenty four feet (24')
and a minimum depth of twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-11: INSTALLATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Connection To Utilities: Manufactured structures which bear a
certification label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with
federal manufactured home construction and safety standards shall be installed
and connected to utilities as required by the federal manufactured home
construction and safety standards.
   B.   Foundation; Anchoring; Compliance With Codes: Manufactured homes shall:
      1.   Be placed on an approved foundation meeting the manufacturer's
specifications.
      2.   Be anchored to the ground in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications.
      3.   Have utilities connected, in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications and meeting the codes of the city. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2A-12: PENALTY; REMEDIAL ACTION:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Each day of noncompliance with punishable provisions
of this article constitutes a separate and distinct violation. Punishment per
day may be assessed for each violation of this article as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Removal Of Structure For Noncompliance: A structure sited upon property
in violation of this article shall be subject to removal from such property. If
action finally is taken by the appropriate authority to bring compliance, the
expense involved may be made a lien against the property.
   C.   Filing Suit: The building official may institute suit in an appropriate
court for injunctive relief to cause such violation to be prevented, abated or
removed. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
ARTICLE B. MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
10-2B-1: Definitions
10-2B-2: License Required; Fee
10-2B-3: Park Attendant
10-2B-4: Park Design And Improvements; New Parks Prohibited
10-2B-5: Site Requirements
10-2B-6: Park Identification Or Numbering System
10-2B-7: Landscaping; Ground Cover
10-2B-8: Fire Protection; Litter Control
10-2B-9: Compliance With Codes; Utility Connections
10-2B-10: Area Requirements For Park And Open Spaces
10-2B-11: Traffic Control And Pet Regulations
10-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
MHMA: Mobile Home Manufacturers' Association.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable structure larger than three hundred twenty (320)
square feet, designed to be used as a year round, residential dwelling, and
built prior to the enactment of the federal mobile home construction and safety
act of 1974, which became effective for mobile home construction June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for placement of mobile homes to be occupied as
residences.
SITE OR LOT: A well defined plot of land designated as the location for a
single mobile home, not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
10-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required; Inspection: It is unlawful for any person to
establish, operate, maintain or permit to be established, operated or
maintained upon any property controlled or owned by him, a "mobile home park"
as defined in this article without having first secured a license and having
paid the proper fee for inspection of the construction of such park.
   B.   Fee: The fee for a mobile home park where two (2) or more mobile homes
are located shall be as set by the city per occupied lot. The fee is payable to
the city clerk. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2B-3: PARK ATTENDANT:
   A.   Office In Park; Posting License; Park Register: In every mobile home
park there shall be a building in which shall be located the office of the
person in charge of the park. A copy of the city license issued by the city,
together with a copy of this article pertaining thereto, and a plan of the area
involved, shall be posted for public view. The park register shall be kept at
all times in the office and subject to inspection by city authorities at all
times.
   B.   Duties Of Attendant And Licensee: It is hereby made the duty of the
attendant or person in charge, and licensee, of the park to:
      1.   Keep a register at all times of all guests showing:
         a.   Name of the person owning the mobile home;
         b.   A license number of mobile home and the owner's car license
number together with the name of the state where such license was issued;
         c.   Date of entrance into the park;
         d.   Number of people residing in the mobile home and their names.
      2.   Maintain the park in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
      3.   Assure that the provisions of this article are complied with by the
occupants of the park and report promptly to city authorities violations of
this or other ordinances.
      4.   Report to the city authorities all cases of persons or animals
suspected of being infected with any communicable disease. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-
2000)
10-2B-4: PARK DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS; NEW PARKS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Site Drainage: All mobile/manufactured home parks shall be located on a
well drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from
stagnant pools of water. The drainage shall not endanger any water supply.
   B.   Design And Installation Of Improvements: All improvements shall be
designed and installed in a manner such that either meet or exceed the minimum
standards established by the regulations set forth in this article.
   C.   New Parks Prohibited: No new mobile home parks will be established in
the city.
   D.   Existing Parks: Those mobile home parks already existing in the city
will be allowed to continue; however, no expansion of these parks will be
permitted. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2B-5: SITE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Homes And Buildings; Proximity To Streets: No occupied mobile home or
building of any nature shall be located within the city limits nearer to the
roads or streets than a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the applicable
setback line in which such mobile home or building is located.
   B.   Drainage: Every mobile home park shall be located on an area having
good drainage of surface waters.
   C.   Driveways And Streets: All sites or lots shall be clearly designated
and the park so arranged that all sites abut on a driveway or street at least
sixteen feet (16') in width, given access to all units from a public street.
All driveways and roads within the park shall have natural drainage and shall
be well lighted at night and unobstructed.
   D.   Off Street Parking Space: All sites abutting a street or drive of less
than thirty feet (30') in width shall have at least one off street parking
space.
   E.   Utility Connections: Connections for sanitary sewer facilities, water,
gas and electricity shall be provided in a common location at each mobile home
site. Electrical connections must be sufficient for 50 ampere circuit and a 50
ampere circuit breaker installed at each site.
   F.   Garbage Disposal: Every mobile home site shall be provided with garbage
disposal facilities according to the provisions of the city ordinances.
   G.   Water Supply: Water supply requirements are as follows:
      1.   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each mobile home park;
      2.   Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality and
pressure is available within three hundred feet (300'), connection shall be
made thereto and its supply used exclusively;
      3.   When a satisfactory public water system is not available, a private
water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the state health
department;
      4.   The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of two
hundred fifty (250) gallons per day per mobile home space and shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with this subsection;
      5.   The treatment of private water supply shall be in accordance with
the applicable laws and regulations as approved by the state health department.
   H.   Sewage System: An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in
all mobile homes for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall
be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of
the state health department:
      1.   In the event that a public sewer system either is or becomes
reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission and the city
council, the sanitary sewer system shall be connected to the public sewer
system;
      2.   All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to
be free of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from
the park water supply system at a safe distance. Sewers shall be at a grade
which will ensure a velocity of two feet (2') per second when flowing full. All
sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the state health
department, shall be adequately vented, and shall have watertight joints. (Ord.
2000-12, 11-9-2000)
10-2B-6: PARK IDENTIFICATION OR NUMBERING SYSTEM:
Each home shall be identified while in a park space by some clear, legible and
orderly external method of identification or numbering system. (Ord. 2000-12,
11-9-2000)
10-2B-7: LANDSCAPING; GROUND COVER:
All land areas which are not covered by an impervious surface shall be
landscaped and maintained with appropriate vegetation. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-
2000)
10-2B-8: FIRE PROTECTION; LITTER CONTROL:
   A.   Litter: Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and
other flammable materials.
   B.   Fires: Fires shall be made only in stoves.
   C.   Barbecue Pits; Fireplace Stoves: The regulations for barbecue pits,
fireplaces stoves, etc., shall be as follows:
      1.   Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and wood burning stoves
shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used to minimize fire hazards
and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring
property;
      2.   No open fires shall be left unattended 1 ; and
      3.   No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke
or objectionable odors.
   D.   Water For Fire Protection: Fire protection capability shall include a
water distribution system with components necessary to provide fire protection
equivalent to that which is required in other residential areas in the city.
(Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-4-7 of this code.
10-2B-9: COMPLIANCE WITH CODES; UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Building Standards: All plumbing, electrical, building, installation
standards and other work on any park licensed under this article shall be
performed in accordance with the ordinances of the city regulating the same
unless the ordinances are specifically made inapplicable under the terms
thereof or under the terms of this article. The city may connect and disconnect
water, gas and sewage facilities to mobile homes located in any park operated
under the provisions of this article.
   B.   Sewer Connection Inspection Fees: Sewer connection inspection fees for
mobile home parks shall be those applicable to family dwellings and each site
within the park shall be deemed a family living unit. The monthly sewer service
charge for mobile home parks shall be as set by the city. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-
2000)
10-2B-10: AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR PARK AND OPEN SPACES:
   A.   Sites Per Acre: In a mobile home park, there shall not be more than
eight (8) mobile home sites per acre, inclusive of streets, alleys and public
ways.
   B.   Recreation And Playground Areas: Recreation and playground areas shall
consist of not less than five percent (5%) of the total area within the
confines of the park and shall be maintained by the park owner. (Ord. 2000-12,
11-9-2000)
10-2B-11: TRAFFIC CONTROL AND PET REGULATIONS:
All ordinances enacted by the city pertaining to traffic and vehicles, and the
control of pets or animals, shall be fully as effective within the park as
though streets and driveways were dedicated to public use, and the consent and
agreement of the owner of the park, streets, and highways thereto shall be a
condition precedent to the issuance of the license. (Ord. 2000-12, 11-9-2000)
CHAPTER 3
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-3-1: Statutory Authorization
10-3-2: Findings Of Fact
10-3-3: Statement Of Purpose
10-3-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
10-3-5: Definitions
10-3-6: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
10-3-7: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
10-3-8: Establishment Of Development Permit
10-3-9: Compliance
10-3-10: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-3-11: Interpretation
10-3-12: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
10-3-13: Floodplain Administrator
10-3-14: Permit Procedures
10-3-15: Variance Procedures
10-3-16: General Standards
10-3-17: Specific Standards
10-3-18: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
10-3-19: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
10-3-20: Floodways
10-3-21: Fee Schedule
10-3-22: Penalties
10-3-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The Legislature of the State of Oklahoma has in the Oklahoma Floodplain
Management Act, sections 1601 through 1620.1 of title 82 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of McLoud,
Oklahoma of Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma, does hereby ordain that this chapter
as set forth herein, and any lawfully enacted amendments thereto, be hereby
enacted and effective on the date of adoption. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-
8-2019)
10-3-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the City of McLoud, Oklahoma are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      7.   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
   A.   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Structures which are on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure, but not limited to garages and storage sheds.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial
fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by
high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: Means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD: Means the land area that would be
inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: Means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three
feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: Is the land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM).
After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR,
AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: Means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A,
AE, AH, A1-30 and AR that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from
the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of equaling or exceeding in any
given year - also called the base flood.
BASEMENT: Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL: Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE: Means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: Means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Means for the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Means a manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCES: Means this chapter, and any lawfully
enacted amendments or revisions thereto.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: Means an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): Means an official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): See definition of Flood Elevation Study.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: Means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Means those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: Means the operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Means Zoning Ordinances, subdivision
regulations, Building Codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a Floodplain Ordinance, Grading Ordinance and Erosion Control
Ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: Means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY: See definition of regulatory floodway.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: Means a use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: Means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Means any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1. By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
      2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: Means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: Means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: Means a structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: Means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Means a vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis;
b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections; c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
RIVERINE: Means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: See definition of area of special flood hazard.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or
Safety Code specifications which have been identified by the local Code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions or b) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
VARIANCE: Means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations.)
VIOLATION: Means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10)
or (d)(3) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: Means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in floodplains. (Ord.
2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-6: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of McLoud, Oklahoma. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-
8-2019)
10-3-7: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
"The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of McLoud, Oklahoma and
Incorporated Areas" dated May 16, 2019, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated May 16, 2019
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-8: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-9: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-10: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord.
2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-11: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a) considered as minimum requirements; b) liberally construed in favor of the
Governing Body; and c) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under State Statutes. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-12: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2019-04,
5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-13: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Designation: The Floodplain Manager for the City of McLoud, Oklahoma is
hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency
Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the
proposed building site projects, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
Oklahoma Water Resources Board prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with section
10-3-7 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
sections
10-3-16,
10-3-17,
10-3-18,
10-3-19 and
10-3-20 of this chapter.
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section
65.12.
      11.   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with title 82 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 1601 - 1620, as amended.
      12.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the community of Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma, determine if the residential
and non-residential structures and manufactured homes have been substantially
damaged, and enforce the substantial improvement requirement.
      13.   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the City Council. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-14: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection
10-3-17A2 of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection
10-3-13B1 of this chapter;
   B.   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-
2019)
10-3-15: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The Appeal Board, as established by the community, shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
10-3-14B of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (section
10-3-3 of this chapter).
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon: a) showing a good and
sufficient cause; b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and c) a determination that
the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that: a) the criteria outlined in
subsections A through I of this section are met, and b) the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-
2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-16: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
      7.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019,
eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-17: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
   A.   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in: 1) section
10-3-7 of this chapter, 2) subsection
10-3-13B8 of this chapter, or 3) subsection
10-3-18C of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated at or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection
10-3-14A1 of this chapter is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam
of the manufactured home is elevated at or above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to Oklahoma State
law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection A4 be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is elevated at or above
the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE on the Pottawatomie County's FIRM
either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days, or
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of section
10-3-14 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection A4 of this section. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
      6.   Accessory Structure: Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A and AE on the Pottawatomie County's FIRM shall comply with the
following:
         a.   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
         b.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use;
         c.   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
         d.   Structures shall be small in size, not exceed six hundred (600)
square feet in size;
         e.   Structures exceeding six hundred (600) square feet in size will
be required to meet all applicable standards of sections
10-3-8,
10-3-15, and
10-3-16 of this chapter and this section, including relevant subsections;
         f.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must
be elevated to or above the BFE;
         g.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
         h.   The structure shall be considered low in value, designed to have
low flood damage potential and constructed with flood resistance materials;
         i.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
         j.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
         k.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE; and be placed on opposing walls with the net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of the size of the
footprint of the structure (flood vents);
         l.   The openings (flood vents) shall be located no higher than one
foot (1') above grade;
         m.   The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of flood waters. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-18: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
10-3-2,
10-3-3, and
10-3-4 of this chapter.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain
development permit requirements of sections
10-3-8 and
10-3-14 of this chapter; and the provisions of sections
10-3-16,
10-3-17,
10-3-19, and
10-3-20 of this chapter, and this section.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
10-3-7 or subsection
10-3-13B8 of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-19: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
   A.   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
10-3-7 of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one foot (1') to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures;
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at or above
the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified), or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base specified flood depth level in an AO Zone, or
below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in section
10-3-14 of this chapter are satisfied.
      4.   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-20: FLOODWAYS:
   A.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
section
10-3-7 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
      1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of sections
10-3-16,
10-3-17,
10-3-18, and
10-3-19 of this chapter and this section.
      3.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes
all of the provisions required by section 65.12. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff.
5-8-2019)
10-3-21: FEE SCHEDULE:
The City Council of the City of McLoud, Oklahoma establishes the following fee
schedule not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one service:
 
A. Notice of intent fee                             $ 25.00 maximum
B. Floodplain development permit application review 100.00
C. Floodplain development permit fee                25.00
D. Inspection fee - per inspection                  25.00
E. Variance request filing fee                      25.00
 
(Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
10-3-22: PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than one
year, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
of McLoud, Oklahoma from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2019-04, 5-8-2019, eff. 5-8-2019)
CHAPTER 4
STORMWATER
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Stormwater Management Fund Establishment; Funding
10-4-3: Stormwater Fee
10-4-4: Inspection
10-4-5: City Council Discretion
10-4-6: Construction Stormwater Discharge Permit
10-4-7: Permit Application Fees
10-4-8: Maintenance And Submittal Of Records
10-4-9: Transfer Of Permit
10-4-10: Land Disturbing Activity Regulated
10-4-11: Sediment And Erosion Control
10-4-12: Unauthorized Discharges A Public Nuisance
10-4-13: Illicit Discharge And Illegal Dumping
10-4-14: Variances
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain and enhance the
environment of the city and the short term and long term public health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of McLoud by controlling stormwater runoff
and discharges of pollutants in the city, and to maintain and improve the
quality of the community waters including, without limitation, the lakes,
rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, sinkholes and groundwater of the city. It is
further the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
welfare by providing for studying, designing, operating, constructing,
equipping and maintaining the stormwater drainage system. The establishment of
a stormwater drainage system would:
   A.   Reduce flood and storm losses and inconveniences from uncontrolled
stormwater runoff in the city;
   B.   Improve conditions so that the movement of emergency vehicles is
neither prohibited nor inhibited during storm or flood periods; and
   C.   Preserve and improve the city's watercourses, improve and preserve
water quality, minimize water quality degradation and otherwise facilitate
water resource management techniques, including the reduction of pollution and
the enhancement of the urban environment and such other requirements of the
city, state and federal governments. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-2: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FUND ESTABLISHMENT; FUNDING:
   A.   In the event the city determines to impose a stormwater fee, the
stormwater management fund is hereby established to receive all of the
stormwater charges collected for the use of the city's stormwater drainage
system and to meet applicable local, state and federal regulations. The fund
shall be maintained for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues
and expenses attributable to the stormwater charge. All of the stormwater
charges collected and all loans, grants or funds received for the
administration, operation, construction and improvement of the stormwater
drainage system shall be deposited into the fund. The fund shall be used to pay
for costs of data collection, planning, designing, engineering, policing,
constructing, maintaining, operating and improving drainage services and
facilities and any other activity provided for by this chapter.
   B.   Expenditures and disbursements from the fund shall be at the direction
and discretion of the city council acting through the city manager. (Ord. 2013-
11, 6-27-2013)
10-4-3: STORMWATER FEE:
The city council reserves unto itself the right to establish and impose a
stormwater fee under such terms and conditions as it shall deem necessary by
ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-27-2013)
10-4-4: INSPECTION:
The city manager, or other designated city employee or agent (hereafter
referred to as manager) shall have the right to inspect any on site detention
or retention facility at any reasonable time to determine if it is in
compliance with the applicable requirements and is capable of functioning
properly. The manager shall have the right to inspect any property within the
city to determine the source, quantity, quality or flow rate of stormwater and
to determine the source and nature of pollutants, hazards and/or activities
creating or promoting pollutants or hazards. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-5: CITY COUNCIL DISCRETION:
The determination of stormwater services to be provided, and stormwater
facilities and improvements to be constructed will be made at the sole
discretion of the city council. The manager shall recommend the provision of
stormwater services and construction, repair or replacement of stormwater
facilities and improvements to the city council based upon engineering
analyses, taking into consideration frequency of flooding events, potential
loss of life, potential property damage, potential effect upon the general
public and any other factor affecting the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-
27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-6: CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT:
   A.   All new utility, industrial, commercial, institutional and multi-family
residential facilities and all residential subdivisions shall obtain a
construction stormwater discharge permit prior to construction activity. The
construction stormwater discharge permit shall be required in addition to any
permits required by the state or elsewhere in this code for stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity or for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity or land disturbing activity.
   B.   The minimum standards for issuance of a construction stormwater
discharge permit shall be a pollution prevention plan, and either an approved
general OPDES permit or a land disturbing permit. The application for a
construction stormwater discharge permit shall be filed with the manager and
shall:
      1.   Include, if the facility is to be covered under a DEQ OPDES permit
for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, a general OPDES
permit, an industrial OPDES permit or an NOI, copies of such documents;
      2.   Demonstrate how the owner/operator or developer will ensure that
postdevelopment off site discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates;
      3.   Unless otherwise specified, include calculations of off site
discharges for the existing and developed conditions computed using the 100-
year return frequency storm and soil conservation service (SCS type II) design;
      4.   Contain plans for facilities that serve an area with ten (10) or
more disturbed acres designed to capture the design storm in a detention or
retention basin providing three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of
storage per acre drained to reduce the "first flush" pollutant load. Where
providing three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of storage per acre
drained is not attainable, small sediment basins of equivalent total volume
shall be used;
      5.   Include detention or retention ponds that shall have at least one
foot (1') of freeboard above the design storm, provide a paved emergency
overflow and the maximum level in the pond to be one foot (1') below any
finished floor level of the facility. Ponds shall also have permanent vehicle
access for maintenance purposes. A plan for the routine maintenance of the
ponds will be incorporated in the pollution prevention plan;
      6.   Include constructed wetlands if used to deal with the "first flush"
pollutant load instead of the pond of three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic
feet per acre storage. Grit trap and oil separators must be installed upstream
of the wetlands to prevent contamination;
      7.   Include in the pollution prevention plan a demonstration of how the
facility will collect, control and treat stormwater so as to control the
quantity and quality of stormwater leaving the site. The plan shall also
include, as necessary, structural controls and nonstructural best management
practices adequate to prevent the violation of any water quality standard, and
shall meet the provisions of the clean water act (best conventional technology
and best available technology treatment requirements).
      8.   The pollution prevention plan must be reviewed and approved by the
manager prior to the issuance of a construction stormwater discharge permit.
      9.   The manager must receive an NOI or a certificate of occupancy for
the facility or subdivision for a final inspection. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-7: PERMIT APPLICATION FEES:
   A.   Each application for the issuance of a construction stormwater
discharge permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a minimum
nonrefundable fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus such additional fees for
land disturbing activity or industrial activity as may be required below:
      1.   Each application for the issuance of a land disturbing permit under
this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per location.
      2.   Each application for an existing facility permit required by this
code shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2011-
27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-8: MAINTENANCE AND SUBMITTAL OF RECORDS:
Appropriate proof and records of compliance with the provisions of a stormwater
discharge permit or land disturbing permit shall be made available for the
manager's review at any time. The owner/operator shall send a permit renewal
request annually to the manager prior to the anniversary date of the permit.
(Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-9: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
An industrial or construction stormwater discharge permit or land disturbing
permit may be transferred to a subsequent owner/operator only upon the filing
of an amended application containing all of the subsequent owner/operator's
information required on an application providing there are no changes in the
operation of the facility which may affect the quantity or quality of the
stormwater runoff. If there are to be any changes in the operation of the
facility which may affect the quantity or quality of stormwater runoff, then
the subsequent owner/operator shall resubmit, by NOI, for a stormwater
discharge permit or land disturbing permit prior to the beginning of operation
of the facility. The filing of an amended application shall be treated as an
interim permit allowing the continued operation of the facility pending review
of the amended application by the manager, which shall remain in force until
the amended application shall be approved or denied by the manager. (Ord. 2011-
27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-10: LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY REGULATED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or permit to be
conducted, any land disturbing activity upon any land without a land disturbing
permit issued under this chapter and a general OPDES permit, with a copy
provided to the manager. Such permit shall be required in addition to any
building permit or other permit required by this code for the site and shall be
available for inspection by the manager on the job site at all times during
which land disturbing activities are in progress. The phrase "land disturbing
activity" shall not include the following:
      1.   Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual
home landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work and other related
activities which result in minor soil erosion;
      2.   The construction of single-family residences when built separately
on lots less than five (5) acres not within a subdivision and have been issued
building permits; provided that excavation is limited to trenches for the
foundation, basements, service and sanitary sewer connections, and minor
grading for driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, with no off site discharge of
pollutants;
      3.   Individual service and sanitary sewer connections for single- or
two-family residences;
      4.   Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation or
harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of
pastureland, forestry land management practices including harvesting, farm
ponds, dairy operations and livestock and poultry management practices, and the
construction of farm buildings;
      5.   Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the soil
conservation service of the United States department of agriculture;
      6.   Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground public
utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surface road,
street or sidewalk, provided the activity maintains pollution control and is
confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard surfaced and
a street, curb, gutter or sidewalk permit has been obtained; and
      7.   Construction, repair or rebuilding of tracks of a railroad company.
These activities may be undertaken without the required permits; however, the
persons conducting these excluded activities shall remain responsible for
conducting these activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and other applicable laws including responsibility for controlling
sedimentation and runoff both during the land disturbing activity and after the
land disturbing activity is complete.
   B.   The minimum standards for controlling erosion and sedimentation from
land disturbing activities shall be set forth in rules or regulations as
adopted and amended from time to time by resolution approved by the city
council. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be maintained in the office
of the city clerk and may be viewed and copied in accordance with the
provisions of this code. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-11: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL:
No land disturbing activity shall be conducted within the city except in such a
manner that:
   A.   Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities
shall be conducted so as to minimize erosion. Clearing and grubbing must be
held to the minimum necessary for grading and equipment operation.
Preconstruction vegetative ground cover shall not be destroyed, removed or
disturbed more than ten (10) days prior to grading or earthmoving. Construction
must be sequenced to minimize the exposure time of cleared surface area;
   B.   Upon completion of land disturbing activities, will not leave slopes so
that they will erode. Such methods shall include revegetation, sodding,
mulching, riprapping or guniting. Regardless of the method used, the objective
will be to leave the site as erosion free and maintenance free as practicable;
   C.   Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented;
   D.   Permanent or temporary soil stabilization is applied to disturbed areas
to the extent feasible within seven (7) days on areas that will remain
unfinished for more than fourteen (14) days. Permanent soil stabilization with
perennial vegetation shall be applied as soon as practicable after final
grading is reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization refers to
measures that protect soil from the erosive forces of wind, raindrop impact and
flowing water, and includes the growing of grass, sod, application of straw,
mulch, fabric mats, and the early application of gravel base on areas to be
paved;
   E.   A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on disturbed areas
not otherwise permanently stabilized;
   F.   Sediment in stormwater runoff is trapped by the use of debris basins,
sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures, but not hay bales, until the
disturbed area is stabilized;
   G.   Neighboring persons and property are protected from damage or loss
resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion or deposition upon
property or public streets of water transported silt and debris. Adjacent
property owners shall be protected from land devaluation due to exposed bare
banks;
   H.   A controlled construction entrance/exit is maintained in a condition
that will prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right of way;
   I.   Erosion and sediment control measures must be in place and functional
before earthmoving operations begin, and must be constructed and maintained
throughout the construction period. Temporary measures may be removed at the
beginning of the workday, but must be replaced at the end of the workday;
   J.   Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to
prevent pollution. All surface water flowing toward the construction area
shall, to the extent practicable, be diverted by using berms, channels or
sediment traps as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be
designed according to the size and slope of disturbed or drainage areas to
detain stormwater runoff and trap sediment. Discharges from sediment basins and
traps must be through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not
cause erosion. Muddy water to be pumped from excavation and work areas must be
held in settling basins or treated by filtration prior to its discharge into
surface waters where practicable. Waters must be discharged through a pipe or
lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion and sedimentation;
   K.   All control measures are inspected, and repaired as necessary, biweekly
in dry periods and within twenty four (24) hours after any precipitation of
one-half inch (0.5") or more within a twenty four (24) hour period. During
prolonged precipitation, daily inspections and repairing must be performed. The
permittee shall maintain records of such inspections and repairs;
   L.   A specific individual is designated to be responsible for erosion and
sediment controls on each site;
   M.   There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter
contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge must not cause
an objectionable color contrast in the receiving water. The stormwater
discharge must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be
hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life
or fish and aquatic life in the receiving stream; and
   N.   When the land disturbing activity is finished and stable, perennial
vegetation has been established on all remaining exposed soil. The permittee
shall notify the manager of these facts and submit an NOI of the permit issued
under this section. The manager shall then provide a final inspection of the
site within twenty (20) days after receipt of such notice and, when advisable,
may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. If
such requirements are given by letter, the permittee shall continue to be
covered by the provisions of this chapter until a request for termination of
the permit has been accepted by the manager. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-12: UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGES A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Discharge of stormwater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any
condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a stormwater discharge
permit issued by the state is hereby declared a public nuisance and must be
corrected or abated by the owner/operator. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
10-4-13: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL DUMPING:
   A.   The following direct or indirect discharges into community waters or
waters of the state are prohibited and shall be unlawful:
      1.   Sewage dumping or dumping of sewage sludge;
      2.   Chlorinated swimming pool discharge;
      3.   Discharge of any polluted household wastewater such as, but not
limited to, laundry wash water and dishwater, except to a sanitary sewer or
septic system;
      4.   Leaking sanitary sewers and connections, which shall have remained
uncorrected for seven (7) days or more;
      5.   Leaking water lines that shall have remained uncorrected for seven
(7) days or more;
      6.   Commercial, industrial or public vehicle wash or power wash
discharge;
      7.   Garbage, rubbish or sanitary waste disposal;
      8.   Dead animals or animal fecal waste;
      9.   Nonstormwater discharges, except pursuant to a permit issued by the
state and the city;
      10.   Dredged or spoil material;
      11.   Solid waste;
      12.   Chemical waste; and
      13.   Wrecked or discarded vehicles or equipment. (Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-
2011)
10-4-14: VARIANCES:
   A.   The city manager, with concurrence of the city council may grant a
revocable variance from the requirements of this chapter providing to do so
would not result in the violation of any state or federal law or regulation and
if exceptional circumstances applicable to the site exist such that strict
adherence to the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship
and will not result in a condition contrary to the intent of this chapter.
   B.   A written petition for a variance shall be required and shall state the
specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, why a variance
should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to
evaluate the proposed variance. The petition shall be filed with the manager.
   C.   The manager shall conduct a review of the request for a variance within
ten (10) days after receipt and may either support the petition or may object
to the petition. If the manager objects to the variance, the manager shall
state the reasons therefor.
   D.   Once the manager's review is complete or the ten (10) days for review
have expired, the petition shall be subject to action by the city council.
(Ord. 2011-27, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 5
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Intent
10-5-2: Definitions
10-5-3: Zoning
10-5-4: Zoning Permit Requirements
10-5-5: Spaces
10-5-6: Access Roads
10-5-7: Electrical And Lighting
10-5-8: Refuse Containers
10-5-9: Water Mains
10-5-10: Bathroom Facilities Required
10-5-11: Density
10-5-12: Drainage
10-5-13: Driveways
10-5-14: Manner Of Waste Disposal
10-5-15: Occupancy
10-5-16: Parking Facilities
10-5-17: Prohibited Uses
10-5-1: INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for recreational vehicle
parks, as set forth in this chapter, and the Planning and Zoning Code. Existing
recreational vehicle parks need not conform unless it is so stated. A change to
expand the existing area of a park shall not be permitted unless any such
additions conform to the standards herein established. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-
2017)
10-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below or elsewhere in this Code, words or phrases
used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meanings they have
in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
HARD SURFACED: All driveways within recreational vehicle parks shall be
constructed with a hard surface as follows:
   1.   Double bituminous covering on a six (6") inch layer of gravel; or
   2.   Six (6") inch bed of gravel and two (2") inches of blacktop compacted
to one and one-half (1½”) inches; or
   3.   Concrete built to such specifications as shall be established by code
or regulation: or
   4.   Such other hard surface as shall be approved by the City Council.
   5.   Packed gravel may be approved as a hard surface for recreational
vehicle parks of 20 or fewer site/spaces, at the discretion of the Planning
Commission and City Council, provided such approval does not violate existing
flood plain regulations.
NON-SERVED: A “non-served” space is one that does not have a water and sewer
hookup.
OCCUPIED SPACE: The total area of earth horizontally covered by the structure,
excluding accessory structures.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A transportable vehicular structure designed for
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. It either
has its own motive power or is designed to be mounted on, or drawn by an
automotive vehicle, such as a fifth-wheel, motor home, truck, including a
camper, travel trailer or camping trailer. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017; amd. Ord.
2019-07 - -2019)
10-5-3: ZONING:
Recreational vehicle parks and/or campgrounds are authorized only in areas
zoned C-3. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-4: ZONING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All proposed recreational park projects must be presented to the
Planning Commission and City Council for approval before the issuance of any
permits. Proposals must include site drawings and drainage plans.
   B.   Construction shall not begin until a building and zoning clearance
permit has been issued and all fees paid. The application shall be in such form
as required by the City Clerk, and shall demonstrate compliance with all
applicable ordinances and applicable State requirements.
   C.   Each application for zoning clearance shall include a plot drawn to
scale, by an engineer or architect, showing the boundaries of the land, the
location of the parking sites/spaces, water, sewer, electrical and street
design. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-07 - -2019)
10-5-5: SPACES:
   A.   There shall be provided in every recreational vehicle park a permanent,
hard surfaced site/space for each recreational vehicle which will occupy the
park. The site/space on which a recreational vehicle is parked shall be hard
surfaced as defined and provided in
10-5-2.
   B.   Each site/space for parking shall be at least ten feet (10') from any
other site/space.
   C.   Only one recreational vehicle shall be parked on any one site/space.
   D.   Each site/space shall be of a size and shape that will provide
reasonable area for the parking of the recreational vehicle next to the utility
connections and for the parking of another vehicle side by side.
   E.   Maximum site/space shall be 30 feet x 50 feet with a minimum distance
of ten feet (10') between sites/spaces.
   F.   Each site/space shall be identified with a number in logical sequence
and shown on the approved site plan for the park. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017;
amd. Ord. 2019-07 - -2019)
10-5-6: ACCESS ROADS:
   A.   Each site/space shall have direct access to an abutting hard surfaced
roadway with a width of not less than twenty five feet (25') for two (2) lane
traffic and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') for one-way traffic.
   B.   One-way drive aisles must originate and terminate at two-way drive
aisles.
   C.   Roadways shall not be used for parking. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-7: ELECTRICAL AND LIGHTING:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   All electrical distribution on the development site shall be
underground including site lighting and power distribution.
      2.   Each space shall have a minimum of a fifty (50) amp, two hundred
forty (240) volt, 1-phase pedestal installed per National Electric Code and
meet City Code requirements.
      3.   All exterior lighting shall be located and installed in accordance
with the National Electric Code and must meet all State and City requirements.
(Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-8: REFUSE CONTAINERS:
Refuse containers shall be conveniently located throughout the park and
contained within a trash enclosure in accordance with the standards established
by the State and City Code. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-9: WATER MAINS:
Parks in excess of ten (10) spaces shall have a minimum of a six inch (6")
water main line extension from City water installed to meet the requirements of
State DEQ and City Code. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-10: BATHROOM FACILITIES REQUIRED:
The following sanitary facilities are required:
   A.   Not less than one toilet and lavatory per each five (5) non-served
sites/spaces or fraction thereof.
   B.   Not less than one shower and dressing facility per each ten (10) non-
served sites/spaces or fraction thereof.
   C.   Facilities for males and females shall be separated.
   D.   Bathroom facilities shall be in a dedicated service building located
not more than three hundred feet (300') from any non-served site/space. The
service building shall meet applicable building codes, be heated, lighted,
ventilated, screened and maintained in a clean and healthful manner. (Ord.
2017-06, 7-27-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-07 - -2019)
10-5-11: DENSITY:
The maximum density shall be twenty (20) recreational vehicle spaces per acre.
(Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-12: DRAINAGE:
All RV parks shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure
rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. Drainage shall not
endanger any water supply. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-13: DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   All recreational vehicle spaces shall abut a driveway which shall have
unobstructed access to a public street or highway.
   B.   All driveways shall be not less than twenty-five feet (25') in width
and hard surfaced as approved by the planning commission and city council in
best interest of floodplain management. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017; amd. Ord.
2019-07 - -2019)
10-5-14: MANNER OF WASTE DISPOSAL:
Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, sinks and
laundries in service and other buildings within the parks shall be disposed of
in a manner approved by the Code and Health Officer. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-15: OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Length of stay shall not exceed thirty (30) continuous days or sixty
(60) cumulative days in any one hundred eighty (180) consecutive day period.
   B.   Extended stays can only be authorized by the City Manager. (Ord. 2017-
06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-16: PARKING FACILITIES:
For each RV space there shall be at least one parking space located either on
or adjacent to the RV space. (Ord. 2017-06, 7-27-2017)
10-5-17: PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   Except as otherwise expressly provided, no part of the park shall be
used for any business or commercial purpose, including manufacturing and retail
except the operation of a recreational vehicle park.
   B.   No permanent residency, except for a designated Park Manager. (Ord.
2017-06, 7-27-2017)
TITLE 11
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Interpretation And Application
11-1-4: Jurisdiction; Annexation
11-1-5: Severability Clause
11-1-6: Definitions
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the ZONING
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF McLOUD, OKLAHOMA. (1987 Code § 12-201)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this title are enacted for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community; lessening
congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding
undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements;
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the community; and promoting the development of the community
in accordance with a comprehensive plan. (1987 Code § 12-202)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
As concerns interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall
be held to be minimum requirements. When this title imposes a greater
restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other
rules or regulations or ordinance, the provisions of this title shall control.
Terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in section
11-1-6 of this chapter. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word
"building" shall mean as well the word "structure"; the word "used" shall
include "arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased,
or intended to be used", and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory,
except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. (1987
Code § 12-203)
11-1-4: JURISDICTION; ANNEXATION:
This title shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits of the
city. Territory annexed to the corporate limits of the city, subsequent to the
effective date of this title, shall immediately be subject to the provisions of
this title and shall be deemed to be designated as an A-1 general agricultural
district until altered or reclassified in the manner provided by law. (1987
Code § 12-204)
11-1-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
In case any portion of this title shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the remainder of this title shall not thereby be invalid, but
shall remain in full force and effect. (1987 Code § 12-205)
11-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are to be used and
interpreted as defined in this section. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural
number and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the
natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory. For purposes of this title, certain terms used
herein are defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure customarily incidental,
appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the
principal use of land and which is located upon the same lot therewith.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes including farming,
dairying, pasturage, horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce. The
operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of normal
agricultural activities, and the above uses shall not include the commercial
feeding of swine or other animals, stockyards or commercial feedlots for
cattle.
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use not more than thirty feet
(30') wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA: An open area, other than a street, used for
the display, sales or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in
operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles or trailers, collision services including body, frame,
or fender straightening or repair, overall painting or paint shop, or vehicle
steam cleaning.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental replacement of parts and motor service to
passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OR FILLING STATION: Any area used for retail sale of
gasoline or oil fuels or automobile accessories, and incidental services
including facilities for lubricating, and washing and cleaning, but not
including painting, major repair, or the sale of butane or propane fuels.
AUTOMOBILE WASH OR AUTOMATIC CAR WASH: A building or structure or chain
conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners and other mechanical devices used primarily
for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
BLOCK: In describing the boundaries of a district, reference to the legal
description. In all other cases, the word "block" refers to the property
abutting on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets or
between an intersecting street and a railroad right of way or between an
intersecting street and a watercourse.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: The board of adjustment of the city.
BOARDING HOUSE AND ROOMING HOUSE: Where meals or lodging are provided for
persons other than the family or their relatives and excluding facilities for
transient persons such as hotels, motels, inns and other such facilities.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Use Or Structure.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and
lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest
point of coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING LINE: A line established beyond which no part of a building shall
project, except as otherwise provided by this title.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building or buildings in which the principal use of the
building site is conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be the principal building on the building site.
BULLETIN BOARD: Any sign announcing the activities of an educational,
religious, institutional or similar use.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or
more children under the age of sixteen (16) years for care apart from their
natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, and received for regular
periods of time for compensation. This definition shall not include public and
private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of this state,
custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage
within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other
religious or public institutions caring for children within their institutional
building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or
meetings or classes and other church activities.
CITY COUNCIL: The official governing body of the city.
CLINIC: A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm and injured persons and those in need of surgical or medical attention
but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept overnight on
the premises.
CLUB: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying
regular dues, and organized for some common purpose, but not including a group
organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a
commercial enterprise.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official plan of the city, as adopted by the city
council.
CONVALESCENT HOME: Means also a nursing home, a rest home, a home for the aged,
recuperating, chronically ill, or incurable persons, in which two (2) or more
persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or provided with food
and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or
similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of
disease or injury.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: A private adult female prison facility.
COVERAGE: The lots are covered by all buildings located thereon, including the
area covered by all overhanging roofs.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence of
one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer coach, mobile
home, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel.
DWELLING, MODULAR: A living unit manufactured off site and transported on an
independent carrier unit, to a permanent site which has been constructed in
accordance with applicable engineering bulletins, standards or regulations
issued by the U.S. department of housing and urban development, and which to
the extent applicable, complies with the building codes of the city of McLoud.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or
more dwelling units and designed for or used by three (3) or more families;
also includes the word "apartments".
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing one dwelling unit and designed
for, or used exclusively by, one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing two (2) dwelling units and designed
for, or used exclusively by, two (2) families; also includes the word "duplex".
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a
habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities for not more
than one family living independently of any other family.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems;
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories
thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted
children, or a group of not to exceed five (5) persons (excluding servants) not
all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. A "family"
shall be deemed to include domestic servants employed by said family.
FLOOD (100-YEAR FREQUENCY): A flood having an average frequency of occurrence
once in one hundred (100) years although the flood may occur in any year, based
on statistical analyses of stream flow records available for the watershed and
analyses of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the
watershed, as determined by the city engineer, or as determined by the U.S.
corps of engineers and confirmed by the city engineer or as determined by a
registered professional engineer and certified by the city engineer.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land area adjoining a floodway which is not reasonably
required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood
but which would be inundated by the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood
based on full urbanization of the watershed.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a watercourse or drainageway and those portions of the
adjoining lands which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerlines of walls separating two (2) buildings.
FRONTAGE: The linear measurement of a lot boundary which is abutting a street.
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling for one family erected as a part of a private
garage.
GARAGE, PARKING: Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of four
(4) or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is
incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities
are not provided.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or a portion of the principal
building used or intended for use by the occupants of the premises for storage
of passenger vehicles or trailers.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: The structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repairing or refinishing of any
vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
HEIGHT: The vertical measurement of any structure on any parcel of land
measured from the average elevation of the lot or parcel to the uppermost point
of the structure.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a
dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which
is conducted entirely within the main or accessory building; provided, that no
trading and merchandising is carried on and in connection with which there is
no display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one nonilluminated
nameplate, not more than two (2) square feet in area, attached to the main or
accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used, except such as is
customarily used in purely domestic or household purposes. Such occupation
shall not increase vehicular traffic on the street on which the dwelling is
located by more than four (4) individual visits per day, and shall not increase
parking demands on the street on which the dwelling is located. A tea room,
restaurant, rest home, clinic, barbershop, beauty parlor, doctor's or dentist's
office, childcare center, tourist home or cabinet shop, metal shop, lawn mower
repair, or auto repair garage shall not be deemed a home occupation.
HOSPITAL: See definition of Medical Facilities.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6)
or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without
meals for compensation, but not including trailer parks, or camp, hospital,
asylum, orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint.
INDUSTRY: Storage, repair, manufacture, preparation or treatment of any
article, substance, or any commodity for commercial use.
INSTITUTIONAL USES: Those uses organized, established, used or intended to be
used for the promotion of a public, religious, educational, charitable,
cultural, social, or philanthropic activity and normally operated on a
nonprofit basis.
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD: A place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, bailed, packed, disassembled or handled, including all
wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for
storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and
equipment, but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawnshops and
establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and
household equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvage material
incidental to manufacturing operations.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises on which three (3) or more dogs over four (4)
months of age are kept.
LIVABILITY SPACE: The open space of a lot which is not allocated to, or used
for, off street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the off street
parking or loading area.
LOADING SPACE: A space on the same lot as the principal use of at least ten
feet (10') in width and thirty feet (30') in length and having a vertical
clearance of at least fourteen feet (14'), designated for the temporary parking
of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open space as required by this title, and having access on a public street.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting on a
street; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2)
sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: Any boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where the
lot abuts more than one street, the owner may select the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and most
nearly parallel to, the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT, WEDGE SHAPED: A lot situated so that the front is either wider or narrower
than the rear of the lot.
LOTS OF RECORD: A separate and distinct parcel designated on a legally recorded
subdivision plat or a legally recorded deed filed in the records of
Pottawatomie County, state of Oklahoma.
MEAN LOT ELEVATION: The average elevation of a lot.
MEDICAL FACILITIES:
Dental Or Doctor's Office: The same as "dental or medical clinic", including
the various dental and medical specialties.
Dental Or Medical Clinic: A building used for the examination and treatment of
the physically ill; provided, that no facilities are provided for patients
remaining overnight, except under emergency conditions, except as provided for
in this title.
Hospital: An institution providing physical and mental health services
primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured,
and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments,
training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices which are an
integral part of the facilities.
Nursing Home, Rest Or Convalescent Home: See definition of Convalescent Home.
Public Health Center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for
providing public health services, including related facilities.
MOBILE HOME 1 : A transportable structure larger than three hundred twenty
(320) square feet, designed to be used as a year round residential dwelling,
and built prior to the enactment of the federal mobile home construction and
safety act of 1974, which became effective for all mobile home construction on
June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A portion of a mobile home park allocated to the exclusive use
of the occupants of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK 2 : A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for placement of mobile homes to be occupied as
residences.
MODULAR HOME: See definition of Dwelling, Modular.
MOTEL: An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be used
as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient persons.
OPEN SPACE: Area included in any side, rear, or front yard or any other
unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except for
the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches.
PARCEL: A "lot" as defined in this section.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area of not less than two hundred (200)
square feet, either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways
or access drives, for the parking of motor vehicles.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The McLoud planning commission, as established by the
statutes, and provided for in title 10, chapter 1, article A of this code. The
McLoud planning commission shall also be the zoning commission for the city.
ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of Boarding House And Rooming House.
SALE OR AUCTION FACILITY: A building or place for holding public or contract
auctions.
SIGN: Any word, lettering, part of letters, figures, numerals, phrases,
sentences, emblems, devices, designs, pictures, trade names or trademarks by
which anything is made known, such as is used to designate an individual, a
firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a service, a
commodity or product, which are visible from any public street or right of way
and designed to attract attention. "For sale" and "for rent" shall be deemed
signs within the meaning of this definition, but the term "sign" shall not
include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other
political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious, or like campaign, drive, movement, or event used for a public
purpose in the public interest.
SIGN, DISPLAY SURFACE AREA: The net geometric area of the surface of the sign
upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated,
including the outward extremities of all letters, figures, characters and
delineations; provided, that only one face of a double faced sign shall be
included in the computation of display surface area.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or
designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign erected on the face or outside wall of a building
which projects out at any angle therefrom.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Signs of a temporary nature used to advertise the premises for
sale, rent, or lease.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it; or, if there be no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET: A public right of way more than thirty feet (30') in width which
provides the primary public means of access to abutting property and used
primarily for vehicular circulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL: Any street designated on the comprehensive plan as an
arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, major street, etc.
STREET, MINOR: Any street not designated on the comprehensive plan as an
arterial.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the structural members of a building, such
as walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location
on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the
ground (not including sidewalks, driveways and similar improvement areas).
THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The part of the comprehensive plan referring to
transportation development goals, principles, and standards; also includes use
of the words "major street plan" and "trafficways plan".
TRAILER: A portable or mobile unit, other than a mobile home, used or designed
to carry or transport material or animals.
YARD: A required space on a lot unobstructed, except as expressly permitted.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of a lot from side lot line
to side lot line, abutting on a street, into which a building may not protrude.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured from side lot
line to side lot line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from front yard to the rear yard abutting the side
lot line, into which no building may protrude. (1987 Code § 12-215; amd. Ord.
1997-05, 5-1-1997; Ord. 2000-02, 3-10-2000; 2004 Code; Ord. 2008-02, 3-27-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-2A-2 of this code.
2 2. See also section
  10-2B-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT; GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Zoning Administrator
11-2-2: Zoning Clearance Permit Requirements
11-2-3: Platting Requirements On Rezoning Applications
11-2-4: Penalty
11-2-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of zoning
administrator to enforce this title.
   B.   Duties: If the zoning administrator shall find that any of the
provisions of this title are being violated, he shall notify in writing the
persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other
action as is authorized by law to ensure compliance with, or to prevent
violation of, its provisions. (1987 Code § 12-310)
   C.   City Clerk Authority: The duties of zoning administrator are delegated
to the city clerk. (1987 Code § 12-310; amd. 2004 Code)
11-2-2: ZONING CLEARANCE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Described: The zoning clearance permit is a permit issued by the
zoning administrator which states that a particular development meets all of
the requirements of the zoning regulations. It is not a building permit and
does not authorize construction; it certifies that the land or structure is in
conformance with the terms of this title. (1987 Code § 12-311)
   B.   Permit Required:
      1.   New Construction: No building or other structure shall be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered or repaired in such a manner as to prolong the
life of the building, nor shall the use of any land or building or other
structure be changed without a zoning clearance permit being issued authorizing
such construction, alteration, repair, or use changes as being in compliance
with the provisions of this title. No building permit shall be issued for any
construction not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit. (1987 Code §
12-312)
      2.   Change In Use Of Land Or Building: No change shall be made in the
use of any land or building or structure after the adoption of this title until
a zoning clearance permit has been obtained, certifying that all the provisions
of this title have been complied with. (1987 Code § 12-313)
   C.   Application For Permit: An application for a zoning clearance permit
shall be made to the zoning administrator by the owner or proposed occupant of
the building or land to be occupied or used, and the application shall state
the location and legal description of the property and set out in detail the
character and nature of the use to be conducted thereon. Within three (3) days,
the zoning administrator shall grant or deny the zoning clearance permit in
accordance with the terms of this title. (1987 Code § 12-314)
   D.   Accompanying Material: All applications for zoning clearance permits
shall be accompanied by a plat plan, drawn to scale on suitable paper, showing
the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the
building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to
satisfy the requirements of this title. (1987 Code § 12-315)
   E.   Permit Fee: Zoning clearance permits shall not be issued until a fee as
set by motion or resolution of the city council shall have been paid. (1987
Code § 12-316; amd. 2004 Code)
11-2-3: PLATTING REQUIREMENTS ON REZONING APPLICATIONS:
For the purpose of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring the
adequacy of open spaces for traffic, utilities, and access of emergency
vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily
incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established as
follows:
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no
building permit or zoning clearance permit shall be issued until that portion
of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a
subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to, and approved by,
the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission, and filed
of record in the office of the county clerk where the property is situated.
Provided that the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning
commission, may remove the platting requirement upon a determination that the
above stated purposes have been achieved by previous platting or could not be
achieved by a plat or replat. (1987 Code § 12-317)
11-2-4: PENALTY:
A violation of this title shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (1987 Code § 12-318; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
11-3-1: Zoning Districts Established
11-3-2: Official Zoning Map
11-3-3: District Boundaries
11-3-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this title and the promotion of public health, safety and
general welfare of the community, the following districts are hereby
established for the city:
 
A-1 General agricultural district
A-2 Suburban agricultural district
R   General residential district
C-1 Neighborhood shopping district
C-2 General commercial district
C-3 Intensive commercial district
I   General industrial district
 
(1987 Code § 12-210)
11-3-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
   A.   Zoning Map Established: The locations and boundaries of the zoning
districts shall be established by ordinance and shall be delineated and shown
on a map entitled "zoning map of the city of McLoud, Oklahoma", and the zoning
map is hereby incorporated as a part of this title. (1987 Code § 12-211)
   B.   Maintenance Of Current Map: It is the duty of the zoning administrator
to maintain an up to date official zoning map of the city, including all
amendments directly adopted by the city council. (1987 Code § 12-213)
11-3-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of a zoning district shall extend to a centerline of abutting
streets, regardless of the legal description used in establishing such
districts. In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map of the city, the planning commission, upon
written application or upon its own motion, shall recommend the location of
such boundaries to the board of adjustment and the board of adjustment shall
make the final determination. (1987 Code § 12-212)
CHAPTER 4
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-4A-1: General Description
11-4A-2: Uses Permitted
11-4A-3: Area And Height Regulations
11-4A-4: Signs And Billboards
11-4A-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The A-1 general agricultural district is established for several purposes:
   A.   To provide for the continued use of land for predominantly agricultural
purposes;
   B.   To preserve undeveloped areas until they can feasibly be developed to
urban standards and with adequate public safeguards of health, safety, etc.;
and
   C.   To restrict development in areas subject to severe inundation until
such time as it can be shown that these areas are no longer subject to
flooding. (1987 Code § 12-250)
11-4A-2: USES PERMITTED:
Within the A-1 general agricultural district, the following uses are permitted:
Accessory buildings or uses incidental to the following listed principal uses.
"Agriculture", as defined in section
11-1-6 of this title.
Churches and temples.
Elementary schools and high schools.
Extraction of sand, gravel and other minerals not involving any operation
requiring the use of explosives.
Farmers' markets as provided in title 3, chapter 7 of this code.
Golf courses, but not including golf driving ranges, pitch and putt courses, or
miniature golf courses.
Mobile homes.
Municipal or community recreation centers.
Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit.
Police or fire stations.
Public buildings or buildings operated in the public interest by a not for
profit corporation, including art galleries, post offices, libraries, or
museums.
Public or not for profit auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, armories, or
sanatoriums.
Public or private hospitals or sanatoriums.
Public or private schools or colleges.
Public utility and service uses including electric substations, gas regulator
stations, electric, gas, telegraph, telephone and water transmission metering
and distribution equipment and structures, microwave relay towers, water
reservoirs or pumping stations and other similar facilities.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes only and not for
dwelling purposes, nor for a period that exceeds the completion of
construction. (1987 Code § 12-251; amd. Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
11-4A-3: AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Area: All lots shall have not less than five (5) acres of land, and
not more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot.
   B.   Frontage: Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than three hundred
thirty feet (330'), and the depth shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2)
times the frontage of the lot.
   C.   Coverage: Not more than ten percent (10%) of the lot area shall be
covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within
the meaning of this provision.
   D.   Yards:
      1.   Front: All structures shall have not less than a fifty foot (50')
front yard setback.
      2.   Side: All principal structures shall have not less than a thirty
foot (30') side yard setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not
less than ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear: All principal structures shall have not less than a fifty foot
(50') rear yard setback. Accessory buildings may have a rear yard of not less
than ten feet (10'). (1987 Code § 12-252; amd. 2004 Code)
11-4A-4: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
No signs, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be
permitted in the A-1 district, except as follows:
   A.   Bulletin Board: One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring
an announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   B.   Identification Sign: One identification sign may be erected on each
street frontage of a single-family subdivision or permitted nonresidential use.
The sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen
feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Real Estate Sign: A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or an approved development area may be erected on each
street frontage of the parcel, development, or other agricultural, commercial
or industrial zoned tract having the same ownership as that of the property,
premises or tract being advertised. The sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in individual surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height;
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (1987 Code § 12-253)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this code.
ARTICLE B. A-2 SUBURBAN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-4B-1: General Description
11-4B-2: Uses Permitted
11-4B-3: Area And Height Regulations
11-4B-4: Aerobic Sewer System
11-4B-5: Signs And Billboards
11-4B-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to provide for the land situated in the urbanizing
areas of the community where either public water or public sewer is not
available and is used for residential and agricultural purposes or which is
being platted into rural estate type development. Since tracts in this district
will contain residences in close proximity to agricultural activities, such
agricultural activities conducted in this district should not be detrimental to
urban land uses. (Ord. 2006-08, 7-27-2006)
11-4B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Within the A-2 suburban agricultural district, the following uses are
permitted:
Accessory buildings or uses incidental to the following listed principal uses.
"Agriculture", as defined in section
11-1-6 of this title.
Churches and temples.
Elementary schools and high schools.
Farmers' markets as provided in title 3, chapter 7 of this code.
Golf courses, but not including golf driving ranges, pitch and putt courses, or
miniature golf courses.
Municipal or community recreation centers.
Parks not operated for profit.
Police or fire station.
Public buildings or buildings operated in the public interest by a not for
profit corporation, including art galleries, post offices, libraries, or
museums.
Public or not for profit auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, armories, or
sanatoriums.
Public or private hospitals or sanatoriums.
Public or private schools or colleges.
Public utility and service uses including electric substations, gas regulator
stations, electric, gas, telegraph, telephone and water transmission metering
and distribution equipment and structures, microwave relay towers, water
reservoirs or pumping stations and other similar facilities.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes only and not for
dwelling purposes, nor for a period that exceeds the completion of
construction. (Ord. 2006-08, 7-27-2006; amd. Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014)
11-4B-3: AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Requirements: All lots and improvements within the A-2 district shall
meet the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum lot area:
         a.   Two (2) acres where neither public water or public sewer systems
are available; or
         b.   One acre where either a public water system or a public sewer
system is available.
      2.   Minimum lot area for mobile homes: Five (5) acres.
   B.   Use Of Lot: No more than one principal building shall be placed on any
one lot.
   C.   Frontage: Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than one hundred
fifty feet (150').
   D.   Coverage: Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the lot area shall be
covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within
the meaning of this provision.
   E.   Height: No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35')
in height above the mean elevation of the lot.
   F.   Yards:
      1.   Front: All structures shall have not less than a thirty foot (30')
front yard setback.
      2.   Side: All principal structures shall have not less than a twenty
five foot (25') side yard setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of
not less than ten feet (10').
      3.   Rear: All principal structures shall have not less than a fifty foot
(50') rear yard setback. Accessory buildings may have a rear yard of not less
than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 2006-08, 7-27-2006)
11-4B-4: AEROBIC SEWER SYSTEM:
Aerobic sewer systems may be installed on any lot within the A-2 district,
subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   The minimum lot area shall be as established by applicable state
rules and/or regulations depending upon the type of system to be installed.
(Ord. 2014-07, 8-28-2014)
   B.   Frontage: Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than one hundred
feet (100').
      1.   If the parcel of land is a wedge shaped lot which meets the
requirements of minimum lot size, it may have less than the minimum requirement
for frontage as long as the front building line of the lot meets the
requirements hereinabove.
   C.   Maximum Coverage: The maximum coverage of any lot with an aerobic sewer
system shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the area for interior lots nor
seventy five percent (75%) of the lot area for corner lots.
   D.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum setback requirements for yards
shall apply to any use that is constructed or commenced on a parcel of land in
the A-2 district with an aerobic sewer system:
 
Permitted Use Front Yard Side Yard       Rear Yard
                         Both    One
Single-family 30 feet    15 feet 10 feet 20% lot depth
 
   E.   Use Of Lot: No more than one principal building shall be placed on any
one lot.
   F.   Restrictions: No farm livestock will be permitted on property that is
less than two (2) acres. This includes horses, cattle, swine, goats, chickens.
(Ord. 2006-08, 7-27-2006)
11-4B-5: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
No signs, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be
permitted in the A-2 district, except as follows:
   A.   Bulletin Board: One bulletin board may be erected on each street
frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring
an announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   B.   Identification Sign: One identification sign may be erected on each
street frontage of a single-family subdivision or permitted nonresidential use.
The sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen
feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Real Estate Sign: A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or an approved development area may be erected on each
street frontage of the parcel, development, or other agricultural, commercial
or industrial zoned tract having the same ownership as that of the property,
premises or tract being advertised. The sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in individual surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height;
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (Ord. 2006-08, 7-27-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
R GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-5-1: General Description
11-5-2: Uses Permitted
11-5-3: Minimum Lot Size
11-5-4: Maximum Coverage
11-5-5: Yard Requirements
11-5-6: Height Limit
11-5-7: Off Street Parking
11-5-8: Signs
11-5-9: Structure Size
11-5-10: Secondary Dwelling Units
11-5-11: Temporary Occupancy During Residential Construction
11-5-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R general residential district is established as a district in which the
use of land is for residential purposes and uses directly incidental thereto.
It is the purpose and intent of this district to promote the development and
the continued use of the land for family dwellings and to prohibit commercial
and industrial use or any other use which would substantially interfere with,
or adversely affect, the desirable quality of a residential environment. The
intent is to further discourage any use in this district which would generate
traffic or create congestion on neighborhood streets other than the normal
traffic which serves the residents in this area. (1987 Code § 12-260)
11-5-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in the R general residential district may be used for
the following purposes:
   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the following listed
uses when located on the same lot.
   Agricultural uses of the garden type that are not intended for commercial
purposes.
   Churches.
   Duplex.
   Mobile home trailer park 1 .
   Modular homes.
   Multi-family dwellings.
   Public park, playground, fire station, community center, hospital, or other
similar public facility.
   Public schools, and private schools where the curriculum is similar in
nature and preparation of course work to the public schools.
   Rooming or boarding house.
   Single-family detached dwellings. (1987 Code § 12-261; amd. 2004 Code; Ord.
2008-02, 3-27-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-2B-4C of this code.
11-5-3: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
   A.   Water And Sewer Available: Where both a public water supply system and
a public sewer system is available, no structure or use shall be constructed or
commenced in the R district which does not conform with the following minimum
requirements for lot size:
 
Permitted Use     Minimum Lot Area                    Minimum Frontage2
Single-family     9,000 square feet per dwelling unit 70 feet1
Two-family        5,000 square feet per dwelling unit 80 feet1
Multi-family      2,500 square feet per dwelling unit 100 feet1
Churches          1 acre                              100 feet
Mobile home parks 21/2 acres                          200 feet
All other uses    1 acre                              80 feet
 
   Notes:
      1.   If the lot is a wedge shaped lot which meets the requirements of
minimum lot size, it may have less than the minimum requirement for frontage as
long as the front building line of the lot meets the requirements hereinabove.
      2.   The depth of the lot shall not exceed 21/2 times the frontage of the
lot.
   (1987 Code § 12-262)
   B.   Water And Sewer Not Available Or One System Available: The minimum
required lot area for all uses permitted in the R district, except mobile home
parks, shall be the minimum required under applicable state law, rule or
regulation where there is neither a public water supply system nor a public
sewer system available, and the minimum required under applicable state law,
rule or regulation where either a public water supply system or a public sewer
system, one or the other, is available. In all instances, the minimum lot area
required for a mobile home park in an R district shall be two (2) acres if
neither city water nor sewer is available, and one acre where either service is
available. (Ord. 2014-08, 8-28-2014)
11-5-4: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
The maximum coverage of any lot in the R district shall not exceed sixty
percent (60%) of the area for interior lots nor seventy five percent (75%) of
the lot area for corner lots. (1987 Code § 12-263)
11-5-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements for yards shall apply to any use that is
constructed or commenced on a parcel of land in the R district:
 
Permitted Use  Front Yard Side Yard       Rear Yard
                          Both    One
Single-family  25 feet    10 feet 5 feet  20% lot depth
Two-family     25 feet    10 feet 5 feet  20% lot depth
Multi-family   20 feet    15 feet 5 feet  20% lot depth
All other uses 20 feet    30 feet 15 feet 20% lot depth
 
(1987 Code § 12-264)
11-5-6: HEIGHT LIMIT:
No dwelling structure in the R district shall be constructed with a height in
excess of thirty five feet (35') from the mean lot elevation. (1987 Code § 12-
265)
11-5-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking shall be provided as required in chapter 9 of this title.
(1987 Code § 12-266)
11-5-8: SIGNS 1 :
No signs, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be
permitted in the R district, except as follows:
   A.   Temporary Bulletin Board; Lease Or Sale Of Building: A temporary
bulletin board or sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area,
pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board or
sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or sold.
   B.   Bulletin Board; Announcement Of Activities: One bulletin board may be
erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional or
similar use requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall
not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in
height; and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Public Notices: Official public notices may be erected on affected
property.
   D.   Nameplate: One nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two (2) square
feet in area, and not containing lettering other than the name of the owner or
occupants or name or address of the premises.
   E.   Placement Of Signs: All signs shall be erected on the lot and no
portion of the sign shall encroach on a public right of way or other public
property. (1987 Code § 12-267)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this code.
11-5-9: STRUCTURE SIZE:
No structure or building, intended to be a residence for human habitation,
comprising less than one thousand two hundred (1200) square feet, shall be
constructed, placed upon or moved upon any residential lot(s). (Ord. 2022-03,
8-26-2021)
11-5-10: SECONDARY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred
on municipalities by Title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes and the municipal zoning
and planning powers granted therein. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to conflict with state law, the City Charter (if any), or state building code
rules adopted by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission.
   B.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
      1.   Provide for the creation and regulation of safe, compatible, and
well-designed secondary dwelling units (SDUs) in single-family residential
zones;
      2.   Increase housing choice and affordability while protecting
neighborhood character and public safety; and
      3.   Establish objective, clear development and permitting standards for
SDUs.
   C.   Applicability.
      1.   This section applies to all properties within the corporate limits
of the City of Mcloud that are zoned for single-family residential use, Namely
R, unless otherwise excluded by covenant, plat restriction, or state law. A-
1 and A-2 require a Lot split or applicable rezone application.
      2.   Properties located in multifamily or nonresidential zones are not
eligible for SDUs unless the property’s zoning expressly allows SDUs or the
governing body approves a rezoning or special exception consistent with
applicable procedures.
   D.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
      ACCESSORY/SECONDARY DWELLING UNIT (SDU): A self-contained residential
unit that provides complete independent living facilities (sleeping, cooking,
and sanitation) and is located on the same lot as a primary single-family
dwelling. SDUs detached units as defined below.
      DETACHED SDU: An SDU that is a separate, detached structure located on
the same lot as the primary dwelling.
      FLOOR AREA: Gross habitable floor area measured per the adopted building
code.
      PRIMARY DWELLING: The principal single-family dwelling located on the
lot.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL: Rental of a dwelling unit for a period of less than 30
consecutive days.
   E.   Permitted and Conditional Uses.
      1.   Subject to the requirements of this section, SDUs are a permitted
accessory use in single-family residential zones subject to a specific use
permit approval and pre-inspection fee.
      2.   Detached SDUs may require an administrative site review or a
conditional use permit depending on size, setback deviations, or other variance
requests.
   F.   Owner Occupancy.
      1.   Owner occupancy of the property is not required.
   G.   Development and Design Standards.
      1.   Maximum/Minimum Size. The maximum gross floor area of an SDU shall
not exceed the existing structure’s first floor. The minimum gross floor area
of an SDU shall not be less then 400 sq. ft.
      2.   Height. Detached SDUs shall not exceed the height of the primary
dwelling and in no event shall exceed two stories or 25 feet.
      3.   Setbacks. Detached SDUs must meet the minimum rear and side yard
setbacks applicable to accessory structures commensurate with residential
zoning.
      4.   Lot Coverage and Floor Area Ratio. The addition of an SDU shall not
cause total lot coverage or floor-area ratio to exceed limits. Specifically the
lot size of 10,000 sq. ft. is required and the floor area should not exceed 60%
coverage of the lot.
      5.   Parking. All SDU’s shall have a minimum 10' by 20' hard surface
parking. No alley parking shall be permitted.
      6.   Entrances. SDU entrances shall be designed to be as unobtrusive as
possible with adequate accessibility similar to that of the primary dwelling.
      7.   Utilities. SDUs shall be connected to the same water and sewer
system serving the primary dwelling but with stand-alone hookups.
      8.   There must remain ten (10) feet of separation between primary and
SDU structures.
      9.   Occupancy. SDU’s shall have the purpose of single family dwellings
only.
      10.   Aesthetics. Aesthetics of any proposed SDU shall conform to city
code.
      11.   Number. Only one SDU per property shall be permitted.
   H.   Building Code, Inspections and Safety.
      1.   SDUs must comply with the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code standards
currently adopted by the City of McLoud and any local amendments.
      2.   No SDU shall be occupied prior to final building inspection and
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   I.   Utilities, Addresses, and Services.
      1.   Addressing. Each SDU shall have a separate address.
      2.   Utility Connections. Existing water, sewer and electrical service
must meet code requirements.
   J.   Owner Associations and Covenants.
      1.   The existence of a homeowners association covenant, deed
restriction, or private agreement that restricts SDUs shall remain enforceable
between private parties.
   K.   Application and Fees.
      1.   Permit Required. The permit fee shall be established by resolution
and listed on the City’s schedule of permit fees.
      2.   Application Materials. - the authority may from time to time mandate
a list of required application materials available upon request for
application.
   L.   Nonconforming SDUs.
      1.   An SDU lawfully established prior to adoption of this section shall
be treated as a lawful nonconforming use.
   M.   Enforcement; Penalties.
      1.   Violations of this section shall be enforced by the City’s
designated authority. (Ord. 2026-02, 8-28-2025)
11-5-11: TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY DURING RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
      NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure that does not meet the city’s
zoning, building codes, or other regulations for permanent residences.
      PERMANENT RESIDENCE: A structure built in accordance with all applicable
city codes and regulations intended for long-term habitation.
      TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY: The use of a non-permanent structure, such as a
camper or RV, for residential purposes during the construction of a permanent
residence. (Ord. 2025-08, 5-22-2025)
   B.   Authorization. Property owners actively engaged in the construction of
a permanent residence on their site are authorized to occupy a temporary
structure during the construction period, subject to the following provisions:
      1.   The property owner must obtain a building permit for the
construction of the permanent residence.
      2.   The temporary structure must be maintained in good condition and
must not present any health or safety hazards, as determined by the City
Inspector. Upon a showing thereof, the Inspector may authorize a temporary
structure permit.
      3.   The temporary structure must be removed within one year, or thirty
(30) days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the permanent
residence, whichever occurs first. If the construction is to be longer than one
year the permit may be renewed for one additional period upon a showing of good
cause. A denial by the Inspector may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
      4.   The property owner must comply with all other applicable city
ordinances and regulations during the period of temporary occupancy. (Ord.
2025-08, 5-22-2025)
CHAPTER 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-6A-1: General Description
11-6A-2: Uses Permitted
11-6A-3: Minimum Lot Size
11-6A-4: Area Regulations
11-6A-5: Height Regulations
11-6A-6: Off Street Parking
11-6A-7: Signs And Billboards
11-6A-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This commercial district is for the conduct of retail trade and personal
service enterprises to meet the regular needs and for the convenience of the
people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be an
integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential,
religious, recreational and educational uses, more restrictive requirements for
light, air, open space and off street parking are made than are provided in
other commercial districts. (1987 Code § 12-270)
11-6A-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in a C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   A.   Retail Stores: Retail stores and those which supply the regular and
customary needs of the residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily
for their convenience, as follows:
      Art school, gallery or museum.
      Artists’ materials, supply studio.
      Automobile parking lot.
      Baby shop.
      Bakery goods store.
      Barbershop.
      Beauty shop.
      Book or stationery store.
      Café.
      Camera shop.
      Candy store.
      Car wash facility.
      Cleaning, pressing, laundry collection agency.
      Curio or gift shop.
      Dairy products or ice cream store.
      Delicatessen.
      Dress shop.
      Drugstore or fountain.
      Farmers’ markets as provided in title 3, chapter 7 of this Code.
      Grocery store/convenience store not including the retail sale of
gasoline, diesel or other motor fuels.
      Jewelry or notions store.
      Medical facility.
      Messenger or telegraph service.
      Musical instrument sales.
      Newspaper or magazine sales.
      Office business.
      Optometrists sales and service. Pharmacy.
      Photographer studio.
      Radio and television sales and service.
      Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
      Sewing machine sales, instruction.
      Shoe repair shop.
      Sporting goods sales.
      Tailor shop. Toy store.
   B.   Nameplate And Sign: Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the
store and premises or to products sold on the premises; not to exceed twenty
(20) square feet, no flashing lights.
   C.   Accessory Buildings And Uses: Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incidental to the above uses.
   D.   Restrictions: A building used for any of the above enumerated uses may
not have more than forty percent (40%) of its floor area devoted to purposes
incidental to the primary use. No material or goods offered for sale or stored
in connection with the uses enumerated in subsections A through E of this
section shall be displayed or stored outside a building. (1987 Code § 12-271;
amd. Ord. 2004-10, 4-22-2004; Ord. 2005-05, 6-9-2005; Ord. 2014-13, 10-23-2014;
Ord. 2017-10, 10-26-2017; Ord. 2021-07, 3-25-2021; Ord. 2023-04, 2-23-2023)
11-6A-3: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
None. (1987 Code § 12-272)
11-6A-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
The area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as the requirement of the
R General Residential District. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district:
   A.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way
line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
   B.   Side Yard: When siding on a residential district, the side yard setback
shall be one foot (1') for each one foot (1') of height of the commercial
primary structure. However, the side yard setback shall not be less than twenty
feet (20'), and a solid wall or fence shall be constructed in accordance with
section
11-9-9 of this title. There shall be a side yard setback from an intersecting
street of not less than twenty feet (20'). The side yard requirements of this
section shall not apply when abutting a C-2 General Commercial District or a C-
3 Intensive Commercial District.
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard,
or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30'). (1987 Code § 12-
273)
11-6A-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet
(35') in height based on the mean lot elevation. (1987 Code § 12-274)
11-6A-6: OFF STREET PARKING:
Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code § 12-275)
11-6A-7: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
Signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays in the
C-1 District shall conform to the following requirements: (1987 Code § 12-276)
   A.   Business Sign: One business sign not exceeding eighty (80) square feet
of surface area may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. Ground
signs shall not exceed the height of the building in which the principal use is
located or twenty feet (20'), whichever is lower. No business sign shall be
located within fifty feet (50') of a residential district if visible from such
district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-
23-2015)
   B.   Real Estate: A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease
of the premises or an approved development area may be erected on each street
frontage of the parcel, development, or other agricultural, commercial or
industrial zoned tract having the same ownership as that of the property,
premises or tract being advertised. The sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in individual surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height;
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Placement Of Signs: All signs in the C-1 District shall be erected upon
private property and shall not encroach upon any public street or walk, except
as provided by the applicable codes of the City and then they shall not
overhang at a height of less than nine feet (9') and shall not have a maximum
projection greater than seventy two inches (72") from the front building line.
(1987 Code § 12-276)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this Code.
ARTICLE B. C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-6B-1: General Description
11-6B-2: Uses Permitted
11-6B-3: Minimum Lot Size
11-6B-4: Open Display Uses Permitted
11-6B-5: Area Regulations
11-6B-6: Height Regulations
11-6B-7: Signs And Billboards
11-6B-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business
services and the general retail business of the community. Persons living in
the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct and
frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger
vehicles and those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods. (1987 Code § 12-280)
11-6B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in a C-2 general commercial district shall be used only
for the following purposes:
   A.   Uses In C-1 District: Any use permitted in a C-1 neighborhood
commercial district.
   B.   Uses Enclosed Within Building: When completely enclosed within a
building or buildings, the following uses are permitted:
Automobile and machinery repairing if conducted in conjunction with a retail
agency, but not including automobile or machinery wrecking establishments or
junkyards.
New automobile sales and service.
New machinery sales and service.
Public garages, provided no gasoline is stored aboveground.
Used automobile and machinery sales and service.
   C.   Uses Enumerated: The following uses are permitted:
Advertising signs or structures.
Ambulance service, office or garage.
Antique shop.
Appliance store.
Automobile retail gasoline service station.
      Bait sales.
Bakery.
Bank.
Catering establishment.
Child daycare facility.
Cleaning plant.
Clothing or apparel store.
Commercial school or hall.
Department store.
Drive-in restaurant.
Dry goods store.
Electric supply.
Electric transmission station.
Feed and seed store.
Florist shop, greenhouse, nursery.
Frozen food locker.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Furniture store.
Golf course, miniature or practice range.
Grocery store/convenience store including the retail sale of gasoline, diesel
or other motor fuels.
Hardware store.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and service.
Hospital for small animals.
Ice storage locker plant or storage house for food.
Interior decorating store.
Key shop.
Laboratories, testing and experimental.
Laundry.
Leather goods shop.
Lumberyard.
Meat market.
Museum.
Music or television shop.
Novelty shop.
Nursery or garden supply store.
Outdoor advertising signs.
Pawnshop.
Pet shop.
Printing plant.
Recreation centers.
Research laboratories.
Restaurant.
Sign painting shop.
Stock and bond broker.
Storage warehouse.
Theater.
Used automobile sales.
Variety store.
Wholesale distributing center.
Winery. (1987 Code § 12-281; amd. Ord. 1995-03, 12-14-1995; Ord. 2003-01, 1-9-
2003; Ord. 2006-01, 1-12-2006; Ord. 2017-10, 10-26-2017)
   D.   Accessory Buildings And Uses: Buildings, structures and uses accessory
and customarily incidental to any of the above uses; provided, that there shall
be no manufacturing, processing or compounding of products other than such as
are customarily incidental and essential to retail establishments.
   E.   Other Uses: Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering
personal, professional or business service which does not produce more noise,
odor, dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above. (1987 Code
§ 12-281)
   F.   Sale, Auction: Sale or auction facility. (Ord. 2000-02, 3-10-2000)
   G.   Wrecker Services And Vehicle Impound Yards: Wrecker services and
vehicle impound yards provided they are enclosed by a solid fence of not less
than eight feet (8') in height, or all impounded vehicles are stored inside a
building. Wrecker services and impound yards do not include any form of vehicle
salvage, parting or wrecking operations. Wrecker service and impound yards
shall not be located on lots of less than two (2) acres in size. The size of
any impound yard shall not exceed two (2) acres regardless of the size of the
lot and the fence enclosing the impound yard shall be set back not less than
fifteen feet (15') from any property line, abutting road or street. In the
event existing rules or regulations require a greater setback, such greater
setback shall control. The principal entrance gate shall be set back not less
than one hundred feet (100') from the street, road or highway it abuts. (Ord.
2017-05, 5-25-2017)
11-6B-3: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
None. (1987 Code § 12-282)
11-6B-4: OPEN DISPLAY USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Uses Enumerated: The following uses shall be permitted in the C-
2 General Commercial District; provided, that they comply with the additional
provisions of this subsection:
Boat sales and service.
Farm implement and machinery, new and used, sales.
Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative wrought ironwork
and play equipment sales.
Mobile home and travel trailer sales.
Monument sales.
New and used automobile sales.
Prefabricated house sales.
Trailers for hauling, rental and sales.
   B.   Requirements: The uses enumerated in subsection A of this section shall
comply with the following provisions:
      1.   Landscaping Of Yards: All yards, unoccupied with buildings or
merchandise or not used as trafficways, shall be landscaped with grass and
shrubs and maintained in good condition the year round.
      2.   Lots And Driveways Paved: All of the lots used for the parking of
vehicles, for the storage and display of merchandise, and all driveways used
for vehicle ingress and egress shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement
and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use.
      3.   Servicing Vehicles; Enclosed Building: All servicing of vehicles
carried on as an incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted
within a completely enclosed building.
      4.   Driveway Width: Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not
exceed twenty five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      5.   Outdoor Lighting: Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an
arrangement of reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere
with adjacent land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a
flashing or intermittent type. (1987 Code § 12-283)
11-6B-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of the
R General Residential District. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district:
   A.   Yards:
      1.   Front And Side Yard: There are no specific front or side yard
requirements for uses other than dwellings. When C-2 General Commercial
District abuts an R district, the front and side yard requirements shall be the
same as C-1 Neighborhood Commercial.
      2.   Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear
yard, or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
   B.   Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet
the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (1987
Code § 12-284)
11-6B-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall exceed ninety feet (90') in height. (1987 Code §
12-285)
11-6B-7: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
Signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays in the
C-2 District shall conform to the following requirements: (1987 Code § 12-286)
   A.   Business Sign: One business sign not exceeding eighty (80) square feet
of surface area may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. Ground
signs shall not exceed the height of the building in which the principal use is
located or twenty feet (20'), whichever is lower. No business sign shall be
located within fifty feet (50') of a residential district if visible from such
district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-
23-2015)
   B.   Real Estate Sign: A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or an approved development area may be erected on each
street frontage of the parcel, development, or other agricultural, commercial
or industrial zoned tract having the same ownership as that of the property,
premises or tract being advertised. The sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in individual surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height;
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Placement Of Signs: All signs in the C-2 District shall be erected upon
private property and shall not encroach upon any public street or walk, except
as provided by the applicable codes of the City and then they shall not
overhang at a height of less than nine feet (9') and shall not have a maximum
projection greater than seventy two inches (72"). (1987 Code § 12-286)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this Code.
ARTICLE C. C-3 INTENSIVE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-6C-1: General Description
11-6C-2: Uses Permitted
11-6C-3: Minimum Lot Size
11-6C-4: Area Regulations
11-6C-5: Height Regulations
11-6C-6: Signs And Billboards
11-6C-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business
services and the general retail business of the community. Persons living in
the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct and
frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger
vehicles and those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods. These uses create more traffic noise or congestion
thus require greater consideration as to location than do other commercial
uses. (1987 Code § 12-290)
11-6C-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in a C-3 Intensive Commercial District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
   A.   Uses In C-2 District: Any use permitted in a C-2 General Commercial
District, except R General Residential uses.
   B.   Amusements; Enterprises: Amusements and other enterprises as follows:
Bus terminal.
Dance hall.
Drive-in theater.
Kennel.
Liquor store.
Motel.
Nightclub.
Recreational vehicle parks and/or campgrounds.
Roller skating rink.
Tavern.
Travel trailer park. (1987 Code § 12-291; amd. Ord. 1995-03, 12-14-1995; Ord.
2017-06, 7-27-2017)
   C.   Accessory Buildings And Uses: Buildings, structures and uses accessory
and customarily incidental to any of the above uses; provided, that there shall
be no manufacturing, producing or compounding of products other than such as
are customarily incidental and essential to retail establishments.
   D.   Other Stores, Shops: Any other store or shop for retail trade or for
rendering personal, professional or business service which does not produce
more noise, odor, dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated
above. (1987 Code § 12-291)
   E.   Correctional Facility: Correctional facility. (Ord. 1997-05, 5-1-1997)
11-6C-3: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
None. (1987 Code § 12-292)
11-6C-4: AREA REGULATIONS:
The following requirements shall apply to all other uses permitted in this
district:
   A.   Yards:
      1.   Front And Side Yards: There are no specific front and side yard
requirements for uses. When C-3 Intensive Commercial abuts an R District, the
front and side yard requirements shall be the same as C-1 Neighborhood
Commercial District.
      2.   Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear
yard, or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
   B.   Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet
the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (1987
Code § 12-293)
11-6C-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building or structure shall exceed ninety feet (90') in height. (1987 Code §
12-294)
11-6C-6: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
Signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays in the
C-3 District shall conform to the following requirements: (1987 Code § 12-295)
   A.   Business Sign: One business sign not exceeding eighty (80) square feet
of surface area may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. Ground
signs shall not exceed the height of the building in which the principal use is
located or twenty feet (20'), whichever is lower. No business sign shall be
located within fifty feet (50') of a residential district if visible from such
district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (Ord. 2015-02, 2-
23-2015)
   B.   Real Estate Sign: A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or an approved development area may be erected on each
street frontage of the parcel, development, or other agricultural, commercial
or industrial zoned tract having the same ownership as that of the property,
premises or tract being advertised. The sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in individual surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height;
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Placement Of Signs: All signs in the C-3 District shall be erected upon
private property and shall not encroach upon any public street or walk, except
as provided by the applicable codes of the City and then they shall not
overhang at a height of less than nine feet (9') and shall not have a maximum
projection greater than seventy two inches (72") from the front building line.
(1987 Code § 12-295)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this Code.
CHAPTER 7
I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7-1: General Description
11-7-2: Uses Permitted
11-7-3: Minimum Lot Size
11-7-4: Maximum Coverage
11-7-5: Yard Requirements
11-7-6: Height Limit
11-7-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
11-7-8: Signs And Billboards
11-7-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The purpose of the I general industrial district is to provide a location for
industries and to preserve such land for industry that is most beneficial to
industries and to prohibit nonindustrial uses. Because of the traffic generated
and other objectionable influences which may be created in this district, it is
necessary to provide a buffer or setback area between this district and any
other zoning district. (1987 Code § 12-300)
11-7-2: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Permitted Uses: Property and buildings in an I district shall be used
only for the uses enumerated below. Any of the following uses shall be
permitted:
Automobile wrecking and junkyards, provided they are enclosed by a solid fence
of not less than eight feet (8') in height.
Bottling works, cannery, or preserving factories.
Building materials sales.
Commercial radio and television transmitting antenna towers and other
electronic equipment requiring outdoor towers, including antenna towers for the
dispatching of private messages.
Compounding, processing and blending of chemical products, but not including
any materials which decompose by detonation.
Fuel sales and storage.
General and administrative office.
Machine shops and metal products manufacture and tool and die shops, provided
they do not include any of the following equipment:
      1.   Automatic screw machines;
      2.   Drop forges; or
      3.   Riveting machines.
Mail order houses.
Manufacturing and assembling electrical and electronic products and equipment.
Manufacturing and assembling (for any combination of such processes) products
from cork, felt, fur, glass, leather, plastic, or wood, and other textiles, but
not including, as a principal operation, the processing of any raw materials.
Milk bottling and distribution.
Milling companies and grain elevators.
Motor freight terminals.
Outdoor shooting ranges for weapons provided such establishments are located so
that they do not pose a danger to residences, schools, churches or other
occupied structures.
Printing and binding plants.
Research laboratories.
Sheet metal shops.
Sign painting.
Utility service installation.
Warehouses and storage facilities.
Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and lift stations.
Welding shops. (1987 Code § 12-301; amd. Ord. 2012-03, 4-26-2012; Ord. 2017-05,
5-25-2017)
   B.   Other Processes Or Establishments: Any other manufacturing process or
establishment similar to the above.
   C.   Public Buildings, Uses: Any public building or use.
   D.   Retail Stores In C-1 District: All uses listed in subsection 11-6A-2C,
inclusive, of this title. (1987 Code § 12-301)
11-7-3: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
There are no requirements for minimum lot area in the I District. (1987 Code §
12-302)
11-7-4: MAXIMUM COVERAGE:
Buildings shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the site on which
the use is located. (1987 Code § 12-303)
11-7-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No structure shall be erected, commenced, or maintained which has a front yard
setback of less than fifty feet (50'). A side yard or rear yard of fifty feet
(50') or two feet (2') of setback for each one foot (1') of height, whichever
is greater, shall be provided when adjacent to a residential district, and
provided that a solid wall or fence in accordance with section
11-9-9 of this title shall be constructed on the side or rear property line
where the property abuts an R District, and a solid wall or fence in accordance
with section
11-9-9 of this title shall be constructed on all sides of a junk or salvage
yard. (1987 Code § 12-304)
11-7-6: HEIGHT LIMIT:
There are no requirements for minimum height in the I District. (1987 Code §
12-305)
11-7-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking shall be as required in chapter 9 of this title. (1987 Code
§ 12-306)
11-7-8: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS 1 :
Signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards or other similar displays in the I
District shall conform to the following requirements:
   A.   Business Signs: Business signs not exceeding in the aggregate one
square foot of display surface area per one linear foot of street frontage may
be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. Ground signs and billboards
shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height. No sign or billboard shall be
located within fifty feet (50') of a residential district if visible from such
district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   B.   Real Estate Sign: A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or an approved development area may be erected on each
street frontage of the parcel, development, or other agricultural, commercial
or industrial zoned tract having the same ownership as that of the property,
premises or tract being advertised. The sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in individual surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height;
and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   C.   Placement Of Signs: All signs in the I District shall be erected upon
private property and shall not encroach upon any public street or walk, except
as provided by the applicable codes of the City and then they shall not
overhang at a height of less than nine feet (9') and shall not have a maximum
projection greater than seventy two inches (72"). (1987 Code § 12-307)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 9 of this Code.
CHAPTER 8
GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-8-1: Compliance With District Regulations; Exception
11-8-2: More Restrictive District Regulations Prevail
11-8-3: Residential Uses Restricted To Residential Lots
11-8-4: Division Of Lots
11-8-5: Use Of Yards
11-8-6: Street Access
11-8-7: Trailers And Commercial Vehicles
11-8-8: Sewer Service
11-8-9: Group Housing Projects
11-8-10: Special Use Permits; Review; Communication Services
11-8-1: COMPLIANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS; EXCEPTION:
No land, building, structure, or improvement shall be used and no building,
structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered,
enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or
maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use,
height, area, coverage, yard, space, and other requirements established in the
district in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located,
and such use is not authorized, except as provided by chapter 10 of this title
regarding nonconformities. (1987 Code § 12-220)
11-8-2: MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT REGULATIONS PREVAIL:
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit
the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to the
conditions set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district, unless
otherwise specified. (1987 Code § 12-221)
11-8-3: RESIDENTIAL USES RESTRICTED TO RESIDENTIAL LOTS:
It is intended that this title be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit
to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be
used primarily for nonresidential purposes, except that one accessory
residential unit may be provided for a night watchman, motel manager, or
similar purpose where essential to the main use of the lot. (1987 Code § 12-
222)
11-8-4: DIVISION OF LOTS:
An improved lot shall not hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots unless
all lots resulting from such division comply with all the applicable yard,
space, area, parking and loading regulations of the zoning district in which
located. (1987 Code § 12-223)
11-8-5: USE OF YARDS:
No building, structure, or improvement shall be permitted to encroach upon
required yard spaces set forth in the provisions of this title. Surfaced
parking facilities, signs, fences, and gasoline pumping service units may be
permitted to occupy required yard space unless otherwise prohibited in those
districts permitting such improvements; and provided, that no inoperative
vehicle may be stored in the front yard of a lot in a residential district.
(1987 Code § 12-224)
11-8-6: STREET ACCESS:
No principal building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not
abut a public dedicated street. (1987 Code § 12-225)
11-8-7: TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Parking On Lot: Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types,
including travel, camping and hauling, and mobile homes shall not be parked or
stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential
district, except in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   No more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and
one-half (11/2) tons' rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall
be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling
explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be permitted.
      2.   No more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer per
family living on the premises shall be permitted, and the trailer shall not
exceed twenty four feet (24') in length or eight feet (8') in width. The
trailer shall not be parked for more than forty eight (48) hours unless it is
located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall
not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored
in any area within the incorporated limits, except in a mobile home park
authorized under the ordinances of the city, except as provided for in
subsection B of this section.
      3.   A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a mobile home park
which is in conformity with ordinances of the city.
   B.   Display Of Vehicles: Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types may
be displayed in such commercial districts allowing sales of the vehicles or in
such industrial districts allowing their manufacture. The vehicles may not be
used for dwelling purposes, either temporarily or permanently, except in a
mobile home park authorized under the ordinances of the city. (1987 Code § 12-
226)
11-8-8: SEWER SERVICE:
No structure or use in any district shall be erected or commenced which does
not have a connection to the public sewer system, unless and until the county
public health officer certifies that a septic tank or any substitute disposal
system can be installed and operated effectively. As a basis for making his
decision, the public health officer may require such percolation tests as he
deems to be necessary. Such tests are to be made at the expense of the property
owner. (1987 Code § 12-237)
11-8-9: GROUP HOUSING PROJECTS:
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more
buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two (2) acres, the
height, area and setback requirements of this title may be modified by the city
council upon the recommendation of the planning commission following the
submission of an application for such development by the applicant in such
cases where the application will provide a development that will be in harmony
with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a density of land use no
higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this title
in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no case
shall a use or building height or density of population be permitted which is
less than the requirements of the district in which the housing project is to
be located. (1987 Code § 12-238)
11-8-10: SPECIAL USE PERMITS; REVIEW; COMMUNICATION SERVICES:
The uses listed under the various districts herein as special permit uses are
so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are
located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the nature of
such uses make it desirable that they may be permitted to locate therein. The
following procedure is established to integrate property into special permit
uses with other land uses located in the district:
   A.   Review Process; Notice; Hearing: These uses shall be reviewed and
authorized or rejected under the following procedures:
      1.   An application shall be filed with the city planning commission for
review. The application shall show the location or intended use of the site,
the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within three
hundred feet (300') and any other material or information pertinent to the
request which the planning commission may require.
      2.   Notice shall be published and mailed to property owners at least
seven (7) days before the hearing.
      3.   The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings
thereon.
      4.   The planning commission shall, within forty five (45) days of the
date of the application, transmit to the city council its report as to the
effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood,
traffic conditions, public utilities, and other matters pertaining to the
general welfare, and the recommendation of the planning commission concerning
the use thereon. Thereupon, the city council may authorize or deny the issuance
of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested.
   B.   Filing Fee: Fees for the filing of a special use permit application
shall be set by motion or resolution of the city council.
   C.   Communication Services; Towers; Cellular Telephone, Radio And
Television: The following criteria are established for each use subject to
review before issuance of a special permit:
      1.   Districts: Eligible in A-1, A-2, C-2, C-3, industrial.
      2.   Height And Anchors:
         a.   Any tower anchored to the ground which is proposed to extend to a
height of over fifty feet (50').
         b.   Any tower attached to a building which is proposed to reach a
height over twenty feet (20') above the roofline of the building.
      3.   Standards For Ground Anchored Towers:
         a.   Towers and antennas shall be located on a site so as to provide a
minimum distance equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the height of the
tower from all property lines; provided, however, that the council may modify
this requirement where tower design will assure that a collapsing tower will
fall within a smaller area.
         b.   All tower supports and peripheral anchors shall be located
entirely within the boundaries of the property and shall not be less than five
feet (5') from the property line.
         c.   A wall or chainlink fence not less than eight feet (8') in height
from finished grade shall be provided around any high voltage equipment.
            (1)   Access shall be through a locked gate;
            (2)   Signs shall be located every twenty feet (20'), attached to
the fence or wall, and shall display in large bold letters the following:
   HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER
         d.   Equipment, mobile or immobile, that is not necessary for direct
support of the use, shall not be stored or parked on the site unless repairs to
the facility are being made, or unless the zoning district permits such a use.
(Ord. 1996-04, 5-9-1996)
CHAPTER 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose And Application
11-9-2: Required Open Space
11-9-3: Location Of Off Street Parking Lot
11-9-4: Joint Parking And Off Site Parking Facilities
11-9-5: Size Of Parking Space
11-9-6: Off Street Parking And Loading Schedule
11-9-7: Paved Surface Required
11-9-8: Location Within Or Adjacent To Residential District
11-9-9: Screening Wall Or Fence
11-9-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICATION:
It is the intent of this title that adequate parking and loading facilities be
provided on off the street areas for each use of land within the city.
Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These
requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. (1987 Code § 12-227)
11-9-2: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
Off street parking space may be a part of the required open space associated
with the permitted use, unless otherwise prohibited. The off street parking
requirements shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. (1987 Code
§ 12-228)
11-9-3: LOCATION OF OFF STREET PARKING LOT:
The off street parking lot shall be located within two hundred feet (200'),
exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have
direct access to a street or alley. (1987 Code § 12-229)
11-9-4: JOINT PARKING AND OFF SITE PARKING FACILITIES:
Whenever two (2) or more uses are located together in a common building,
shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements
may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility
cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of
spaces for each use. Owners jointly provide for their individual parking needs
through a joint facility or facilities; provided, that the total number of
spaces so provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual
requirements, and that each business or other use is within two hundred feet
(200') of the parking facility. (1987 Code § 12-230)
11-9-5: SIZE OF PARKING SPACE:
The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area
having dimensions of not less than ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') plus
adequate area for ingress and egress. (1987 Code § 12-231)
11-9-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SCHEDULE:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts in
accordance with the following schedule:
Boarding or rooming houses or hotels  1 parking space for each sleeping room
                                       1 parking space for each 150 square
Commercial establishments not         feet of floor space used for retail
otherwise classified                   trade in the building and including all
                                       areas used by the public
                                       1 parking space for each 4 permanent
                                       seats, based on maximum seating
Community centers, theaters,          capacity, or each 50 square feet of
auditoriums, church sanctuaries        floor area in rooms without permanent
                                       seating but intended to be used for
                                       assembly purposes
                                       1 space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1
Convalescent or nursing homes         space for each staff or visiting
                                       doctor, plus 1 space for each 2
                                       employees including nurses
Convention halls, lodges, clubs,       1 parking space for each 50 square feet
libraries, museums, places of         of floor area used for assembly or
amusement or recreation                recreation in the building
                                       The number of spaces provided shall not
Dwellings, multi-family               be less than 2 spaces for each of the
                                       first 50 dwelling units and 11/2 spaces
                                       for each dwelling unit above 50 units
Dwellings, single-family or duplex    2 parking spaces for each separate
                                       dwelling unit within the structure
Eating places                         1 off street parking space for each 225
                                       square feet of gross floor area
                                       1 space for each 4 patient beds,
                                       exclusive of bassinets, plus 1 space
Hospitals                             for each staff or visiting doctor, plus
                                       1 space for each 3 employees including
                                       nurses, plus adequate area for the
                                       parking of emergency vehicles
                                       1 off street parking space for each 500
                                       square feet of gross floor area or 1
                                       off street parking space for each 2
Industrial establishments             employees, whichever is greater, and 1
                                       loading or unloading berth for each
                                       25,000 square feet or fraction thereof
                                       of gross floor area
Medical or dental clinics or offices  6 spaces per doctor, plus 1 space for
                                       each 2 employees
                                       1 parking space for each 300 square
                                       feet of gross floor area in the
Office buildings                      building, exclusive of the area used
                                       for storage, utilities and building
                                       service
 
(1987 Code § 12-232)
11-9-7: PAVED SURFACE REQUIRED:
All parking spaces shall be paved with a sealed surface permanent pavement and
maintained in a manner that no dust will result from continued use. (1987 Code
§ 12-233)
11-9-8: LOCATION WITHIN OR ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
Whenever off street parking lots for more than six (6) vehicles are to be
located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions
shall apply:
   A.   Screening Wall Or Fence: All sides of the lot within or abutting the
residential district shall be enclosed with a screening wall or fence as
specified under section
11-9-9 of this chapter.
   B.   Front Yard: No parking shall be permitted within a front yard when the
parking lot is located in a residential district.
   C.   Driveways: Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to,
and shall not exceed, twenty five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb
returns.
   D.   Paving: All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be
paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no
dust will be produced by continued use.
   E.   Lighting: Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that
all light is deflected from adjoining residential uses.
   F.   Signs: No sign of any kind shall be erected, except information signs
used to guide traffic and to state the condition and terms of the use of the
lots. Only nonintermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted. (1987
Code § 12-234)
11-9-9: SCREENING WALL OR FENCE:
   A.   Specifications: When the provisions of this title require the
construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation and
subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence:
      1.   Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual
separation of uses, irrespective of vegetation;
      2.   Shall not be less than five feet (5') nor more than eight feet (8')
in height; and
      3.   Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior.
(1987 Code § 12-235)
   B.   Maintenance: The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the
owner of the zoning lot containing the use requiring the construction of the
screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the zoning administrator shall
constitute an offense hereunder. (1987 Code § 12-236)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
11-10-1: Intent
11-10-2: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
11-10-3: Nonconforming Structures
11-10-4: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures
11-10-5: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
11-10-6: Changes In Nonconformity
11-10-1: INTENT:
Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be
adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which
were lawful before the regulations of this title were passed or amended but
which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this
title or future amendments. It is the intent of this title to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival. Such uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this
title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended,
nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere
in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use
of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended
or enlarged after adoption of this title. (1987 Code § 12-240)
11-10-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which a lot exists of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title which does not conform in size or area to
the provisions of this title, buildings for the uses permitted in such district
may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this title; provided, that such lot is in separate ownership and
not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. (1987 Code §
12-241)
11-10-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason
of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics
of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlargement Or Alteration: No such structure may be enlarged or altered
in a way which increases its nonconformity.
   B.   Destruction; Reconstruction: Should such structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at
time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with
the provisions of this title.
   C.   Moving Structure: Should such structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved. (1987 Code § 12-242)
11-10-4: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES:
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that would
not be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   Changing To Permitted Use: No existing structure devoted to a use not
permitted by this title in the district in which it is located shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered,
except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district
in which it is located.
   B.   Extending: Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts
of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of adoption or amendment of this title, but no such use shall be extended
to occupy any land outside such building.
   C.   Conformance With District Regulations: Any structure, or structure and
land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a
permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
   D.   Discontinuance Or Abandonment: When a nonconforming use of a structure,
or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six
(6) consecutive months, the structure, or structure and premises in
combination, shall not thereafter be used, except in conformance with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   E.   Removal Or Destruction: Where nonconforming use status applies to a
structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. (1987 Code § 12-243)
11-10-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title, lawful
uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of this title
as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as they remain
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Moving: No such conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title.
   B.   Enlargement: No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased
or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title.
   C.   Discontinuance: If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any
reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such
land shall conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district
in which such land is located. (1987 Code § 12-244)
11-10-6: CHANGES IN NONCONFORMITY:
A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination,
shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which
located, except that the board of adjustment may permit a change to a more
restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be construed as an
abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use. (1987 Code § 12-245)
CHAPTER 11
AMENDMENTS, SUPPLEMENTS AND CHANGES
SECTION:
11-11-1: Planning Commission Recommendation Required
11-11-2: Application For Amendment; Fee
11-11-3: Notice And Public Hearing
11-11-4: Planning Commission Action
11-11-5: City Action
11-11-6: Protest To Amendment
11-11-1: PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED:
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed and the
districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the
planning commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the city
council a report and recommendation on the proposed change. (1987 Code § 12-
320)
11-11-2: APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT; FEE:
   A.   Application: An owner or his duly authorized agent or representative
may make application for the amendment of the zoning restrictions applicable to
his property by filing with the planning commission a written application in
such form and content as the planning commission may by resolution establish.
(1987 Code § 12-321)
   B.   Fee: An application for amendment shall be accompanied by the payment
of a fee as set by motion or resolution of the city council to cover the costs
of notice and posting and administrative review. The fee shall be payable in
two (2) parts:
      1.   One-half (1/2) of the fee amount for the hearing before the planning
commission; and
      2.   One-half (1/2) of the fee amount for the hearing before the city
council. (1987 Code § 12-321; amd. 2004 Code)
11-11-3: NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Set Hearing Date: Upon receipt of an application, the planning
commission shall set a date for public hearing not less than twenty (20) days
nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of filing. (1987 Code § 12-322)
   B.   Notice; Time Limit; Posting:
      1.   Twenty (20) days' notice of the public hearing shall be given by the
planning commission by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city.
      2.   In addition to the notice provided in subsection B1 of this section,
notice of public hearing of any zoning change shall be given by a sign or signs
twenty (20) days prior to the hearing and as may be required, placed on the
property affected by such proposed zoning change. Such sign or signs and the
lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and
legible from the public street and/or streets toward which it faces. It shall
contain information giving the date, time and place of the public hearing and
by whom it shall be conducted, the desired zoning change, the proposed use of
the property, and such other information as deemed necessary to provide
adequate and timely public notice. (Ord. 2015-10, 7-23-2015)
11-11-4: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   Recommendations: After notice and public hearing, the planning
commission shall vote to:
      1.   Recommend to the city council that the application be approved as
submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or
      2.   Recommend to the city council that the application be denied.
   B.   Time Limit: An application recommended for approval, or approval
subject to modification, shall be transmitted to the city council with the
report and recommendation of the planning commission within fifteen (15) days
from the date of planning commission action. (1987 Code § 12-323)
   C.   Denial; Request For Hearing:
      1.   An application recommended for denial shall not be considered
further, and a portion, as determined by motion or resolution of the city
council, of the fee required in application for amendment shall be refunded (if
previously paid) to the applicant unless the applicant, within fifteen (15)
days from the date of the planning commission action, files a written request
with the city council for a hearing, whereupon a fee as set by motion or
resolution of the city council shall accompany the request for a hearing before
the city council. (1987 Code § 12-323; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Upon notice of such request, and receipt of the required fee, the
planning commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and
recommendation and an approved copy of its minutes on the hearing to the city
council.
      3.   The city clerk shall notify all interested parties of record, before
the planning commission proceedings, of the time and place of the consideration
of the appeal hereinabove provided for. (1987 Code § 12-323)
11-11-5: CITY ACTION:
The city council shall hold a hearing on each application regularly
transmitted, or which has been transmitted pursuant to an appeal as provided
for in subsection
11-11-4C of this chapter. The city council shall approve the application as
submitted and recommended by the planning commission, or approve the
application subject to modification, or deny the application or return the
application to the planning commission for further study. (1987 Code § 12-324)
11-11-6: PROTEST TO AMENDMENT:
If a written protest against an amendment, change or repeal of this title or
any part thereof is presented, duly signed and acknowledged more than ten (10)
days prior to the public hearing by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more
of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of
fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting any
side of the territory included in such proposed change, or separated therefrom
only by an alley or street less than three hundred feet (300') wide, such
amendment shall not become effective, except by the favorable vote of three-
fifths (3/5) of all the members of the city council. (1987 Code § 12-325)
CHAPTER 12
SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Purposes
11-12-2: Conditions For Approval
11-12-3: Specific Use Permit List
11-12-4: Use Conditions
11-12-5: Administration
11-12-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   The City Council may, after a public hearing and recommendation by the
Planning Commission, authorize for specific parcels of land, the issuance of a
Specific Use Permit.
   B.   The uses listed in the Specific Use List located in
11-12-3, as well as other uses outlined in the McLoud Municipal Code as
requiring a Specific Use Permit, are so classified because of the size of the
land they require or the specialized nature of the use, they may more intensely
dominate the area in which they are located, or their effects on the general
public are broader in scope than other types of uses permitted in the district.
   C.   The designation of a Specific Use Permit as possible on the Specific
Use Permit List does not constitute an authorization or an assurance that such
use will be permitted. Rather, each Specific Use Permit application shall be
valued as to its probable effect on the adjacent property and community welfare
and may be approved or denied, with appropriate conditions, as the findings
indicate appropriate. (Ord. 2019-10, 11-12-2019)
11-12-2: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL:
   A.   Plans and Data to be Submitted Prior to submission of a request for a
Specific Use Permit: The appointed City Staff Member may require one or more
pre-application conferences with the potential applicant. In considering and
determining its recommendation to the City Council relative to any application
for a Specific Use Permit, the Planning Commission will establish the
requirements necessary for consideration of the application. The Commission
shall also set a deposit amount from the applicant sufficient for payment of
the application and permit expenses. The requirements and amount of deposit may
be adjusted by the Planning Commission as necessary during the application
process. The Planning Commission may require that the applicant furnish
preliminary site plans and data concerning the operation, location, function
and characteristics of any use of land or building proposed. For uses in which
the land use has possible environmental impact, the Commission may require
those engineering and/or environmental impact studies necessary for the City of
McLoud evaluation of the proposed use. Further, the Commission may require such
other information as necessary to evaluate the proposed specific use.
   B.   Planning Commission Requirements - The Planning Commission may, in the
interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the intent of this
ordinance and the McLoud Comprehensive Plan, require such development standards
and operational conditions and safeguards as are indicated to be important to
the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole
and be compatible with the natural environment and the planned capacities of
public services and facilities affected by the land use. This may include the
requirement of having the property platted and/or the requirement of the
dedication of sufficient right-of-way or easement as necessary to further the
public good. The Planning Commission may recommend the City Council impose
certain safeguards and conditions including, but not limited to: bonding,
insurance, permitted uses, lot sizes, setbacks, height limits, required
facilities, buffers, open space areas, lighting, noise levels, signage,
landscaping, parking and loading, compatibility, ingress and egress, off-street
parking and loading arrangements, location or construction of buildings and
uses, and land use intensity/density as may be required depending upon the
proposed use and its potential effect on adjacent areas or the community. If
the Planning Commission fails to review and make a recommendation within 90
days from the date the application is accepted for processing, the City Council
may take action on the application.
   C.   City Council Requirements - The City Council shall have the same
authority as the Planning Commission under subsection B, and in addition may
make additional requirements for review and conditions that in its discretion
are in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance with the
intent of this ordinance and the McLoud Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Detail Plans - A Detail Plan setting forth the conditions specified may
be required of the applicant and such plan when accepted shall be made a part
of the permit issued for the Specific Use.
   E.   Designation of Zoning Map - A Specific Use Permit approved under the
provisions of this Zoning Code shall not be considered as an amendment to the
zoning ordinance; however, the Specific Use Permit shall be noted on the zoning
map as follows: SUP - (the number of the request for a Specific Use Permit).
Any of the conditions contained in a Specific Use Permit approval shall be
considered as conditions precedent to the granting of a Building Permit for the
specific use provided for.
   F.   Time Limits for Implementation - If for any reason the approved
specific use ceases operation for a period of two years, then the approval of
said specific use shall be considered void and will require another public
hearing review by the Planning Commission and City Council. This shall also
apply to any approved specific use that does not begin operation within two
years of approval. This voiding of approval shall not apply if orderly progress
toward completion of construction is taking place. Uses existing before the
adoption of the Specific Use Permit ordinance, including nonconforming uses and
their incidental and accessory uses, must receive a Specific Use Permit before
any expansion of the use is permitted or the municipality may act or approve
any state or local permit/certificate. (Ord. 2019-10, 11-12-2019)
11-12-3: SPECIFIC USE PERMIT LIST:
The following uses may be allowed by Specific Use Permit as granted by the City
Council:
   Adult Detention Center/Correctional Facility
   Adult Novelty Shop
   Antenna and Antenna Supporting Structure
   Airport
   Apartments
   Auto Pool
   Bar/Tavern
   Billiard Parlor/Pool Hall
   Casinos, Other Gambling Establishments
   Cemetery
   Cement, Portland Manufacture
   Churches
   Commercial Theme Parks Convalescent Homes
   Water Treatment Facility
   Convict Pre-Release Center
   Tavern
   Correctional Community Treatment Center
   Crematory
   Detention Center Juvenile-Adult
   Heliport
   Electric Generation Plant and/or Sub-Station
   Sewage Disposal Facility
   Emergency Protective Shelter
   Private Club
   Entertainment Establishments
   Prisons
   Garbage Dump
   Growing, manufacturing, processing, or storing hemp, including any related
or ancillary activities
   Jail
   Gravel Operations
   Junk or Salvage Yards
   Golf Course
   Golf Driving Range
   Gun Club
   Halfway House
   Juvenile Delinquency Center
   Homeless Center
   Commercial Kennel
   Mini-Storage
   Museum
   Night Club
   Nursing Homes
   Rifle and Skeet Range
   RV Park
   Sand Operations
   Sanitary Landfill
   Sexually Oriented Business
   Trade Schools
   Transitional Living Center
   Refuse Dump/Refuse Transfer Station
   Recycling Center Residential Treatment Center
   Garbage, Offal, or Dead Animal Reduction or Dumping
   Extraction Operations, Mining and Mineral Processing
   Offices
   Transmitting Tower (excluding amateur radio tower)
   Water Storage Facility
   Mining and Quarrying, Mineral Products Processing, as defined in the Zoning
Code Use
   Industrial Uses
   Public or Private Attractions
   Public or Private Schools with a compulsory education curriculum
   College or University Hospital Commercial Resort Facilities
   Commercial Recreation
   Asphalt and/or Concrete Plant
   Any activity regulated by the Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority (except
personal use which is licensed for personal medical purposes). (Ord. 2019-10,
11-12-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-05, 9-23-2021)
11-12-4: USE CONDITIONS:
Compliance with District and Use Unit Requirements: Specific uses permitted
shall comply with the all other Zoning District and Ordinance Requirements
where the property is located. In addition, all uses and aspects of the
property shall comply with all requirements as required per the related Use
Unit in the McLoud Zoning Code, except as may be modified by City Council as
provided in Section
11-12-5. (Ord. 2019-10, 11-12-2019)
11-12-5: ADMINISTRATION:
Filing of a Petition for Specific Use Permit
   A.   Petition - A petition for a Specific Use Permit may be filed with the
Planning Commission by the owner(s) of the property concerned, by the duly
authorized representative thereof, by the holder of an option to purchase the
affected real estate or by the purchaser in a contract to purchase realty. Such
petition shall be on a standard form furnished by the Planning Department of
the City. All petitions for a Specific Use Permit shall be accompanied by a
site plan of the proposed area showing the location of buildings, parking, and
other pertinent data concerning the operation of the proposed use.
   B.   Fee for Petition - A one hundred-dollar ($100.00) fee shall be required
with the Specific Use Permit application, or such other fee as the City Council
may from time to time specify by resolution.
   C.   Notice of Hearing
      1.   Notice - Notice of the public hearing to consider a Specific Use
Permit shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the public hearing held
by the Planning Commission by mailing written notice by the secretary of the
Planning Commission to all owners of property within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property or such other
notice deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission or the City Council.
      2.   The notice shall contain:
         a.   The date, time and place of the public hearing.
         b.   The present zoning classification of the property and the nature
of the Specific Use Permit.
         c.   The legal description of the property and street address or
approximate location in the municipality.
   D.   Appeals and Confirmation by City Council. An applicant, or any
adversely affected person, may appeal a recommendation of approval or denial by
the Planning Commission to the City Council, within 10 days of the Planning
Commission decision, by:
      1.   Completing a Notice of Appeal form that shall be available from the
Appointed municipal staff member; and
      2.   Paying an appeal fee in the amount of $100.00, or such fee as set by
council resolution. If an appeal is not timely filed, the recommendation of the
Planning Commission shall be included on a council consent agenda for
consideration, and may be removed from the consent agenda by council pursuant
to council rules, whereupon the council may either accept the recommendations
of the Planning Commission, reverse the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, modify the decision of the Planning Commission, or remand the
matter for further consideration by the Planning Commission. If an appeal is
timely filed, the City Council shall establish a date specific for its decision
and may affirm, reverse or remand the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
   E.   Reapplication or Reconsideration of Mining and Quarrying, Mineral
Products Processing - The City is not required to reconsider requests denied by
the municipality related to mining and quarrying, or mineral products
processing for the same site unless the municipality determines there has been
a material change in the application. A mining application for any portion of a
site previously denied by the City Council will be reviewed by the Appointed
municipal staff member first to determine if there has been a material change
in the application. A material change is a substantial change in the
application as compared with prior applications such that it warrants
consideration as a new application. The Appointed municipal staff member will
establish the requirements necessary for consideration of the application. The
appointed municipal staff member of the City of McLoud shall also set a deposit
amount from the applicant sufficient for payment of the application and permit
expenses. The requirements and amount of deposit may be adjusted by the
Appointed municipal staff member as necessary during the application process.
The Appointed municipal staff member will notify the applicant of the decision.
The determination of the Appointed municipal staff member may be appealed to
the City Manager within fifteen (15) days of the rendering of the decision.
(Ord. 2019-10, 11-12-2019)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; AUTHORITY; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Short Title
12-1-2: Authority
12-1-3: Purpose And Intent
12-1-4: Jurisdiction
12-1-5: Definitions
12-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF McLOUD,
OKLAHOMA. (1987 Code § 12-402)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted pursuant to 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 41-101 et seq.
(1987 Code § 12-403; amd. 2004 Code)
12-1-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The provisions of this title are designed to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community by establishing standards
for the subdivision of land within the city.
   B.   The provisions of this title are specifically designed to lessen the
congestion on streets, promote the orderly layout and use of land, secure
safety from fire and other dangers, provide adequate light and air, facilitate
adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds and other public requirements, and protect neighborhood areas from
the hazard of through traffic.
   C.   The provisions of this title are designed and intended to achieve the
following and should be administered so as to:
      1.   Implement the comprehensive plan;
      2.   Provide for conservation of existing standard residential areas and
prevent the development of slums and blight;
      3.   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to
the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
      4.   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community be borne by the whole community;
      5.   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
      6.   Reconcile any differences of interests; and
      7.   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. (1987
Code § 12-401)
12-1-4: JURISDICTION:
   A.   This title shall govern the subdivision of land in the corporate limits
of the city.
   B.   The provisions of this title shall apply to the following forms of land
subdivision:
      1.   The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or
parcels, any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than five (5)
acres in area;
      2.   The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels of less than ten (10) acres in area;
      3.   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
      4.   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract
of land regardless of the area involved. (1987 Code § 12-404)
12-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties, otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights of way, public
walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels, or a combination
thereof.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE: A line or lines designating the area outside of
which a building may not be erected.
CITY: The city of McLoud, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL: The official legislative body of the city.
CITY PLANNER: The qualified professional planner designated by the city council
to advise the planning commission and board on matters relating to the
development of the community.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official plan of the city.
DEVELOPMENT DENSITY: Density in terms of gross land area are:
   A.   Low - two (2) or less dwelling units per acre;
   B.   Medium - 2.1 to 6.0 dwelling units per acre; and
   C.   High - Over six (6) dwelling units per acre.
EASEMENT: A grant of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes by the
property owner to the public, a corporation or persons.
LOT: A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of, and abutting on, two (2) or
more streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two (2) nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more
streets.
LOT SPLIT: Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two (2) or
more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, and which does not constitute a "subdivision" as herein defined.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city, as established by
section
10-1A-1 of this code.
PLAT, FINAL: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications, and acceptances, and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets
and alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character
and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
ROADWAY: That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic; and
where curbs are in place, that portion of the street between curbs.
STREET: The entire width of whatever nature between the property lines when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the
purpose of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic, and wherever designated as
a street, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place, cul-de-sac, or however otherwise designated.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A major street which is designated on the thoroughfare plan,
or comprehensive plan or as may be designed by ordinance by the city council
and which is designed to carry intercommunity traffic and to relate the various
neighborhoods within the community.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street collecting traffic from minor streets and serving
as the most direct route to an arterial street or a community facility. Any
street may be designated by the city council as a collector street when it
serves, or when extended may serve, more than fifty (50) dwelling units.
STREET, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL: A street which abuts a commercial or
industrial zoned property and is designed to provide access to those parcels so
designated.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic and
having one closed end terminated by a turnaround.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE: A minor street auxiliary to, and located on the
side of, the arterial street for service to abutting properties and adjacent
areas and for control of access.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A service road or other roadway normally running
parallel to, or with, an arterial street for the purpose of intercepting
traffic from abutting property or intersecting streets for the purpose of
limiting access to the arterial street main roadway.
STREET, MINOR: Any street not specifically classified on the thoroughfare or
comprehensive plan whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent
properties.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation or other entity
acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of land by map into two (2) or more
lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right of way
or easement.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The part of an official community plan referring to street
development goals, principles and standards. (1987 Code § 12-405)
CHAPTER 2
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Street Plan; Relation To Adjoining Street System
12-2-2: Relation To Other Limited Rights Of Way
12-2-3: Reserve Strips Prohibited
12-2-4: Street Alignment
12-2-5: Street Rights Of Way And Roadway Widths
12-2-6: Arterial Street Frontage Access Control
12-2-7: Street And Subdivision Names
12-2-8: Street Grades
12-2-9: Street Intersections
12-2-10: Cul-De-Sacs And Dead End Streets
12-2-11: Alleys
12-2-12: Easements
12-2-13: Blocks
12-2-14: Lots
12-2-15: Marginal Land
12-2-1: STREET PLAN; RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM:
   A.   Conformance With Official Community Plan: The arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade and location of all streets in a proposed subdivision
shall conform to the official community plan and this title.
   B.   Relationship To Certain Conditions: All such streets shall be related
to existing and proposed streets in the area, topographical conditions, public
convenience and safety, and existing and proposed land uses along such streets.
   C.   Conformance With Zoning Regulations: All streets shall be platted in
such a manner that all resulting lots shall conform to the applicable zoning
regulations.
   D.   Arrangement: Where such streets are not shown in the official community
plan, the arrangements of these streets in the subdivision shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
streets in the surrounding areas; or
      2.   Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the planning
commission.
   E.   Minor And Collector Streets: Minor and collector streets shall be laid
out so as to discourage through traffic.
   F.   Arterial Streets: Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial, the planning commission shall require:
      1.   Marginal access streets;
      2.   Reverse frontage with screen plantings contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line;
      3.   Deep lots with rear service streets; or
      4.   Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate protection
and stabilization of residential properties and to afford separation of through
and local traffic. (1987 Code § 12-410)
12-2-2: RELATION TO OTHER LIMITED RIGHTS OF WAY:
Where a subdivision borders on, or contains, a railroad right of way or limited
access highway, the planning commission may require a street approximately
parallel to, and on each side of, such right of way. (1987 Code § 12-411)
12-2-3: RESERVE STRIPS PROHIBITED:
Reserve strips designed and used for the primary purpose of controlling access
to minor streets by parties or persons other than a public agency shall be
prohibited. (1987 Code § 12-412)
12-2-4: STREET ALIGNMENT:
   A.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided.
   B.   Tangent: A tangent of not less than one hundred feet (100') in length
shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
   C.   Clear Sight Distance: Minimum clear sight distance, measured along the
chord of the centerline, shall be provided on all streets as follows:
 
Arterial streets  400 feet
Collector streets 350 feet
Minor streets     250 feet
 
(1987 Code § 12-413)
12-2-5: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY AND ROADWAY WIDTHS:
   A.   Conformance With Official Community Plan: Street rights of way and
roadway width shall conform to the official community plan.
   B.   Paving: All streets shall be paved according to the established
standards adopted by the city council.
   C.   Minimum Standards: The following minimum standards shall apply:
Street Type  Right Of Way Width
Street Type                       Right Of Way Width
                                
Expressway                       As per Oklahoma state highway department
Primary arterial                 120 feet
Secondary arterial               100 feet
Commercial or industrial street  80  feet
Collector                        60  feet
Minor                            50  feet or 60 feet1
 
Note:
      1.   Use where abutting development is high density or where bar ditch
drainage is used shall have a 60 foot right of way.
   D.   Half Streets:
      1.   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this title.
      2.   In no event shall lots facing a one-half (1/2) minor residential
street be permitted.
      3.   Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(1987 Code § 12-414)
12-2-6: ARTERIAL STREET FRONTAGE ACCESS CONTROL:
   A.   Access On Arterial Street: No access on an arterial street shall occur
within minimum intervals of five hundred feet (500'), measured from the nearest
intersecting rights of way lines (except as modified by subsection B of this
section, the distance may be extended or increased if traffic conditions, as
determined by the planning commission, warrant such extension).
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Subdivisions:
      1.   In commercial and industrial subdivisions, specifically designated
"one-way turn only", access may be provided in the direction of the adjacent
traffic lane at a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') between major
street intersections or a minimum of three hundred feet (300') between each
access point.
      2.   Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to an
arterial or commercial street, and may have access to a collector street, if
traffic conditions, as determined by the planning commission, warrant such
extension, but shall not have access to a minor street.
   C.   Assurance Of Traffic Safety: To assure traffic safety, appropriate
nonaccess provisions shall be designated and dimensioned along all abutting
streets in commercial and industrial subdivisions, and along major streets in
residential subdivisions. A description of such nonaccess provisions shall
appear upon the plat.
   D.   Closest Proximity To Arterial Street: Access to property occurring
within the minimum distance prescribed for arterial street access, five hundred
feet (500'), shall only be by the closest service or frontage road entrance
onto the arterial street. (1987 Code § 12-415)
12-2-7: STREET AND SUBDIVISION NAMES:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   No street name shall be used which will duplicate, or be confused
with, the names of existing streets.
      2.   Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning
commission and the city council.
   B.   Subdivisions: Subdivision names shall not duplicate existing
subdivisions of record unless the plat is an extension of a previously recorded
addition as reflected in a preliminary plat approved by the planning commission
and the city council. (1987 Code § 12-416)
12-2-8: STREET GRADES:
   A.   Minimum Grade: The minimum grade of all streets shall be four- tenths
percent (0.4%).
   B.   Maximum Grade: Except where unusual topographic conditions justify an
exception, the maximum grade of all streets shall not be greater than the
following:
 
Street Type Grade
            
Arterial    3 percent
Collector   5 percent
Minor       7 percent
 
(1987 Code § 12-417)
12-2-9: STREET INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Angle: Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles, and may
be curved, if necessary, in order to make this possible. In no event shall a
street intersect any other street at any angle of less than seventy five
degrees (75°).
   B.   Residential: Street corners on local residential streets shall have a
minimum radius of thirty feet (30') at the curb line or its equivalent.
   C.   Commercial And Industrial: Street corners on commercial and industrial
streets shall have a minimum radius of forty feet (40') at the curb line or its
equivalent.
   D.   Arterials: Street intersections involving arterials shall have a
minimum street corner radius of forty feet (40') at the curb line or its
equivalent.
   E.   Shown On Plats: All street corner radii shall be shown on the
preliminary and final plats.
   F.   Corner Dedications: Corner dedications shall be provided at the
intersections of all streets which are not less than twenty five feet (25')
back from the intersection of the projected right of way lines of the
intersecting streets. (1987 Code § 12-418)
12-2-10: CUL-DE-SACS AND DEAD END STREETS:
   A.   Maximum Length: Except where topography would render impracticable the
standard distance as set forth herein, the maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall
be one thousand feet (1,000') in areas of low density and five hundred feet
(500') in all other cases.
   B.   Turnaround: Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having
a minimum right of way radius of fifty feet (50').
   C.   Roadway Surface: The road surface within the cul-de-sac right of way
shall have a minimum radius of thirty eight feet (38').
   D.   Stub Streets: In the case of temporarily dead ended streets which are
stub streets designed to provide future connection with adjoining unsubdivided
areas, the planning commission may require:
      1.   Temporary easement for a turnaround having a radius of fifty feet
(50'); or
      2.   An appropriate area for a backaround.
   E.   Storm Drainage: In all instances, proper provisions shall be made for
adequate storm drainage so that stormwater does not collect at the ends of
these streets. (1987 Code § 12-419)
12-2-11: ALLEYS:
   A.   Commercial Districts: Alleys shall be provided in all commercial
districts, except where a commercial district will be developed as a self-
contained unit; then other provisions shall be made on the site for service
drives and service areas.
   B.   Width:
      1.   Alleys in residential areas shall not be less than twenty feet (20')
in width when provided.
      2.   Alleys in commercial areas shall not be less than thirty feet (30')
in width and shall be paved.
   C.   Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys are prohibited, except where natural
or other features make it impossible to continue them. Where dead end alleys
are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround areas with a
minimum radius of forty feet (40') at the dead end. Backaround areas may be
allowed in residential subdivisions. (1987 Code § 12-420)
12-2-12: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Alleys Unavailable: Where alleys are not provided or may not be used
for utility purposes, easements shall be provided as may be advisable for
poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains
and lines, and other similar purposes.
   B.   Rear Yard: Rear yard easements shall be at least twenty feet (20')
wide. In the event one-half (1/2) of an easement is platted, it shall be not
less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
   C.   Stormwater Easement: Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right of way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width of construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith.
   D.   End Of Cul-De-Sac: Twenty foot (20') utility easements shall be
provided at the end of cul-de-sacs along major thoroughfares. (1987 Code § 12-
421)
12-2-13: BLOCKS:
   A.   Dimensions: In general, blocks should have the following dimensions:
 
       Minimum  Maximum
               
Length 600 feet 1,200 feet
Width  220 feet 400 feet
 
   B.   Adjustment Of Dimensions: The foregoing dimensions shall be subject to
adjustment upon recommendation by the planning commission where topography, the
character of the proposed development, or other similar conditions justify
blocks of greater or lesser length or width.
   C.   Measurement: Block lengths and widths shall be measured from the street
right of way line.
   D.   Crosswalks: Wherever blocks are longer than one thousand feet (1,000'),
crosswalks may be required at the approximate center of the block. (1987 Code §
12-422)
12-2-14: LOTS:
   A.   Specifications Appropriate For Location: The lot size, width, depth,
shape, orientation, and minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for
the location of the subdivision and the type of development and use
contemplated. Lot depth shall not exceed twenty five (25) times the lot
frontage.
   B.   Dimensions Per Zoning Regulations: Lot dimensions shall conform to the
existing zoning regulations.
   C.   Access And Frontage: Each lot shall have access and front upon a public
street.
   D.   Double Frontage And Reverse Frontage: Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots should be avoided, except where their use will produce definite
advantages in meeting special situations in relation to topography and proper
land use.
   E.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
or radial to street lines. (1987 Code § 12-423)
12-2-15: MARGINAL LAND 1 :
When a plat is filed on land that is subject to flooding or has been flooded
within the last twenty (20) years and corrective measures have not been taken
to prevent reflooding, or when the land has soil conditions unsuitable for
building purposes, the plat shall not be acceptable, except where the property
is dedicated to the city subject to its acceptance for a watercourse, water
drainage basin, a park or a conservancy district or for any other purpose of
protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the public. (1987 Code §
12-424)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 3 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
PLATTING PROCEDURE
SECTION:
12-3-1: Preliminary Plat
12-3-2: Final Plat
12-3-3: Recording Of Plat
12-3-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Copies Submitted For Review: The subdivider shall submit at least
fourteen (14) copies of the preliminary plat to the city clerk or his
designated agent, who shall cause the plat to be reviewed for conformity with
this title.
   B.   Distribution Of Copies: The city clerk, or his designated agent, shall
distribute the plats as follows:
      1.   One copy to the city planner;
      2.   One copy to the city engineer;
      3.   One copy to the planning division, Oklahoma state highway
department;
      4.   One copy to the Pottawatomie board of county commissioners;
      5.   One copy to the McLoud school superintendent;
      6.   One copy to the telephone company;
      7.   One copy to the gas company;
      8.   One copy to the electric company;
      9.   One copy to the postmaster;
      10.   One copy to the planner of COFDD; and
      11.   Four (4) copies of the plat shall be retained for the following
purposes:
         a.   One copy to be returned to the developer with the comments of the
planing commissions;
         b.   One copy to be retained in the file of the city council;
         c.   One copy to be retained in the files of the planning commission;
and
         d.   One extra copy.
   C.   Review By City Planner: The city planner shall be responsible for
assembling the comments of the above persons designated to review the
preliminary plat and shall review the plat for conformity with their
regulations, the official comprehensive plan and good planning principles and
shall submit his report and recommendations to the planning commission at the
next regular meeting of the planning commission which is not less than fifteen
(15) days from the date that the preliminary plat was accepted for processing
by the city clerk, or his designated agent.
   D.   Consideration By Planning Commission: Upon receipt of the report of the
city planner, the planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or
reject the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days of its acceptance for
processing.
   E.   Commission Report: After its consideration, the planning commission
shall return one copy of the preliminary plat to the subdivider and forward one
copy to the city council, together with its report of any conditions of
approval or the reasons for rejection.
   F.   City Council Evaluate Commission Report: The city council shall concur
in the actions of the planning commission or shall return the preliminary plat
to the planning commission for reconsideration stating the reasons for such
request for reconsideration.
   G.   Approval No Guarantee Of Final Plat Approval: Approval of the
preliminary plat shall not in all cases entitle the subdivider to approval of
the final plat. After preliminary approval, if any conditions arise which would
cause the preliminary plat to become unsatisfactory due to health, safety, or
welfare of the community, the planning commission shall recommend that the
final plat be rejected. (1987 Code § 12-430)
12-3-2: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Submission Of Copies; Time Limit: The subdivider shall cause the final
plat to be prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor and shall
submit ten (10) paper copies and one copy of stable base tracing medium of
Mylar or comparable stable base reproducible material of the proposed
subdivision to the city clerk, or his designated agent. The final plat of the
proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission and city
council for final approval within two (2) years of the date on which the
preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final approval within such
time, the preliminary plat approval shall be considered as null and void unless
the planning commission and city council agree to an extension of time.
   B.   Distribution: The city clerk, or his designated agent, shall distribute
the plats as follows:
      1.   One copy to the city planner;
      2.   One copy to the city engineer;
      3.   One copy to the telephone company;
      4.   One copy to the gas company;
      5.   One copy to the electric company; and
      6.   Five (5) copies of the plat shall be retained for the following
purposes:
         a.   One copy to be retained in the files of the city council;
         b.   One copy to be retained in the files of the planning commission;
and
         c.   Three (3) extra copies.
   C.   Review By City Planner: The city planner shall be responsible for
assembling the comments of the above persons designated to review the final
plat and shall review the plat for conformity with their regulations and shall
submit his report and recommendations to the planning commission at the next
regular meeting which is not less than fifteen (15) days from the date that the
final plat was presented to the city clerk, or his designated agent, for
processing.
   D.   Review By Planning Commission: The planning commission shall review the
final plat for conformance with the preliminary plat and this title and shall
prepare a set of written recommendations to be submitted to the city council at
the time the final plat is considered.
   E.   Commission Action: The planning commission shall approve or disapprove
the plat within thirty (30) days of the date of its submittal. If the final
plat is approved with the modification or waiver of certain requirements, the
planning commission shall specify the reasons therefor. If the final plat is
disapproved, the grounds for refusal, including citation of the applicable
regulations or general plan, shall be stated on the records of the planning
commission. If the planning commission fails to act, a certificate by the city
clerk as to date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of the
planning commission to act thereon within such specified time shall be
sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval.
   F.   Action Shown On Final Plat: The action of the planning commission shall
be shown on the final plat, with the date of action, over the signature of the
chairman or vice chairman.
   G.   Report To City Council: The planning commission shall transmit to the
city council the reproducible copy and two (2) paper copies of the final plat,
together with copies of the restrictive covenants, and a listing of all
required improvements indicating that they have been installed, or that a
contract and bond ensuring their installation, satisfactory to the city
council, has been executed and received by the city clerk. (1987 Code § 12-431)
12-3-3: RECORDING OF PLAT:
   A.   City Council Approval Required: Before recording the final plat, it
shall be submitted to the city council for approval and for acceptance of
public ways, service and utility easements, and land dedicated to public use.
This approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the president
and attested to by the city clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat by
the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedications shown
thereon.
   B.   Dark Line Prints Required: After final approval of the plat by the city
council and the affixing of all required signatures on the original tracing,
the subdivider shall provide the planning commission with two (2) dark line
prints thereof and one contact reproducible tracing on stable base material.
One dark line print shall be retained in the permanent file of the planning
commission and one shall be sent to the office of the city clerk. The applicant
shall, within six (6) months after the date of approval by the city council,
record the original signed tracing with the county clerk.
   C.   Changes On Plat; Filing Of Final Plat:
      1.   After the planning commission and city council have approved the
final plat, no change shall be made therein unless the plat is resubmitted for
approval of the planning commission and city council.
      2.   The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk
within six (6) months after approval of the city council, and if not filed
within such time, the approval shall be considered null and void. (1987 Code §
12-432)
CHAPTER 4
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
12-4-1: Purpose And Intent
12-4-2: Application Of Provisions
12-4-3: Effect Of Approval
12-4-4: Compliance With Standards And Requirements
12-4-5: Application Procedure
12-4-6: Preapplication Conference
12-4-7: Preliminary Development Plan
12-4-8: Final Development Plan
12-4-9: Subdivision Plats And Site Plans Required
12-4-10: Uses Permitted
12-4-11: Intensity Of Development
12-4-12: Maximum Number Of Dwelling Units
12-4-13: Bulk, Area And Height
12-4-14: Public Facilities
12-4-15: Access To Public Thoroughfares
12-4-16: Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements
12-4-17: Signs
12-4-18: Perimeter Treatment
12-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The intent of the planned unit development (PUD) regulations is to
permit greater flexibility and consequently more creative and imaginative
design than generally are possible under conventional zoning regulations.
   B.   It is hereby intended to permit, upon application and upon approval of
site and use plans, the creation of planned unit development (PUD) districts. A
designation shall be determined by, and shall be designed to lessen congestion
in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers, to
promote health and the general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to
prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
to preserve features of historical significance, to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements; and with a reasonable consideration being given, among other
things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses and with a view to conserving the land throughout the city. In
a PUD district, the regulations which are adopted are intended to accomplish
the same purposes as do zoning and other applicable regulations in districts
which are developed on a lot by lot rather than a unified basis. (Ord. 2001-08,
7-26-2001)
12-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A PUD district may be proposed for any location in the city if it is in
accordance with the provisions of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-
2001)
12-4-3: EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
Approval of a planned unit development district shall constitute an amendment
to the zoning ordinance. Designation of a property as a planned unit
development district in accordance with an approved development plan shall
supersede all existing and prior zoning classifications. Such property shall be
for zoning purposes and will be identified by the letters PUD followed by an
identifying number. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
All planned unit development districts shall at a minimum satisfy the standards
and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-5: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Applications for planned unit development (PUD) district designation shall be
processed pursuant to a three (3) step review process as specified in this
chapter. The three (3) step procedure shall include:
   A.   A preapplication conference;
   B.   A preliminary development plan; and
   C.   A final development plan. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-6: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
The preapplication conference is an informal procedure to assist the applicant
in meeting various requirements of the city and to provide an early preview of
the application. To obtain further information, each applicant shall confer
with the city administrator and appropriate department heads in connection with
the preparation of the PUD application. It shall be the responsibility of the
city administrator to coordinate the preapplication review. Upon review, the
city administrator shall furnish the applicant with his/her written comments
regarding the proposal including appropriate recommendations to inform and
assist the applicant in preparing the PUD application. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-
2001)
12-4-7: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Upon satisfying the preapplication conference requirement, an applicant may
submit a preliminary development plan. The following information shall, as a
minimum, be included in the application:
   A.   A legal description of the site proposed for PUD designation, including
a statement regarding present ownership and present zoning.
   B.   A master conceptual plan that indicates: 1) parcel, tract or lot
locations, and dimensions; 2) density per gross and per net acres in the
development and in each land use component, if appropriate; 3) the intensity of
land use in the development and each land use component, if appropriate; 4) the
amount of land in common area open space, recreation use, or public use, if
appropriate; and 5) the treatment of project boundaries.
   C.   Written text which includes: 1) supporting graphics describing the
overall concept of the plan; 2) the uses included and any limitations upon
uses, building types and prototypical site layouts, if appropriate; 3)
provisions for maintenance of common areas; 4) any proposed agreements,
dedications or easements; 5) any proposed private covenants and restrictions;
and 6) any other information required by this chapter or pertinent to a
determination of compliance with this chapter.
   D.   A circulation plan that indicates roads adjoining the property; the
location of access from public roads into the project; and vehicular and
pedestrian circulation systems within the project. The circulation plan may be
included as part of the master conceptual plan.
   E.   An improvement plan indicates that: 1) water supply and distribution
facilities, as well as the source of the water supply; 2) sewage collection and
disposal including method and location of sewage discharge; 3) methods and
facilities for the management of stormwater runoff; 4) improvements to streets
and roads; and 5) any other physical improvements required to support the
project.
   F.   A statistical summary indicates that: 1) the number of acres in the
project; 2) the number of acres allocated to each land use within the project;
3) the gross and net residential density within the project and within each
land use component of the project; and 4) floor area, floor area ratios, open
space ratios, and other data relating the intensity of development to the site
size and location.
   G.   The following elements are optional at the request of the planning
commission:
      1.   A sign that indicates the location, size and design and other
pertinent provisions relating to signs within the project.
      2.   A parking plan which shows the number of parking spaces as well as
the general location and design.
      3.   An environmental impact statement indicating possible problem areas
within the site as well as solutions to these problems as intended by the
developer.
   H.   The preliminary development plan shall be reviewed as a zoning
amendment and shall be processed in the same manner specified by this title.
(Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-8: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Flexibility In Procedures: Due to diversity in size and character of
proposals considered under this chapter, flexibility in the form, content and
approval procedures of the final development plan should be retained. Toward
this end, the council shall specify, as part of its approval of the preliminary
plan, the form, content and approval authority of the final development plan.
   B.   Necessity Of Plan; Approval Authority: In the event that the council
considers a submission of a final development plan necessary for all or part of
the district, it shall so specify in its approval of the preliminary
development plan. The council may delegate its approval authority to the
planning commission or to specified administrative officials.
   C.   Limits Of Discretion: In the event the approval authority is delegated,
the council shall specify the limits of discretion to be exercised by the
approving authority. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-9: SUBDIVISION PLATS AND SITE PLANS REQUIRED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent an applicant from
submitting, at his/her option, a subdivision plat or site plan for the
simultaneous review with the development plan. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-10: USES PERMITTED:
   A.   Specify Permissible Principal And Accessory Uses: The development plan
shall specify both for the project as a whole and/or for subareas within the
project, as appropriate, those principal and accessory uses that are
permissible. The city council may include or exclude uses from the development
plan or include uses with attached conditions as appropriate, to achieve the
intent of these provisions.
   B.   Council Considerations: In making its determinations of the uses to be
permitted within the PUD district, the city council may consider the
compatibility and relationship of uses within the project; the compatibility
and relationship of permitted uses adjoining or in proximity to the PUD
district; the appropriateness of permitted uses for the area in general and
their overall impact on the community; and the consistency of the permitted
uses with other adopted plans and policies. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-11: INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The development plan shall contain
provisions to regulate the intensity of development within the planned unit
development district. Such provisions may apply to the project as a whole or to
subareas within the project, as appropriate.
   B.   Nonresidential Development: For nonresidential development, the
intensity of development may be regulated:
      1.   By specifying an appropriate floor area ratio(s) (FAR);
      2.   By specifying maximum square footage or gross leasable area;
      3.   By specifying setbacks, height and bulk restrictions; or
      4.   By a combination of such restrictions for the project as a whole or
for components or subareas within the project.
   C.   Performance Standards: In addition, nonresidential development plans
may specify performance standards to be imposed on the project and restrictions
regarding the location and nature of industrial, commercial, and other
residential activities. The city council may impose such standards and
restrictions, as necessary, to achieve the intent of this chapter.
   D.   Criteria: In making its determination regarding the intensity of
development and appropriate performance standards, the council may consider: 1)
character and scale of similar developments; 2) the character and scale of
surrounding development and the area in general; 3) the real or anticipated
impact on public facilities and services; and 4) consistency with other plans
and policies. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-12: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS:
The density of residential dwelling units within a PUD shall be computed in
accordance with the following formula:
   A.   Maximum Residential Density: The entire area of the property to be
utilized for residential purposes divided by the maximum density as shown by
table 1 below permitted within the zoning district(s) in effect for the
property at the time of PUD district application.
      TABLE 1
Zoning Uses  Maximum
             Residential Density
Zoning Uses                   Maximum
                              Residential Density
                             
Single-family housing use    6 du/acre
Two-family housing use       10 du/acre
Multi-family housing use     16 du/acre
Neighborhood commercial use  16 du/acre
Downtown commercial use      16 du/acre
Manufacturing use            16 du/acre
 
   B.   Distribution Of Units: The permitted number of dwelling units may be
distributed in any manner over the residential portion of the project
consistent with the intent and provisions of this title. The development plan
shall specify distribution of residential density for the project as a whole or
for subareas within the project, as appropriate. In making its determination
regarding the distribution of residential densities, the council may consider
compatibility of residential densities with other uses within the district as
well as outside the district, the impact of residential densities on public
facilities and services, and the consistency with the master plan and other
adopted plans and policies. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-13: BULK, AREA AND HEIGHT:
The development plan shall specify bulk, area, and height restrictions for the
project as a whole and for subareas and/or components of the project, as
appropriate. The council may impose alternate or additional standards or
restrictions to achieve the intent of this chapter. In making its determination
regarding such standards or restrictions, the council may consider the
character and scale of the proposed development as it related to other uses and
structures both within the district and outside the district, the general
character and scale of similar developments within the area of the proposal,
and the consistency with adopted plans and policies. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-14: PUBLIC FACILITIES:
The development plan shall specify conditions, restrictions and standards
relating to the timely provisions of necessary public facilities as
appropriate. The council may impose conditions, restrictions and standards as
appropriate to achieve the intent of this title. In making its determination
regarding such conditions, restrictions and standards, the council may consider
the adequacy of existing facilities, the timely provision of adequate
facilities and the overall cost to the community. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-15: ACCESS TO PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES:
The development plan shall specify the location and general design of ingress
and egress to the project along with access restrictions, as appropriate. The
council may impose such access standards and restrictions, as necessary, to
protect the integrity and function of the city's thoroughfare system and to
otherwise achieve the intent of this title. In making its determination
regarding such access standards and restrictions, the council may consider the
classification and function of the thoroughfare system, existing and projected
traffic volumes, the condition and design of the affected thoroughfares, the
effect of the proposed development on traffic flow and circulation patterns on
other adopted plans and policies. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-16: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Unless specifically modified by the development plan, the off street parking
and loading requirements contained within the zoning regulations shall apply 1
. Reductions in off street parking and loading standards shall be approved only
if it can be demonstrated that parking demand will be less due to density and/
or occupancy characteristics of the project and/or the availability of public
transportation. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11, chapter 9 of this code.
12-4-17: SIGNS:
Unless specifically modified by the development plan, the sign regulations
contained within the zoning regulations shall apply. Modifications to the sign
regulations shall be approved only if the general intent to the sign
regulations regarding size, location, illumination, structural integrity and
relation to surrounding uses is satisfied. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-26-2001)
12-4-18: PERIMETER TREATMENT:
The development plan shall specify any special treatment of perimeter areas
designed to mitigate the impact of the project upon adjoining properties and/or
to achieve an appropriate transition between land uses and densities. The
council may impose those standards and requirements for perimeter treatment it
deems necessary to protect adjoining properties from adverse effects and to
achieve an appropriate transition of land uses and densities. (Ord. 2001-08, 7-
26-2001)
CHAPTER 5
PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-5-1: Preliminary Plat Data
12-5-2: Final Plat Data
12-5-3: Fees
12-5-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT DATA:
   A.   Procedures; Conformance With Minimum Requirements: The following
procedures shall apply to the filing for preliminary approval of any
subdivision. The preliminary plat shall conform to the minimum requirements of
the comprehensive plan for the city, which shall have been previously
ascertained by the subdivider, and shall also reflect and show all contiguously
owned lands of the developer, notwithstanding that all of the land may never be
finally platted.
   B.   Scale Of Plat; Information Required: The plat shall be drawn to a scale
of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Date, scale, and north point.
      2.   The proposed subdivision name and all intended street names.
      3.   The name of the subdivider, the engineer, and surveyor preparing the
plat.
      4.   Legal description showing location of plat.
      5.   Topographic survey map of the area being subdivided, showing
contours at two foot (2') intervals.
      6.   A key map showing the location of the plat in the section, township
and range in which the plat is located.
      7.   Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land.
      8.   Location, widths, and names of all existing platted or dedicated
streets, alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility
rights of way, parks, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings,
bridges, and other pertinent data as required by the planning commission.
      9.   The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or
streams. All elevations shall refer to the established U.S. coast and geodetic
survey datum.
      10.   When a subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distance and
bearings of a meander line shall be established not less than twenty feet (20')
back from the ordinary high water mark of the lake or from the bank of the
stream.
      11.   Layout and width of all new streets and rights of way, including
alleys, highways, and easements, whether private or public, and for public and
private utilities.
      12.   The proposed street names and system of numbering lots and blocks.
      13.   The exact length of the exterior boundaries of the land to be
subdivided (property boundary line shall be shown in heavy line).
      14.   Approximate dimensions of all lots.
      15.   Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of all tangents.
      16.   Approximate location and area of property to be dedicated for
public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in
the subdivision, with any conditions of such dedication or reservation.
      17.   The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other surface and subsurface structures and pipe lines
existing within or immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the
location, layout, type and proposed size of the following structures and
utilities:
         a.   Water mains and storage facilities;
         b.   Sanitary sewer mains, submains, and laterals;
         c.   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; and
         d.   Street improvements.
      18.   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements
relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed
plat.
      19.   Where deed restrictions are to be recorded on the plat, a brief
description of the proposed restrictions should accompany the preliminary plat.
      20.   A description of the improvements such as grading, paving, tree
planting, walks, and installation of utilities which the subdivider proposes to
make, and the time when they are proposed to be made, shall accompany the
preliminary plat. (1987 Code § 12-440)
12-5-2: FINAL PLAT DATA:
   A.   Print Size; Specifications: The final plat shall be a print or series
of prints not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in
size, on a stable base tracing medium of Mylar, Cronar, and other suitable
durable material or linen tracing cloth. When more than one sheet is used in
connection with the plat, each additional sheet shall be numbered consecutively
and shall contain a notation indicating the total number of sheets.
   B.   Scale Of Plat; Information Required: The final plat shall be drawn to a
scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall contain the
following information:
      1.   Name of subdivision and the name of the owner, the subdivider and
the engineer or land surveyor.
      2.   Date, north point, scale (written and graphic).
      3.   Boundaries of the subdivided area with accurate distances and
bearings noted thereon.
      4.   Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all
monuments found or placed in making the survey.
      5.   The lines, names, and widths or dimensions of all proposed street
rights of way.
      6.   The lines, widths, and purposes of all easements.
      7.   Numbered designation of all lots in the subdivision with their lines
and dimensions accurately shown.
      8.   The names of all adjacent subdivisions.
      9.   Exact dimensions of all lots.
10. The following, which shall be made and shown on the original reproducible:
         a.   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed;
         b.   Engineer's certificate of survey, signed, and his seal;
         c.   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public, signed;
         d.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the county recorder of deeds, which directly
affect the land being subdivided;
         e.   Certificate of planning commission action;
         f.   Certificate of city council's acceptance of streets, alleys,
easements, and public land dedications;
         g.   Tax receipt showing all taxes payable on all property within the
limits of the tract as paid in full for the last five (5) years or, in lieu
thereof, a statement that such taxes have been paid, signed by the county
treasurer; and
         h.   A receipt for the payment of all special assessments to which the
subdivision is subject. These shall either be paid in full or, in lieu thereof,
a letter from the city clerk shall be submitted stating that a surety bond has
been filed with him ensuring the payment of all interest and principal payments
until the assessment is paid in full.
      11.   Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents.
      12.   Plans and specifications on all required improvements.
      13.   Any additional data as may be required by the planning commission.
(1987 Code § 12-441)
12-5-3: FEES:
   A.   Preliminary Plat: The subdivider shall pay to the city a preliminary
plat and application fee per lot, as set by motion or resolution of the city
council.
   B.   Final Plat: The subdivider shall pay to the city a final plat filing
fee per residential lot, as set by motion or resolution of the city council.
When acreage is involved, such as sites for industrial, housing projects and
commercial purposes, the fee shall be figured per acre as set by motion or
resolution of the city council. (1987 Code § 12-442; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Monuments
12-6-2: Improvements Required; Bond
12-6-3: Public Sites And Open Spaces
12-6-1: MONUMENTS:
   A.   Placement Of Pipes Or Pins: Each block corner shall be marked with iron
pipes or pins not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter and eighteen
inches (18") long and placed at least one inch (1") below finished grade.
   B.   Disturbing Monuments: Monuments marking property lines and corners
shall not be disturbed; or if such disturbance is necessary, the monuments
shall be replaced at the exact spot from which they were removed. (1987 Code §
12-450)
12-6-2: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED; BOND:
   A.   Facilities Required; Water And Sewer Lines Within Certain Distance: Any
final plat or subdivision located within one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320') of existing water and sewer lines shall not be approved unless the
subdivider or developer shall provide the facilities listed below or file a
surety bond with the city clerk to ensure the actual construction of such
improvements according to the plans and specifications approved by the city
engineer within a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date of
final plat approval. Such bond shall equal one hundred percent (100%) of the
cost of improvements as estimated by the city engineer. Conditions stipulated
by the bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney and city council. No
building shall be occupied until all such facilities have been constructed:
      1.   Water mains properly connected with public water supply system
provided to ensure adequate water flow for fire protection in accordance with
standard specifications governing water improvements construction as approved
by the city council. In subdivisions where lots exceed fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet, water service may be provided by individual private water
wells on each residential lot, provided such wells meet the standards of, and
are approved by, the state and county health departments, and, provided
further, that a sanitary sewer system is installed to serve the lots.
Individual water wells are permitted for all tracts exceeding five (5) acres.
      2.   A sanitary sewer system properly connected to an approved treatment
facility, in accordance with requirements of state and county health
departments. Lots exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet having public
water supply may use septic tank disposal systems; provided, that the lot meets
the requirements of the state and county health departments for septic tanks
installation. Tracts exceeding five (5) acres may use septic tanks with a
private well. All lots in residential subdivisions where septic tanks or
individual sewerage disposal devices are to be installed shall comply with the
regulations of the county and state board of health.
      3.   Streets graded to the full roadway width and to the established
grade and paved in accordance with the paving standards as approved by the city
council.
      4.   Storm drainage facilities, to provide adequate surface water
drainage for the area being drained. The storm drainage facilities shall be
designed in accordance with the approved drainage standards and requirements as
per chapter 7 this title.
   B.   Public Or Private Facilities; Criteria: Any final plat or subdivision
located one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320'), or more, from existing
water and sewer lines shall not be approved unless the subdivider or developer
shall provide the facilities listed below or file a surety bond with the city
clerk to ensure the actual construction of such improvements according to the
plans and specifications approved by the city engineer within a period of time
not to exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval. Such bond
shall equal fifty percent (50%) of the cost of such improvements as estimated
by the city engineer. Such bond may be drawn to cover construction in phases.
Conditions stipulated by the bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney and
city council. No building shall be occupied until all such facilities have been
constructed to service that building:
      1.   Water service may be provided by individual private water wells on
each residential lot, provided such wells meet the standards of, and are
approved by, the state and county health departments.
      2.   All lots and residential subdivisions where septic tanks or
individual sewage disposal devices are to be installed shall comply with the
regulations of the county and state board of health.
      3.   Streets graded to the full roadway width and to the established
grade and paved in accordance with the paving standards as approved by the city
council.
      4.   Storm drainage facilities to provide adequate surface water drainage
for the area being drained. The storm drainage facilities shall be designed in
accordance with the approved drainage standards and requirements as per chapter
7 of this title. (1987 Code § 12-451)
12-6-3: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
   A.   Authority To Require Open Site: Where a site for a proposed park,
playground, play field, school, library, fire station, or other public use is
proposed by the official comprehensive plan, is located in whole or in part in
a subdivision, the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning
commission, may require the reservation of such area within the subdivision.
   B.   Notice Of Proposed Subdivision: The developer shall give the city or
public agency involved ninety (90) days' written notice of the proposed
subdivision, with a copy of such notice to be mailed to the planning
commission. During the ninety (90) day period, the agency may or may not
express its interest in the proposed subdivision in connection with the
provision of appropriate public site. Should such interest be expressed, that
agency shall have a period of an additional sixty (60) days within which to
arrange for the acquisition of the public site under construction.
   C.   Small Subdivision: Where the proposed subdivision is too small to
provide space of suitable size for the public site intended, the site provided
may be combined with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas; thus,
in the aggregate, there will be provided a site of suitable size for the
purpose intended. (1987 Code § 12-452)
CHAPTER 7
DRAINAGE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Drainage Channels Classified
12-7-2: Methods For Calculating Stream Flow And Runoff
12-7-3: Primary Drainage Channels
12-7-4: Secondary Drainage Channels And Surface Drainage
12-7-5: Requirements Relating To Improvements
12-7-6: Improvements Outside Dedicated Drainage Easements
12-7-1: DRAINAGE CHANNELS CLASSIFIED:
For the purpose of this title, drainage channels shall be classified as
follows:
   A.   Primary: Primary drainage channels shall be those streams, creeks, and
channels which drain an area of five hundred (500) acres or more; and
   B.   Secondary: Secondary drainage channels shall be all drainage channels
which drain an area of less than five hundred (500) acres. (1987 Code § 12-460)
12-7-2: METHODS FOR CALCULATING STREAM FLOW AND RUNOFF:
The maximum condition of rainfall for a 50-year frequency shall be used for the
purpose of determining all runoff for the sizing of drainage channels and
structures, unless otherwise specified herein. The following formulas and
values shall be used for calculating all stream flow and runoff for the
policies and regulations established herein:
   A.   Nine Hundred Acres Or Less: Runoff from drainage areas of nine hundred
(900) acres or less shall be determined by the rational formula: Q = AIR
 
Q = Flow in cubic feet per second
A = Area to be drained in acres, determined by field surveys for areas less
    than 100 acres, and by latest government quadrangle maps for larger area
    Percent of imperviousness of the area; may vary between 70 percent and 95
I = percent. Coefficients lower than these indicated values may be used;
    however, in such instances, individual block calculations will be submitted
    with plans
R = Rate of rainfall over entire drainage area in inches per hour, based on
    time for concentration and latest government records for area
 
   B.   Greater Than Nine Hundred Acres: Runoff from drainage areas greater
than nine hundred (900) acres will be determined by use of accepted engineering
principles.
   C.   Size; Manning Formula: The size of closed storm sewers, open channels,
culverts, and bridges shall be determined using the Manning formula which may
be modified for use with runoff determined by the rational formula to:
 
Q = 1.5r 2/3 s 1/2 A    
  n                   
Q = Discharge in cubic feet per second
r = Hydraulic radius of water in conduit
s = Mean slope of hydraulic gradient in feet of vertical rise per foot of
    horizontal distance
A = Cross sectional area of water in conduit in square feet
n = Roughness coefficient, based on condition and type of material of conduit
    lining, but not less than 0.013
 
(1987 Code § 12-461)
12-7-3: PRIMARY DRAINAGE CHANNELS:
All primary drainage channels lying within, or immediately adjacent to, the
subdivision shall meet the following conditions:
   A.   Drainage For Parks Or Utility Easements: All land having an elevation
below the 50-year maximum flood elevation for the final improved channel and
not protected by levies or dikes shall be dedicated to the public for the
purpose of providing drainage for public park or utility easement use. All
dedications for public park purposes will be reviewed and approved by the
planning commission.
   B.   Cleaning, Straightening Of Channel: The existing channel lying within
or immediately adjacent to the subdivision shall be cleaned to provide for the
free flow of water, and the channel shall be straightened, widened, and
improved to the extent required to prevent overflow, resulting from a 50-year
frequency rainfall, beyond the limits of the dedicated drainage easement
provided for in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Grading Of Building Sites, Streets: Site improvement shall provide for
the grading of all building sites and streets to an elevation where all lots,
building areas, and streets will not be subject to overflow from a 50-year
frequency flood and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff of
stormwater.
   D.   Bank Protection; Erosion Control: Whenever channel improvement is
carried out, sodding, backsloping, cribbing, and other bank protection shall be
designed and constructed to control erosion for the anticipated conditions of
flow resulting from a 50-year frequency rainfall.
   E.   Conditions For Use Of Street Easement: A drainage channel shall not be
located in a street easement unless it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer,
except as provided below:
      1.   Unless a paved street surface at least two (2) lanes wide is
provided on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting
properties.
      2.   Except where lots are platted to back up to the street right of way
where the drainage channel is located between the rear lot line and the paved
street; provided, that there is no access to the rear of the lot from the
street; and further provided, that at no time in the future shall access be
allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot so
platted. For the purpose of this title, a lot which sides is not considered to
back up to the street right of way.
      3.   When a condition outlined in either subsection E1 or E2 of this
section is present, adequate space shall be dedicated as right of way to
provide for maintenance of the paved drainage channel and its unpaved bank.
   F.   Drainage Structures, Construction: Culverts, bridges, and other
drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
and design criteria of the city where the public shall have present or future
maintenance responsibility.
   G.   Cost Borne By City:
      1.   Arterial Streets: Cost of construction of bridges and culverts at
arterial streets and major thoroughfares will be borne by the city. The city
may participate in the cost of construction of bridges and culverts at
collector streets where the required hydraulic cross section of the bridge or
culvert is greater than forty (40) square feet; provided, in any event, that
participation of the city is subject to the availability of funds. Cost to be
borne by the city will be determined by the following formula:
         a.   Total cost of bridge or culvert divided by the square feet of
cross section, all multiplied by the square feet of required hydraulic cross
section less forty (40) square feet; and
         b.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent owner or
owners from bearing all costs if he or they so desire.
      2.   Residential Streets: When the planning commission, subsequent to the
submission by a developer of a preliminary plat, requires a bridge or culvert
at a residential street and the required hydraulic cross section is greater
than forty (40) square feet, the city may participate in the cost of
construction of the bridge or culvert in the same manner as provided for
collector streets in subsection G1 of this section. (1987 Code § 12-462)
12-7-4: SECONDARY DRAINAGE CHANNELS AND SURFACE DRAINAGE:
Surface drainage and all secondary channels within or adjacent to the addition
shall meet the following conditions:
   A.   Collecting Surface Water: Secondary drainage channels which have a
primary function of collecting surface water from adjacent properties or
intercepting and diverting side hill drainage shall be provided with an
improved open channel.
   B.   Transporting Water: Secondary drainage channels which have a primary
function of transporting water through the block or collecting water from cross
channels and which have a drainage area of less than forty (40) acres shall be
improved with closed storm sewers; and where the secondary drainage channel has
a drainage area of greater than forty (40) acres, an improved open channel or
closed storm sewer may be provided. Within greenway developments, when the unit
area to be drained is less than four (4) acres, the city engineer may modify
the requirements of the first part of this provision to permit a paved open
channel, designed for use as a sidewalk, having a minimum width of four feet
(4') and provided with six inch (6") curbs.
   C.   Drainage Channel In Street Easement: A drainage channel shall not be
located in a street easement unless it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer,
except as provided below:
      1.   Unless a paved street surface at least two (2) lanes wide is
provided on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting
properties.
      2.   Except where lots are platted to back up to the street right of way
where the drainage channel is located between the rear lot line and the paved
street; provided, that there is no access to the rear of the lot from the
street; and further provided, that at no time in the future shall access be
allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot so
platted. For the purpose of this title, a lot which sides is not considered to
back up to the street right of way.
      3.   When a condition outlined in either subsection C1 or C2 of this
section is present, adequate space shall be dedicated as right of way to
provide for maintenance of the paved drainage channel and its unpaved bank.
   D.   Site Grading: In a single-family residential high density development,
site grading shall be carried out in such a manner that surface water from each
lot will flow directly to a storm sewer, improved channel, sodded swale, or
paved street without crossing more than four (4) adjacent lots.
   E.   Surface Water Diverted To Storm Drains: Surface water collected on
streets shall be diverted to storm drains at satisfactory intervals to prevent
overflow of six inch (6") high curbs during a 25-year frequency rain for the
area and grades involved. Drainage area allowed for surface flow on streets at
point of diversion shall not exceed twenty (20) acres, regardless of flow. (See
requirements relating to improvements, subsection B of this section.)
   F.   Drainage Easement Required: Drainage easement of satisfactory width to
provide working room for construction and maintenance shall be provided for all
storm sewers.
   G.   Open Channel Improvements: Open channels shall be improved by providing
a paved section that will carry the runoff from a rain of 25-year frequency
within the lined section and a sodded section to carry the additional runoff
from a rain of 50-year frequency. Whenever an open improved channel is required
or authorized for a secondary drainage channel under the provisions of this
title and the channel crosses residential lots which have been developed under
the planned unit development or where the channel improvement is to be designed
as an area that will be maintained by a property owner's association, then,
upon recommendation of the city engineer, the city council may modify the
requirements of the first part of this subsection to permit a channel
improvement design in keeping with landscaping architectural plans, provided
all hydraulic requirements to support the overflow resulting from a 50-year
frequency rainfall are met. (1987 Code § 12-463)
12-7-5: REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Bridges And Culverts:
      1.   All flow of water across continuous streets or alleys shall be
through culverts or bridges;
      2.   Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year
frequency rain, without increasing the depth of flow in the channel; and
      3.   Design of bridges and culverts shall conform to construction
specifications of the city.
   B.   Closed Storm Sewers: Closed storm sewers shall be constructed to
precast or prefabricated pipe or built in place of closed box design to conform
with city's construction specifications. Storm sewers carrying runoff from
streets may be designed to serve a 10-year frequency rain for the drainage area
involved; provided, that overflow from a 25-year frequency rain can reach a
suitable outlet without inundating an elevation one foot (1') below any house
pad elevation. In cases where the above cannot be accomplished, the storm sewer
shall be designed to serve a 25-year frequency rain. Sizing shall be calculated
by the Manning formula.
   C.   Open Paved Storm Drainage Channels: Open paved storm drainage channels
shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications. Side slopes above
the paved section shall be shaped and sodded on a slope of three (3) horizontal
to one vertical or flatter. Fences shall be erected adjacent to the paved
section only as directed by the planning commission. (1987 Code § 12-464)
12-7-6: IMPROVEMENTS OUTSIDE DEDICATED DRAINAGE EASEMENTS:
The city reserves the right to require improvements to preclude any backup of
tail waters inundating any areas outside of the dedicated drainage easements in
the subdivision as a result of a 50-year frequency flood. (1987 Code § 12-465)
CHAPTER 8
VARIANCES; AMENDMENTS; PENALTIES
SECTION:
12-8-1: Variances And Exceptions
12-8-2: Amendments
12-8-3: Validity
12-8-4: Penalties
12-8-1: VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS:
Whenever it would be inadvisable to apply a provision of this title because a
tract is of such unusual size, shape, or character as would render an
extraordinary hardship not created or imposed by the owner or developer, the
city council, upon the concurring recommendation of the planning commission,
may modify such provisions only to provide that substantial justice may be
done, the public interest secured, and the intent and spirit of this title
fulfilled; provided, that in no event shall the requirements of procedure or
improvements be waived. Such modification thus granted shall be made at the
written request of the developer stating the reasons for such modification and
shall be waived only by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of both the regular
membership of the planning commission and the city council. Any such
modifications thus granted shall be duly entered and recorded in the minutes of
the planning commission and the city council, with the reasons justifying the
modifications set forth therein. In the case of planned unit development, this
title may be varied in terms with the development plan as recommended by the
planning commission and approved by the city council. (1987 Code § 12-470)
12-8-2: AMENDMENTS:
The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend, and make public rules
and regulations for the administration of this title to the end that the public
be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. (1987 Code § 12-471)
12-8-3: VALIDITY:
If any section, clause, paragraph, provision, or portion of this title shall be
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not affect any other section, clause, paragraph, provision, or
portion of this title. (1987 Code § 12-472)
12-8-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement, or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land in a
subdivision filed of record after the effective date of this title which does
not comply with all of the provisions of this title.
   B.   A violation of this title shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation which violates or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. (1987 Code § 12-473)
