TOWN CODE
OF
MOORELAND, OKLAHOMA
2017
Code current through:
Ord. 369, passed 10-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Town of Mooreland, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 369, passed October 2, 2025. Ordinances of the Town
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Town
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
MOORELAND TOWN CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Jurisdiction
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the Town Board of Trustees, this Code is hereby declared
to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Town Code of Mooreland. This
Code shall be known and cited as MOORELAND TOWN CODE and is hereby published by
authority of the Town Board of Trustees and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the Town as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Code by title in any legal documents. (2017 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the Town of general and permanent effect. (2017
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code.
(2017 Code)
1-1-4: JURISDICTION:
All provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Town now in effect or
adopted in the future are hereby extended to all real property belonging to, or
under the control of, the Town outside the corporate limits thereof, and shall
be in full force and effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. Any words
in any such provisions indicating that its effect is limited to the corporate
limits of the Town shall be deemed to mean and include also the outlying real
property belonging to, or under the control of, the Town, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise. (2011 Code § 2-8)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said Code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the Town and shall be returned to the Office of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer when directed so to do by order of the Town Board of Trustees.
(2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Ordinances Saved From Repeal
1-2-2: Effect Of State Law And Local Provisions
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: ORDINANCES SAVED FROM REPEAL:
   A.   Nothing in this Code shall be construed to repeal, or otherwise affect
the validity of, any of the following, and all such ordinances are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length herein:
      1.   Ordinances promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
Town, either authorizing the issuance of any Municipal bonds or any evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
      2.   Appropriation ordinances, or ordinances providing for: a) the levy
of taxes; b) an annual budget; or c) prescribing salaries for Municipal
officers and employees.
      3.   Ordinances annexing or detaching territory to or from the Town.
      4.   Ordinances approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument, or granting any
franchise.
      5.   Ordinances authorizing or otherwise relating to specific public
improvements.
      6.   Ordinances vacating, opening or dedicating specific streets and
alleys.
      7.   Ordinances relating to specific street improvements and assessments
therefor.
      8.   Ordinances relating to the grade or alignment of specific streets.
      9.   Ordinances naming or renaming specific streets.
      10.   Ordinances granting railroads the right to use specific streets and
alleys.
      11.   Ordinances changing the zoning district classification of a
specific parcel of real property.
      12.   Temporary or special ordinances. (2011 Code § 2-5)
   B.   All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this Code,
shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire on their
own limitations. (2011 Code § 1-42)
1-2-2: EFFECT OF STATE LAW AND LOCAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Provisions of State law which affect the Town because of its general
relationship to the State may not be enumerated herein but may be adopted by
reference as inseparable parts of this Code.
   B.   Provisions of State law which prescribe specific actions or laws for
the Town and its citizens may be included in this Code through adoption by
reference.
   C.   Provisions of State law in matters of wide public concern which are not
enumerated herein, but which affect the Town and its citizens in a general way,
may not be enumerated herein but may nevertheless be made a part of this Code
through adoption by reference.
   D.   All provisions which are of purely local concern shall be specifically
enumerated in this Code. The regulations, rules, prohibitions, nuisances,
offenses and other provisions which are of purely local concern, as provided by
State law, and specifically enumerated herein in detail, shall be enforced by
the Town. Duly authorized officers and agents of the Town shall have all
powers, duties and responsibilities necessary to enforce the same. (2011 Code §
2-6)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the Town herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the Town under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Code. (2017 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
   A.   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this Code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The Town Board of Trustees hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or
more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
   B.   Further, if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Code shall seem invalid through printing or typographical error,
such error or misprint shall not serve to misconstrue or invalidate the intent
thereof, nor affect in any way the intent or validity of any or all other
sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Code.
(2011 Code § 2-11; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words; Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS; INTERPRETATION:
In all the construction of this Code and of all subsequent ordinances and
resolutions passed by the Town Board of Trustees, the following rules shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Town Board:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and Town Board of Trustees may be
fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is
imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be performed by an
authorized deputy or designee or by any person authorized pursuant to law or
ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   F.   Or; And: The word "or" may be read "and"; the word "and" may be read
"or", if the sense requires it.
   G.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases which are not
specifically defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted
usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
   H.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing.
Words used in the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary
intention plainly appears.
   I.   Officers, Employees, Departments, Boards And Commissions Generally:
Whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred
to by title alone, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma".
   J.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   K.   Oath: The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and
in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed".
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Town
has been changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Town's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2011 Code §
2-1; amd. 2017 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this Code and of all subsequent ordinances and
resolutions passed by the Town Board of Trustees, the following definitions
shall apply, unless such definitions would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of Town Board:
AUTHORITY: The Mooreland Public Works Authority.
CODE: The Town Code of the Town of Mooreland.
COUNTY: Woodward County, Oklahoma.
MAYOR: The Chief Executive Officer of the Town.
OS: Oklahoma Statutes.
PERSON: Shall extend, and be applied to, associations, corporations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person", as applied to
partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and
as applied to corporation, the officers thereof.
STATE: The State of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to Statutes of the State of Oklahoma as they
now are or as they may be amended to be.
TOWN: The Town of Mooreland, County of Woodward, State of Oklahoma. (2011 Code
§§ 1-25, 2-1; amd. 2017 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2017
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Judicial Relief
1-4-4: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Violation Of Code Provisions:
      1.   In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
         a.   Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an
offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance.
         b.   Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
         c.   Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a
misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation
authorized by ordinance.
      2.   In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the
failure of a Town officer or Town employee to perform an official duty unless
it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided
in this section.
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a
violation of this Code shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00), plus costs, or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days,
or both the fine and imprisonment. With respect to violations of this Code that
are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a
separate offense.
   C.   Limitation: No penalty, including fine and costs, shall be greater than
that imposed by statute for the same offense.
   D.   Revocation Or Suspension Of License, Permit Or Franchise: The
imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license,
permit or franchise.
   E.   Injunctive Relief: Violations of this Code that are continuous with
respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The
imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. (2017 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this Code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2017 Code)
1-4-3: JUDICIAL RELIEF:
No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this Code shall interfere with the right
of the Town to apply to the proper courts of the State of Oklahoma for a
mandamus and injunction or other appropriate action against such person, firm
or corporation. (2011 Code § 2-21)
1-4-4: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the Town Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 5
INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; TOWN BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Incorporation
1-5-2: Form Of Government
1-5-3: General Powers Of Town
1-5-4: Elective Town Officers
1-5-5: Town Board Of Trustees
1-5-1: INCORPORATION:
The Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now established
or as hereinafter may be established, shall continue to be a Municipal body
politic and corporate, in perpetuity, under the name of the "Town of Mooreland,
Oklahoma". It shall succeed to and possess all the property, rights,
privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to the corporation
known as the Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma, and shall be liable for all debts and
other obligations for which the corporation is now legally bound. (2011 Code §
1-1)
1-5-2: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The Municipal government provided for the Town shall be the "statutory Town
Board of Trustees" form of government. All powers of the Town shall be
exercised in the manner prescribed by this Code, future ordinances or State
laws; provided, that this Code and all future ordinances are not inconsistent
with the State Constitution and laws. (2011 Code § 1-2)
1-5-3: GENERAL POWERS OF TOWN:
   A.   The Town shall have all the powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises and immunities specifically granted to municipalities, or not
prohibited by the State Constitution and laws, and all the implied powers
necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted.
   B.   The Town shall have the power to adopt a Corporate Seal and alter the
same, to sue and be sued, to make contracts and to grant, extend and renew
franchises. It shall have the power to issue bonds, in accordance with the
State Constitution and laws. It shall have the power to ordain and enforce
local legislation, consistent with the State Constitution and laws, for the
preservation and enforcement of good government and order; for the protection
of health, life, peace, safety, morals and property; for the preservation,
summary abatement and removal of nuisances; and otherwise for the promotion of
the common welfare.
   C.   The enumeration of particular powers of this Code shall not be deemed
to be exclusive or limiting. In addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, the Town shall have the powers which, under the State
Constitution and laws, it would be competent for this Code specifically to
enumerate. (2011 Code § 1-3)
1-5-4: ELECTIVE TOWN OFFICERS:
   A.   The Board of Trustees shall consist of five (5) Trustees. Said Trustees
shall be nominated and elected by the Town at large without regard to their
place of residence within the corporate limits. General elections shall be held
on the first Tuesday in April 2011, and each two (2) years thereafter.
Commencing on the first Tuesday in April 2011, Trustees 1, 3 and 5 shall be
elected and on the first Tuesday in April 2013, Trustees 2 and 4 shall be
elected. Trustees shall serve for a term of four (4) years.
   B.   The Trustees' terms shall begin on the second Monday following the
general Municipal election. These officers shall serve until their successors
are elected and qualified. (2011 Code § 1-10; amd. 2017 Code)
1-5-5: TOWN BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
   A.   General Powers: Except as may be otherwise provided in this Code, all
powers of the Town, including the determination of matters of policy, shall be
vested in the Town Board of Trustees. Said Town Board shall have and may
utilize all of the powers granted to the Town and the Town Board by the State
Constitution and laws. (2011 Code § 1-11)
   B.   Municipal Policy And Business:
      1.   The Town Board of Trustees shall conduct all business of the Town,
set policy for the efficient administration of the Municipal government,
administratively supervise all activities of Municipal employees and carry out
their responsibilities, powers and duties as officers and as a corporate and
politic body, within the limits prescribed by the State Constitution and laws
and this Code. (2011 Code § 1-12)
      2.   It shall be the policy of the Municipal government that no person
shall be discriminated against on the grounds of race, color, sex, religion,
national origin, age, genetic information or disability in employment or other
activities sponsored directly or indirectly by the Town. (2011 Code § 1-12;
amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Every member of the Town Board of Trustees who shall be present when
the opportunity or need arises to vote upon a question, shall vote thereon,
unless excused by the unanimous consent of those Town Board members present, or
unless he is directly interested in the question to the event a conflict may
exist. In the event of the latter, he shall disclose his interest to the Town
Board and it shall be made a matter of record. (2011 Code § 1-12)
   C.   Meetings And Rules:
   1.   Municipal business of the Town shall be conducted at regular, open and
public meetings held in the Town Hall, 212 S. Main Street, or an agreed upon
place which is open to the public, on the first Thursday of each month at six
o’clock (6:00), or in the event of a conflict with a holiday, the Board shall
meet on the immediately following business day, beginning at six (6:00) P.M.,
except when a special, emergency, continued, or reconvened meeting is deemed
necessary by the Mayor or Town Board of Trustees.
      2.   If any change in the date, time, or place of a regularly scheduled
meeting is made, notice of the change shall be given to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer at less than ten (10) days prior to the implementation of such
change, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall publicly post a notice of the change.
      3.   An agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Board of
Trustees shall be prepared and shall be publicly posted in the Town Hall in
accordance with the Oklahoma Open Meetings Act and at least twenty four (24)
hours prior to the meeting excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays.
      4.   All voting shall be by roll call of the Trustees by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer. All voting shall be by "aye" or "nay" and shall be taken on all
questions.
      5.   A majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
      6.   All motions may be reduced to writing and, if desired by the Mayor
or any member of the Board, shall be read by the presiding officer or Clerk-
Treasurer before a vote is taken on the motion.
      7.   All parliamentary questions shall be decided by the presiding
officer subject to override by a three-fifths (3/5) vote of the Board. Any item
may be placed on the agenda by request of any Board member.
      8.   Executive sessions to discuss personnel shall be placed on the
agenda with specific actions to be considered set forth.
      9.   The Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare a schedule of all regular meetings
conducted by any Town Board or committee prior to each calendar year and shall
post this schedule in the Town Hall prior to December 15 preceding the calendar
year for which the schedule has been determined.
      10.   Special or emergency Town Board meetings may be called by the
Mayor, or by a majority of the Trustees, in accordance with the following
provisions:
         a.   Special meetings shall not be held without public notice being
given at least forty eight (48) hours prior to said meeting. Such public notice
of the date, time, place, and agenda for the special meeting shall be given in
writing, in person, or by telephonic means to the Clerk-Treasurer.
         b.   At least twenty four (24) hours prior to the special meeting, a
written public notice of the special meeting shall be prominently posted in the
Town Hall. Such notice shall include the date, time, place and agenda for the
special meeting, and only items appearing on the agenda shall be considered at
the meeting. The twenty four (24) hour public posting shall exclude Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays legally declared by the State of Oklahoma.
         c.   In the event of an emergency, an emergency meeting of the Town
Board of Trustees may be held without public notice required. If an emergency
meeting is required, as much advance public notice as is reasonable and
possible under the circumstances existing shall be made in person or by
telephonic or electronic means.
   D.   Removal From Office; Vacancies:
      1.   The Mayor or any Trustee may be removed from office for any cause
specified by, and by the methods prescribed and specified by, applicable State
law for the removal of an officer, including 22 Oklahoma Statutes section 1181
et seq., as amended, or any other present or future law applicable.
      2.   Whenever a member of the Town Board of Trustees is inexcusably
absent for more than one-half (1/2) of all meetings of said Town Board (regular
and special) held within any period of four (4) consecutive months, said member
shall thereupon automatically cease to hold office, unless the remaining
members of the Town Board vote to retain the member on said Town Board.
      3.   When a vacancy occurs in the office of any Municipal elected
official, the Governing Body shall, by a majority vote of the remaining
Trustees, appoint a person to fill the vacancy until the next general Municipal
election, and until a successor is elected and qualified. Any vacancy shall
then be filled at the next general Municipal election by election of a person
to complete the balance of the unexpired term. If the vacancy has not been
filled within sixty (60) days after it occurs, the Board of Trustees shall call
for a special election for the purpose of filling the vacancy for the duration
of the unexpired term unless such vacancy occurs within one hundred twenty
(120) days prior to the first day of filing period for the next general
Municipal election.
      4.   When a majority of the Governing Body offices are vacant more than
sixty (60) days before the beginning of a regular filing period for general
Municipal elections, the remaining members of the Governing Body shall call for
a special election to be held in the Town for the purpose of filling all vacant
offices for the remainder of their unexpired terms.
   E.   Supervision Of Town Activities: The Board of Trustees may designate
members of the Board to serve as Supervisor or as member of a committee which
shall supervise various Town activities. In all cases, this Trustee or
committee shall be subordinate to the Board.
(2011 Code §§ 1-13 - 1-15; amd. Ord. 305, 1-13-2014; Ord. 362, 6-2-2022)
CHAPTER 6
TOWN OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Specific Town Officers
1-6-1-1: Mayor
1-6-1-2: Town Clerk-Treasurer
1-6-1-3: Police Personnel
1-6-1-4: Town Attorney
1-6-1-5: Town Engineer
1-6-1-6: Health Officer
1-6-1-7: Town Administrator
1-6-2: Other Personnel
1-6-3: Oath And Bonds
1-6-4: Compensation; Change Of Salaries
1-6-5: Accumulation And Compensation For Sick Leave
1-6-6: Nepotism; Dual Office Holding
1-6-7: Vacancies In Office
1-6-8: Succession In Government
1-6-9: Conflict Of Interest
1-6-1: SPECIFIC TOWN OFFICERS:
1-6-1-1: MAYOR:
   A.   Election: The Town Board of Trustees shall elect from among its members
a Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected each odd numbered year at the first Board
of Trustees meeting held after Trustee terms begin, or as soon thereafter as
practical. The Mayor shall serve until his successor has been elected and
qualified. (2011 Code § 1-25; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Duties: The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Board and shall
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed
thereby. He shall be recognized as head of the Town government for all
ceremonial purposes and shall have such other powers, duties and functions as
may be prescribed by law or ordinance. The Mayor shall have all the powers,
rights, duties and responsibilities of a Trustee, including the right to vote
on questions.
   C.   Absence Of Mayor:
      1.   During the absence, disability or suspension of the Mayor, the Board
shall elect from among its members an Acting Mayor.
      2.   When a vacancy occurs in the Office of the Mayor, the Board shall
elect another Mayor from among its members to serve for the duration of the
unexpired term. (2011 Code § 1-25)
1-6-1-2: TOWN CLERK-TREASURER:
   A.   Interpretation Of Terms: Unless clearly indicated otherwise, the words
"Clerk", "Town Clerk", "Treasurer", or "Town Treasurer" used in this Code or
other ordinances shall refer to the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code § 1-26)
   B.   Compensation:
      1.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be paid each pay period the amount of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) contingent upon the Clerk-Treasurer's performance
of the Clerk-Treasurer's legal duties of the office. The pay period for the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be the last working day of the month.
      2.   Any increase or decrease in the Clerk-Treasurer's salary for the
legal duties shall not go into effect until the next term of office. (2011 Code
§ 1-41)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be an officer of the
Town and shall:
      1.   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the Town Board of Trustees;
and
      2.   Enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Town Board of
Trustees in a book or set of books kept for that purpose; and
      3.   Have custody of documents, records, and archives, as may be provided
by law or by ordinance, and have custody of the Town Seal. The documents,
records, and archives, as may be provided by law or by ordinance, shall not be
removed at any time from the Municipal offices of the Town; and
      4.   Attest and affix the Seal of the Town to documents as required by
law or by ordinance; and
      5.   Maintain accounts and books to show where and from what source all
monies paid to him or her have been derived and to whom and when any monies
have been paid; and
      6.   Deposit daily funds received for the Town depositories as the Town
Board of Trustees may designate; and
      7.   Attend all regular scheduled meetings, special meetings and
emergency meetings of the Town and the Town Public Works Authority; and
      8.   Perform the daily duties of the Municipal offices when the Town
Administrator and/or Town Public Works Secretary are unavailable; and
      9.   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the Town Board of Trustees;
and
      10.   Have such other powers, duties, and functions related to his or her
statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinances.
   D.   Books And Accounts:
      1.   The books and accounts of the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be subject
at all times to examination by the Town Board of Trustees.
      2.   The books and accounts as may be provided by law or by ordinance
shall not be removed at any time from the Municipal offices of the Town. (2011
Code § 1-26)
   E.   Duties Outside Position Of Clerk-Treasurer: The person who serves as
Town Clerk-Treasurer may also perform additional administrative duties not
specified by State law as an employee of the Town. Said additional duties can
be performed by the person serving as the Town Clerk-Treasurer as otherwise
provided by motion or other action of the Board of Trustees. The person
performing additional duties shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Trustees and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Board of
Trustees. The pay period for performing the additional duties shall be the same
as for other Municipal employees, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall be paid each
pay period the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) in accordance with any
personnel policy or other policy of the Town. The salary for performing the
additional duties shall not be subjected to the constitutional restrictions.
(2011 Code § 1-41)
1-6-1-3: POLICE PERSONNEL:
   A.   Town Marshal: The Board of Trustees shall have authority to appoint a
Town Marshal, also known as the Chief of Police, and such other employees of
the Town as the Board of Trustees shall from time to time deem necessary and
not contrary to the Statutes of the State of Oklahoma governing incorporated
towns. (2011 Code § 1-28)
   B.   Reserve Police Officers:
      1.   The Town Marshal, also known as the Chief of Police, shall have the
police authority to establish a Reserve Officer Department. The Marshal, also
known as the Chief of Police, may appoint reserve officers upon their
respective confirmation by the Town Board of Trustees.
      2.   Police reserve officers will not be salaried employees of the Town,
but may be paid at the discrimination of the Chief of Police, an amount not to
exceed the hourly wage of the full time officers.
      3.   Police reserve officers will receive only the minimum amount of
workers' compensation insurance.
      4.   The Town will not provide any other employment benefits to the
police reserve officers.
      5.   Police reserve officers will not be allowed to work more than
allowed under State Statute.
      6.   All police reserve officers must meet the requirements of 70
Oklahoma Statutes section 3311 et seq.
      7.   Non-compensated reserve officers shall only serve as dispatchers or
confinement officers, in accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statute section 34-101.
(Ord. 337, 5-14-2018)
1-6-1-4: TOWN ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment Or Contract: The Board of Trustees may appoint a Town
Attorney or may secure the services of an attorney or attorneys on a
contractual basis when needed.
   B.   Duties: The Town Attorney, when and if appointed, shall be the legal
advisor of the Board and all officers, departments and agencies of the Town
government in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He may
represent the Town in proceedings in the courts and perform services incident
to his position which may be required by law or ordinance. (2011 Code § 1-30)
1-6-1-5: TOWN ENGINEER:
The Board of Trustees, at any time necessary where the work of the Town
requires it, may appoint, at such time as necessity arises, an engineer or
engineering firm whose duties and compensation shall be such as the Board of
Trustees may prescribe by motion. (2011 Code § 1-34)
1-6-1-6: HEALTH OFFICER:
The Board of Trustees may appoint a Town Health Officer, or the County Health
Officer, or any qualified personnel of the State Department of Health may
perform the duties and functions of a Town Health Officer, if so designated by
the Town. (2011 Code § 1-35)
1-6-1-7: TOWN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Office Created: The office of the town administrator is hereby created.
   B.   Appointment; Term; Qualifications; Restrictions: The town administrator
shall be appointed by majority vote of the board of trustees for an indefinite
term, as defined in a contract for employment. The administrator shall be
chosen by the board solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative
qualification with special reference to his/her actual experience in or his/her
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his/her office
hereinafter set forth. At the time of his/her appointment, he/she need not be a
resident of the town of Mooreland or the state of Oklahoma. After the
appointment and before his/her first pay period, he/she shall reside within the
state of Oklahoma, but is not required to reside within the town of Mooreland.
No board member shall receive such appointment during the term for which he/she
shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of his/her
term.
   C.   Removal From Office: The board of trustees may remove the town
administrator at any time by a majority vote of its members. If requested, the
board of trustees shall grant him/her a public hearing within thirty (30) days
following notice of removal. During the interim, the board of trustees may
suspend the administrator from duty, but shall continue his/her salary and, if
the removal becomes final, shall pay his/her salary for two (2) calendar months
following the final removal date.
   D.   Powers And Duties: The town administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the town. He/she may head one or more departments and
shall be responsible to the board of trustees for the proper administration of
all affairs of the town. To that end, he/she shall have power and shall be
required to:
      1.   Hire and fire when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or
remove officers and employees of the town except as otherwise provided by law.
      2.   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the board of trustees,
together with a message describing the important features, and be responsible
for its administration after adoption.
      3.   Prepare and submit to the board of trustees as of the end of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the town for the preceding year.
      4.   Keep the board of trustees advised of the financial condition and
future needs of the town, and make such recommendations as he/she may deem
desirable.
      5.   Recommend to the board of trustees a standard schedule of pay for
each appointive office and position in the town service, including minimum,
intermediate, and maximum rates.
      6.   Recommend to the board of trustees (from time to time) adoption of
such measures as he/she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety,
or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services.
      7.   Attend all meetings of the board of trustees unless excused
therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
board. He/she shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings
of the board.
      8.   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget. The administrator may issue such rules
governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization.
      9.   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
      10.   Investigate the affairs of the town or any department or division
thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the town, and in regard to service
maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the town are faithfully observed.
      11.   Devote his/her entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
      12.   Perform such other duties as may be required by the board of
trustees, not inconsistent with the town ordinances or law.
   E.   Compensation: The town administrator shall receive such compensation as
the board of trustees shall fix from time to time by ordinance, resolution, or
contract. (Ord. 350, 3-8-2021)
1-6-2: OTHER PERSONNEL:
The Board of Trustees may appoint such other officers and employees as it deems
desirable to work in the water system, in the cemetery, and on the streets, and
to perform other appropriate duties and functions (including inspectors of the
building trades); may determine their compensation by motion or resolution; and
may demote, suspend, lay off, or remove all such personnel at pleasure. (2011
Code § 1-36)
1-6-3: OATH AND BONDS:
   A.   Oath Of Office: Officers of the Town shall take the oath or affirmation
of office prescribed by the State Constitution before they enter upon their
duties. (2011 Code § 1-45)
   B.   Bonds:
      1.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer and any other officer or employee signing
warrants or checks shall give bond, payable to the Town, within ten (10) days
after election or appointment in accordance with applicable State laws or the
provisions of any loans or grants in current status. Said bonds shall be in the
amounts and form as prescribed by the Board of Trustees, and the Town shall pay
the premiums on such bonds.
      2.   The Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, may require other
officials and employees to give bond. (2011 Code § 1-40)
1-6-4: COMPENSATION; CHANGE OF SALARIES:
   A.   The basic compensation of the Mayor, Town Trustees and Town Clerk-
Treasurer is established by ordinance of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code
§ 1-41; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Compensation of all elected officials shall not be changed after their
election or during their term of office.
   C.   The Town Board of Trustees may determine or regulate the number and
class of officers and employees and determine or change their compensation by
motion or resolution. (2011 Code § 1-41)
1-6-5: ACCUMULATION AND COMPENSATION FOR SICK LEAVE:
   A.   The terms for accumulation and compensation for sick leave and any
modifications thereof and additions thereto lawfully made are applicable to all
employees of the Town.
   B.   The terms of accumulation and compensation of sick leave for each and
every employee of the Town are as follows:
      1.   Each employee shall be permitted to accumulate a maximum of five
hundred twenty (520) hours of sick leave; and
      2.   Sick leave shall accrue as follows: For every month of employment at
forty (40) hours per week during said month, an employee shall accumulate eight
(8) hours of sick leave, not to exceed the provision of subsection B1 of this
section;
(2011 Code § 1-38; amd. Ord. 363, 6-2-2022)
1-6-6: NEPOTISM; DUAL OFFICE HOLDING:
   A.   No elected or appointed official or other authority of the Town shall
appoint or elect any person related by affinity or consanguinity within the
third degree to any member of the Town Board or to himself or, in the case of a
plural authority, to any one (1) of its members to any office or position of
profit in the Town government. The provisions of this subsection shall not
prohibit an officer or employee already in the service of the Town from
continuing in such service or from promotion therein.
   B.   A person may hold more than one (1) office or position in the Town
government as the Town Board may ordain.
   C.   A member of the Town Board shall not receive compensation for service
in any Municipal office or position other than his elected office. (2011 Code §
1-43)
1-6-7: VACANCIES IN OFFICE:
   A.   Vacancy in the office of an elected Town official shall be filled in
compliance with 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 8-109, as amended or supplemented.
   B.   Every officer who is elected or appointed for a definite term shall
continue to serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed and
qualifies, unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation,
disqualification, removal, death, abolition of the office, or other legal
manner. (2011 Code § 1-44)
1-6-8: SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT:
   A.   All officers and employees of the Town under any and all previous
ordinances shall continue in the offices and employments which they
respectively hold after this Code goes into effect.
   B.   Every officer who is elected or appointed for a definite term shall
continue to serve thereafter or until his successor is elected or appointed and
qualifies, unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation,
disqualification, removal, death, abolition of the office, or other legal
manner.
   C.   All books, vouchers, monies or other property belonging to the Town and
in the charge or possession of any officer of the Town shall be delivered to
his successor or to the Town Board of Trustees upon termination of the office
or of employment. (2011 Code § 1-42)
1-6-9: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No Town Trustee, officer or employee, or any business in which said Trustee,
officer, employee, or spouse of the Trustee, officer or employee has a
proprietary interest, shall engage in any buying, selling, contracting or other
activity as provided by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 8-113. (2011 Code § 12-17)
ARTICLE A. RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Employee Retirement System
1-6A-2: Social Security
1-6A-3: Firefighters Pension And Retirement Fund
1-6A-1: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the State and for the
purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of Town
employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized,
created, established, approved and adopted, the funded pension plan designated
"Employee Retirement System of Mooreland, Oklahoma", as amended from time to
time. (2017 Code)
1-6A-2: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Extension Of Benefits: It is hereby declared to be the policy and
purpose of the Town to extend to the employees and officials thereof, not
excluded by law or this section, and whether employed in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of Federal Old
Age and Survivors Insurance, as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act
and amendments thereto, and 51 Oklahoma Statutes section 121 et seq. In
pursuance of such policy and for that purpose, the Town shall take such action
as may be required by applicable State or Federal laws or regulations. (2011
Code § 1-51)
   B.   Agreement With State: The Mayor of the Town is hereby authorized and
directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the
State Public Welfare Commission as agent or agency, to secure coverage of
employees and officials as provided in subsection A of this section. (2011 Code
§ 1-52; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Withholdings: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and
officials for the purpose provided in subsection A of this section, are hereby
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable State or Federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid to the State
or Federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. (2011 Code § 1-53)
   D.   Contributions: There shall be appropriated by the Town from available
funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable State or
Federal laws or regulations for employer contributions, which shall be paid to
the State or Federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. (2011 Code
§ 1-54)
   E.   Records And Reports: The Town shall keep such records and make such
reports, relative to the system of Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance, as
may be required by applicable State or Federal laws or regulations. (2011 Code
§ 1-55)
   F.   Exclusions: There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to
make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now
covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any
retirement system for any employee or official of the Town. (2011 Code § 1-56)
1-6A-3: FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT FUND:
The Town hereby adopts the provisions of State law governing the Oklahoma
Firefighters Pension and Retirement System, and amendments thereto, for the
purpose of providing volunteer firefighters of the Town with a retirement
program. (2011 Code § 1-50; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-7-1: Purpose And Effect
1-7-2: Definitions
1-7-3: Jurisdiction
1-7-4: Municipal Judge
1-7-5: Change Of Venue Not Allowed
1-7-6: Chief Of Police
1-7-7: Clerk Of The Court
1-7-8: Town Attorney
1-7-9: Rules Of The Court
1-7-10: Prosecutions Verified By Complaint; Style
1-7-11: State Bail Bond Regulations Adopted
1-7-12: Arrest, Bond, Release
1-7-13: Traffic Violations Bureau; Traffic Fines
1-7-14: Summons
1-7-15: Warrant Of Arrest
1-7-16: Arraignment
1-7-17: Imprisonment; Work By Prisoners
1-7-18: Community Service Or Remedial Action; Failure To Perform
1-7-19: Assessments To Municipal Fines
1-7-20: Deferred Sentence; Suspension Of Judgment Or Costs; Reconfinement;
Administrative Fee
1-7-21: Contempt Of Court; Failure To Comply; Failure To Appear
1-7-1: PURPOSE AND EFFECT:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal Court
of the Town as put into operation by resolution duly passed and filed in
accordance with law, as authorized by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 27-101 and
27-102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town, the provisions of this
chapter shall control. (2011 Code § 13-1)
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The peace officer in charge of the police force of the Town.
CLERK-TREASURER: The Clerk-Treasurer of this Municipality, including any deputy
or member of the office staff of the Clerk- Treasurer while performing duties
of the Clerk-Treasurer's Office.
COURT: The Municipal Court of the Town of Mooreland.
GOVERNING BODY: The Board of Trustees of the Town of Mooreland.
JUDGE: The Judge of the Municipal Court of the Town, including any Acting Judge
or Alternate Judge thereof, as provided by the Statutes of this State and this
chapter.
MUNICIPALITY OR THIS MUNICIPALITY: The Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma.
THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The District Court judicial district of the State of
Oklahoma wherein the government of the Town is situated. (2011 Code § 13-2)
1-7-3: JURISDICTION:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance
of this Municipality is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to
the court in accordance with applicable law. (2011 Code § 13-3; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-4: MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
   A.   Qualifications: There shall be one (1) Judge of the court. A Judge need
not be a licensed attorney at law, but if not, he must be a resident of this
Municipality, of the age of thirty five (35) years or older, and possessed of
good moral character. A Judge who is a licensed attorney may engage in the
practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept employment
inconsistent with his duties as a Judge, or arising out of facts which give
rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court,
pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings therein. He
must be a resident of the County or maintain a law office therein. (2011 Code §
13-4)
   B.   Appointment: Judges and Alternate Judges shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the consent of the Governing Body. A proposed appointment shall be
submitted in writing to the Governing Body at the next regularly scheduled
meeting prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take effect and shall
be acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The Governing Body may
decide upon the proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and
acting. Failure of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent
action thereon at a later regularly scheduled meeting of the Governing Body
unless the Mayor, in writing, withdraws the proposed appointment. (2011 Code §
13-8)
   C.   Term Of Judge: The official term of the Judge shall be two (2) years,
expiring on May 15 in each odd numbered year. Each Judge, unless sooner removed
for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified;
provided, that the Judge of the Municipal Court existing in this Municipality
at the effective date hereof shall act as Judge of the court herein provided
until a Judge is appointed and qualified under the terms of this section. (2011
Code § 13-5)
   D.   Alternate Judge: There shall be appointed for each Judge of the court
an Alternate Judge possessed of the same qualifications required of the Judge
in this section. His appointment shall be for the same term and made in the
same manner as the Judge. He shall sit as Acting Judge of the court in any case
if the Judge is:
      1.   Absent;
      2.   Unable to act as Judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as Judge in the case. (2011 Code § 13-6)
   E.   Acting Judge: If at any time there is no Judge or Alternate Judge, duly
appointed and qualified, available to sit as Judge, the Mayor shall appoint
some person, possessing the qualifications required by this section for the
Judge, who shall preside as Acting Judge over the court in the disposition of
pending matters until such time as a Judge or Alternate Judge shall be
available. (2011 Code § 13-7)
   F.   Compensation: A Judge, an Alternate Judge or an Acting Judge shall
receive a monthly salary to be fixed by the Board of Trustees by resolution,
paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of this
Municipality. (2011 Code § 13-9)
   G.   Removal:
      1.   Removal For Cause: Judges shall be subject to removal from office by
the Governing Body for the causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of
this State for the removal of public officers.
      2.   Filing Petition: Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one (1) or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed
and filed by:
         a.   The Mayor; or
         b.   Twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of this Municipality.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one (1) or more of the petitioners.
      3.   Hearing; Notice: The Governing Body shall set a date for hearing the
matter and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to
be served personally upon the Judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing.
At the hearing, the Judge shall be entitled to:
         a.   Representation by counsel;
         b.   Present testimony and cross examine the witnesses against him;
and
         c.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
      4.   Procedures: So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the
Oklahoma Administrative Procedures Act 1  governing individual proceedings
shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be
entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the
Governing Body, in favor of such removal. (2011 Code § 13-10)
   H.   Vacancy In Office:
      1.   Cause Of Vacancy: A vacancy in the office of Judge shall occur if
the incumbent:
         a.   Dies;
         b.   Resigns;
         c.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
         d.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed
finally in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
(2011 Code § 13-11)
      2.   Filling Vacancy: Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the Office of
Judge, the Mayor, with the consent of the Governing Body, shall appoint a
successor to complete the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment is made. (2011 Code § 13-11; amd. 2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 75 OS § 309 et seq.
1-7-5: CHANGE OF VENUE NOT ALLOWED:
In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed, but the
Judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he
may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure
provided by law for courts of record. If a Judge is disqualified, the matter
shall be heard by an Alternate or Acting Judge, appointed as provided in this
chapter. (2011 Code § 13-12)
1-7-6: CHIEF OF POLICE:
All writs or process of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to
the Chief of Police of this Municipality, who shall be the principal officer of
the court. (2011 Code § 13-13)
1-7-7: CLERK OF THE COURT:
   A.   Designated; Duties: The Clerk-Treasurer, or a Deputy designated by him,
shall be the Clerk of the Court. He shall:
      1.   Assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, process and other papers.
      2.   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court.
      3.   Enter all pleadings, process and proceedings in the dockets of the
court.
      4.   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the Judge shall direct.
      5.   Receive and receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits and sums of
money payable to the court. (2011 Code § 13-14)
      6.   Pay to this Municipality, on a daily basis, all monies so received
by him, except such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be
disbursed by him for special purposes. All monies paid to this Municipality
shall be placed in the general fund of the Town, or in such other fund as the
Governing Body may direct, and said monies shall be used in the operation of
the Municipal government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing
the fund in which it is placed. (2011 Code § 13-14; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Bond: The Clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-111, in the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). When executed, said bond shall be submitted to the Governing Body
for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with this Municipality and
retained in the Municipal archives. (2011 Code § 13-16; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-8: TOWN ATTORNEY:
The Attorney for this Municipality, or his duly designated assistant, shall be
the prosecuting officer of the court. He shall prosecute all alleged violations
of this Code and the ordinances of the Town. He shall be authorized, in his
discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals, proceedings in error and review
from the court to any other courts of the State, and to represent this
Municipality in all proceedings arising out of matters in the court. (2011 Code
§ 13-15; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-9: RULES OF THE COURT:
   A.   Authority To Establish: The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with
the laws of the State and with this Code and the ordinances of this
Municipality, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. (2011 Code §
13-17; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Enforcement: Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the
Judge or by the court may be enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison
for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against
process issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the
District Courts of this State. (2011 Code § 13-18)
1-7-10: PROSECUTIONS VERIFIED BY COMPLAINT; STYLE:
All prosecutions for violation of this Code or ordinances of this Municipality
shall be styled "The Town of Mooreland vs. (naming defendant or defendants)".
Except as provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing
of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making the
complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged. (2011 Code § 13-19;
amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-11: STATE BAIL BOND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The provisions of the State and Municipal Traffic, Water Safety, and Wildlife
Bail Bond Procedure Act, 22 Oklahoma Statutes section 1115 et seq., shall apply
to any person, whether a resident of this State or a nonresident, who is
arrested by a police officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a State
traffic law or misdemeanor traffic ordinance. The provisions of such Act shall
be adopted as if set forth in full herein. (2011 Code § 13-20; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-12: ARREST, BOND, RELEASE:
   A.   Arrests:
      1.   Residents:
         a.   Whenever a resident of the Town is arrested for the violation of
any provision of this Code or ordinance of the Town, traffic or nontraffic, by
a law enforcement officer, the officer shall immediately release such person if
he acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it unless it reasonably
appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others in
response to the citation. If such person fails to appear in response to the
citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be
compelled.
         b.   Whenever a resident of the Town is arrested by a law enforcement
officer for the violation of any provision of this Code or ordinance of the
Town and is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided in
subsection A1a of this section, he shall be admitted to bail either before or
after arraignment or released on his own recognizance. (2011 Code § 13-21; amd.
2017 Code)
      2.   Nonresidents: Whenever a nonresident of the Town is arrested by a
law enforcement officer for a violation, the defendant shall be eligible to be
admitted to bail either before or after arraignment. (2011 Code § 13-21)
   B.   Bond And Release:
      1.   A person who is arrested for a Municipal traffic violation by a law
enforcement officer of the Town shall be required to comply with the procedures
provided by State law in the Municipal Traffic, Water Safety, and Wildlife Bail
Bond Procedure Act, 22 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1115 to 1115.5.
      2.   The amount and conditions of bail granted under subsections A1b and
A2 of this section shall be determined by the Judge who shall prescribe rules
for the receipt of bail and for the release on recognizance. In the event of
arrests at night, or other emergency, or when the Judge is not available, the
Chief of Police or his designated representative shall be authorized by the
Judge, under such conditions as shall be prescribed by the Judge, to accept a
temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the
accused, not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum fine
provided by this Code or the ordinance for each offense charged. The Chief of
Police or his designated representative is authorized, subject to such
conditions as shall be prescribed by the Judge, to release a resident of the
Town on his own recognizance. (2011 Code § 13-21; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-13: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU; TRAFFIC FINES:
   A.   A Traffic Violations Bureau hereby is established as a division of the
office of the Clerk of the court, to be administered by the Clerk, or by
subordinates designated by him for that purpose. Persons who are cited for
violation of one (1) of the traffic regulatory ordinances of this Municipality,
other than a second traffic offense within a twelve (12) month period, may
elect to pay a fine in the Traffic Violations Bureau according to the schedule
established by the Town Board of Trustees by resolution. (2011 Code § 13-22;
amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the defendant prior to
trial of the charge against him, the defendant shall be allowed to pay the
amounts set forth in full payment of fine and cost with regard to the charge
against the defendant. Such plea and payment shall constitute a final
determination of the cause against the defendant. (2011 Code § 13-22)
   C.   The defendant shall also be allowed to pay the amount set in the
schedule referenced in subsection A of this section in lieu of his appearance
before the Municipal Court for arraignment. Such payment shall constitute a
final determination of the cause against the defendant. (2011 Code § 13-22;
amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section. If a
defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section fails to do so,
prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter. (2011 Code §
13-22)
1-7-14: SUMMONS:
   A.   Warrant Of Arrest Issuance: Upon the filing of a complaint charging
violation of a provision of this Code or an ordinance, the Judge, unless he
determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has
been issued a citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance,
shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or
place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and
giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a day certain as
specified after the summons is served upon him, and including such other
pertinent information as may be necessary. (2011 Code § 13-23; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Serving Summons: The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to
the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons
within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as
provided by this chapter. (2011 Code § 13-23)
1-7-15: WARRANT OF ARREST:
   A.   Form Of Warrant: Except as otherwise provided in this Code or the
ordinances of this Municipality, upon the filing of a complaint approved by the
endorsement of the Attorney of this Municipality or by the Judge, there shall
be issued a warrant of arrest in substantially the following form: (2011 Code §
13-24; amd. 2017 Code)
The Town of Mooreland to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Mooreland,
Oklahoma. Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant)
that the offense (naming the offense in particular by general terms) has been
committed and accused (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor
forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring the above named (name
of defendant) before me, at the Municipal Courtroom,
Witness my hand this       day of        , 20    .
                                               
Judge of the Municipal Court
Mooreland, Oklahoma
   B.   Police To Serve Warrant: It shall be the duty of the aforesaid Marshal,
personally, or through a duly constituted member of the police force of this
Municipality, or through any other persons lawfully authorized so to act, to
execute said warrant as promptly as possible. (2011 Code § 13-24)
1-7-16: ARRAIGNMENT:
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned.
The Judge or the Attorney of the Town shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him of his legal rights and of the consequences of
conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the
defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgement and sentence or may
continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, the
court may proceed to try the case or may set it for hearing at a later date.
(2011 Code § 13-25)
1-7-17: IMPRISONMENT; WORK BY PRISONERS:
   A.   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the
Sheriff of the County, or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence. (2011 Code § 13-26)
   B.   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may
be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, buildings, or other premises or property. For each day of such
work, the prisoner shall be paid at a rate as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, until the fine or costs
are satisfied. (2011 Code § 13-27; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the Mayor, shall
direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in charge
of the place where the work is to be performed, himself or by some person
designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the Chief
of Police shall make provisions therefor. (2011 Code § 13-27)
1-7-18: COMMUNITY SERVICE OR REMEDIAL ACTION; FAILURE TO PERFORM:
Whenever any person is convicted in Municipal Court for violation of a
provision of this Code or a Municipal ordinance, the court may order the
defendant to a term of community service or remedial action at the rate as
provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment. If the defendant
fails to perform the required community service or if the conditions of
community service are violated, the Judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment
at the rate as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town
Board of Trustees, not to exceed the maximum sentence allowable for the
violation for which the defendant was convicted. (2011 Code § 13-31; amd. 2017
Code)
1-7-19: ASSESSMENTS TO MUNICIPAL FINES:
   A.   Court Costs: The Municipal Court shall assess court costs in all
matters in which an offender is found guilty or pleads guilty or no contest to
the offense. Such costs shall be set at the maximum amount allowed by the State
Legislature.
   B.   CLEET And AFIS Charges: The Municipal Court, in addition to fines and
costs, shall assess CLEET (Council On Law Enforcement Education and Training)
and AFIS (Automated Fingerprinting Identification System) charges in accordance
with the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 331A, 7-9-2018)
   C.   Laboratory Fee:
      1.   The Municipal Court, in addition to fines and cost and those charges
provided in subsection B of this section, shall assess an additional laboratory
analysis fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town
Board of Trustees for every conviction for an offense in which forensic science
or laboratory services are rendered or administered by the Municipality. (Ord.
331, 3-13-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   The Court Clerk shall cause said amounts to be deposited as
collected in a separate fund to be used for the following purposes:
         a.   Providing criminalistics laboratory services. (Ord. 331, 3-13-
2016)
         b.   The purchase and maintenance of equipment for use by the
laboratory, law enforcement personnel and/or Municipality in performing any
analysis, and, (Ord. 331A, 7-9-2018)
         c.   Education, training, and scientific development of Municipal
personnel.
   D.   Jail Fees:
      1.   The Municipal Court shall require a person who is actually received
into custody at a jail facility or who is confined in a Town or County Jail for
any offense to pay the jail facility the costs of incarceration, both before
and after conviction. Costs of incarceration shall include booking and housing.
Fees shall be assessed as follows: (Ord. 331, 3-13-2016)
         a.   Booking Fees: A fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees shall be assessed for each booking
procedure.
         b.   Incarceration Fees: Upon conviction or upon entry of a deferred
judgment and sentence, a fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees shall be assessed for the total number
of days of incarceration. (Ord. 331, 3-13-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   The fees for booking and incarceration shall be collected by the
Court Clerk as provided for collection of other costs and fines. Upon
collection, the Municipal Court Clerk shall, on a monthly basis, remit fifty
dollars ($50.00) of each collected booking fee and the total of the collected
incarceration fees to the Woodward County Sheriff's Department.
   E.   Police Training And Technology Fee:
      1.   For every case in which a fine, bond forfeiture or administrative or
other fee is collected by the Court Clerk, an amount equal to twenty percent
(20%) of the fine, bond forfeiture or administrative or other fee will be set
aside for the Police Training and Technology Fund. (Ord. 331, 3-13-2016)
      2.   The Police Training and Technology Fund shall be a separate fund,
not subject to fiscal limitations, for the purpose of purchasing public safety
technology and equipment and all costs associated therewith, and providing
advanced training of law enforcement officers, and all expenses incurred for
such training. (Ord. 331A, 7-9-2018)
      3.   These funds shall be deposited as State Statute requires. The
purpose of this fund is to provide revenues for public safety technology and
equipment and advanced training of law enforcement officers. (Ord. 331, 3-13-
2016)
   F.   Equipment Fee: The Municipal Court, in addition to all fines, costs and
additional fees, shall assess an equipment fee as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. Such amount collected
shall be designated for use by the Town for the purchase, update and
maintenance of equipment and training for Municipal personnel on the use of
equipment. (Ord. 331, 3-13-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-20: DEFERRED SENTENCE; SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT OR COSTS; RECONFINEMENT;
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
   A.   The Judge of the Municipal Court imposing a judgment or sentence, at
his/her discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the
imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for
a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of sentence, upon such
terms or conditions as the court may specify. Procedures relating to suspension
of the judgment or cost, or both, shall be as provided in 11 Oklahoma Statutes
section 27-123. Upon completion of the probation term, the defendant shall be
discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and the verdict judgment of
guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged from the record, and the charge
dismissed with prejudice to any further action. Upon a finding of the court
that the conditions of probation have been violated, the Municipal Judge may
enter a judgment of guilty.
   B.   The Judge of the Municipal Court may continue or delay imposing a
judgment or sentence for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from the
date of sentence. At the expiration of such period of time, the Judge may allow
the charge to be amended to a lesser offense. (Ord. 326, 8-8-2016)
   C.   If a deferred sentence is imposed as provided in subsections A and B of
this section, a deferral fee in the amount as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees for the length of the
deferral period will be assessed in addition to an administrative fee of not
less than the amount provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees, plus State mandated fee and court cost. (Ord. 326, 8-8-
2016; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-21: CONTEMPT OF COURT; FAILURE TO COMPLY; FAILURE TO APPEAR:
The Judge shall have power to enforce due obedience to orders, rules and
judgments made by him and may fine or imprison for contempt offered to the
Judge while holding his court or to process issued by him in the same manner
and to the same extent as the District Courts of the State. Failure to comply
with an order, rule or judgment shall constitute a separate offense against the
Town. Failure to appear shall constitute a separate offense against the Town.
(2011 Code § 13-30)
CHAPTER 8
TOWN ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Conducted By County
1-8-1: CONDUCTED BY COUNTY:
Pursuant to 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 16-302, the Town hereby declares that
it shall not be governed by the Oklahoma Town Meeting Act as a means of
electing its officers and deciding referendum and initiative questions. The
Town shall hereby elect its officers and decide initiative and referendum
questions through elections conducted by the County Election Board pursuant to
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 16-101 et seq. (Ord. 307, 2-10-2014)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Town Board Serve As
2-1-2: Powers And Duties
2-1-3: Serve As Zoning Commission
2-1-4: Employment Of Staff
2-1-1: TOWN BOARD SERVE AS:
The Town Board of Trustees shall, in addition to their duties, serve as the
Town Planning Commission. (2011 Code § 17-1)
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Town Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties prescribed
therefor by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 45-103 and 45-104, as amended or
supplemented, and all other powers and duties now or hereafter prescribed
therefor by any other provision of law or ordinance. (2011 Code § 17-3; amd.
2017 Code)
2-1-3: SERVE AS ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   The Town Planning Commission is hereby appointed to the Zoning
Commission of the Town, and the Town Planning Commission shall have the powers
of a Zoning Commission as provided by State law. Whether exercising the powers
of a Planning Commission or the powers of a Zoning Commission, it shall be
legally one (1) board, known as the Town Planning Commission.
   B.   In exercising the powers of a Zoning Commission, the Town Planning
Commission shall recommend the boundaries of the various zones and appropriate
zoning regulations to be enforced therein. It shall have all the powers
conferred upon a Zoning Commission by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 43-101 to
43-109, as amended or supplemented, and all powers which now or in the future
may be granted by applicable State law to such authorities. (2011 Code § 17-4)
2-1-4: EMPLOYMENT OF STAFF:
The commission may employ engineers, attorneys, clerks and other help deemed
necessary. Their salaries and compensation shall be fixed by the Town Board and
shall be paid out of the Town treasury as other salaries and compensation are
paid. The necessary legal expenses shall be paid out of the Town treasury as
other legal expenses of the Town government are paid. (2011 Code § 17-2)
CHAPTER 2
AIRPORT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Created; Members; Qualifications
2-2-2: Appointment And Terms
2-2-3: Oath Of Office; Prohibited Activities
2-2-4: Removal From Office
2-2-5: Organization
2-2-6: Powers And Duties
2-2-7: Airport Revenues
2-2-8: Rules And Regulations
2-2-9: Records And Reports
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the MOORELAND MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT COMMISSION, to be composed of five (5) citizens who are qualified
electors within Woodward County. At least one (1) of the members shall be fully
experienced in aviation and shall hold a current license as a private pilot or
commercial pilot. (2011 Code § 1-60)
2-2-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
The Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor, and confirmed by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of the duly elected and qualified members of the Town Board
of Trustees, and shall hold office for a term of five (5) years; provided,
however, that the Commissioners first appointed shall serve for terms of one
(1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) years each, to be designated by
the Mayor, and thereafter, upon the expiration of their respective terms, their
successors shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. (2011 Code § 1-61)
2-2-3: OATH OF OFFICE; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
Each Commissioner shall take and file the oath required by law in the State of
Oklahoma. No member of the commission shall hold any elective office under the
Municipal government while a member of the commission, nor shall any such
member be a candidate for any elective office while a member of the commission.
Further, no member of the commission shall engage financially in any
aeronautical enterprise other than minority ownership of stock of a
certificated air carrier not operating on or from the Mooreland Municipal
Airport, nor shall any member have any financial interest in any concession,
right or privilege to conduct any business or render any services for
compensation upon the premises of the Municipal Airport. (2011 Code § 1-62)
2-2-4: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any Commissioner appointed under the provisions of this chapter may be removed
only by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the duly elected and qualified members of
the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 1-63)
2-2-5: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Meetings: The commission shall meet at least monthly, but other
meetings may be held at any time by the commission or upon the call of the
Mayor or members of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 1-69)
   B.   Officers: The commission shall elect annually from its members a Chair
and Vice Chair and shall also appoint a Secretary who may, but need not be, a
member of the commission. (2011 Code § 1-70)
   C.   Legal Counsel: The Town Attorney shall serve as ex officio legal
counsel for the commission, and the commission shall have the authority to
employ other legal counsel as it may deem necessary. (2011 Code § 1-71)
2-2-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The Commissioners herein appointed shall have full and complete
authority to manage, operate, improve, extend and maintain the Municipal
Airport known as the Mooreland Municipal Airport and its related properties and
facilities, subject to approval of the Board of Trustees; and shall have full
and complete charge of the airport and its related properties and facilities,
including the right to employ or remove any and all assistants and employees of
whatever nature, kind or character, and to fix, regulate and pay the salaries;
it being the intention of this chapter to vest in the Commissioners the
authority to operate, manage, maintain, and improve facilities, and to have
full and complete charge thereof, subject to approval of the Board of Trustees.
The commission is further empowered to represent the Town before any State or
Federal authority having jurisdiction over the operation of public and private
aircraft or airports. (2011 Code § 1-64)
   B.   The commission shall, in addition to the powers enumerated herein, have
such other and further powers as are now by law given to the Boards of Trustees
of any Town, and they shall be governed by all existing statutes pertaining to
the duties of Boards of Trustees of such Towns. (2011 Code § 1-66)
2-2-7: AIRPORT REVENUES:
All revenues derived from the operation of the airport or flying field or
related property, after paying the operating expenses and maintenance, shall be
set aside and used for additional improvements of the airport or flying field
or for the retirement of any debt and interest incurred for the purchase and
improvement of the airport or flying field, or as the Board of Trustees may
otherwise direct. (2011 Code § 1-65)
2-2-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Commissioners shall adopt such rules and regulations that are necessary and
expedient for the proper operation and management of the Municipal Airport and
its related properties and facilities and shall have authority to alter, change
or amend such rules and regulations at their discretion. The Commissioners
shall comply with, or cause to be complied with, all civil air regulations of
the Federal and State governments as to air worthiness of aircraft,
certification of aircraft and operation of aircraft. They shall protect all
aerial approaches to the airport insofar as same come within their jurisdiction
and as they adjudge necessary for the safe operation of the airport. (2011 Code
§ 1-67)
2-2-9: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The Commissioners shall keep a record of all revenues and expenditures of the
airport and its related properties and facilities, and it shall be their duty
to prepare and file an annual verified audit of the financial affairs and
conditions of the airport and its related properties and facilities. The annual
audit shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and with the
District Airport Engineer of the FAA not later than March 15, and shall be
subject to the inspection of any citizen of the State. The audit report shall
show the full financial condition of the airport, its related properties and
facilities, and the status of its bonded debt, if any be incurred following the
effective date hereof, and of every other detail necessary to a full and
thorough understanding for such audit report of the actual financial condition
of the airport. In addition, it shall be the duty of the Commissioners to
furnish such other and further reports, data and information as may be
requested by the Mayor. (2011 Code § 1-68; amd. 2017 Code)
TITLE 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Checks And Warrants
3-1-2: Claims Against The Town
3-1-3: Budget And Appropriations
3-1-4: Funding And Accounting
3-1-5: Deposit Of Funds
3-1-6: Investment Of Meter Deposits
3-1-7: Insurance
3-1-8: Bonds
3-1-9: Financial Books And Records
3-1-10: Debt Collection Fee
3-1-1: CHECKS AND WARRANTS:
   A.   Authority To Sign: The Municipal officers designated to sign Municipal
checks and Municipal warrants for the Town and the Mooreland Public Works
Authority are as follows:
      1.   The Mayor and the Town Clerk-Treasurer are hereby designated as the
Municipal officers to sign Municipal checks for the Town.
      2.   The Chair of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and the Secretary
of the Mooreland Public Works Authority Utility Fund are hereby designated as
the Municipal officers to sign Municipal checks for the Mooreland Public Works
Authority. (2011 Code § 12-47)
   B.   Issuance And Processing: Warrants and checks shall be issued and
processed, and funds of the Town disbursed, only for legal purposes and in
accordance with 62 Oklahoma Statutes sections 372, 471 – 485 and 551 – 555.
(2011 Code § 12-15)
3-1-2: CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN:
   A.   The Town Administrator and the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for the review and approval for payment of claims for all
expenditures of the Town. The Town Administrator and the Town Clerk-Treasurer
shall be authorized to pay an amount not to exceed the encumbered amount of
each purchase order submitted; provided: 1) said encumbered amount of each
purchase order has been previously approved by the Town Board of Trustees; and
2) the creditor has submitted proper documentation reflecting an itemized
statement of the charges incurred or the services rendered.
   B.   All claims shall be made on purchase orders properly issued by the Town
Clerk-Treasurer which shall certify that the amount is within the approved
budget for the account charged. All claims must be signed by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer and the purchasing officer initiating the purchase or expenditure
prior to approval by the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code § 1-39-2)
3-1-3: BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS:
   A.   Statements Of Condition And Needs; Appropriations:
      1.   The Town Board of Trustees shall meet on the first and third
Thursdays in June every year and shall make, in writing, a financial statement
showing the true fiscal year on June 30 and, prior to September 1, shall make
an itemized statement of estimated needs and probable income from all sources
including ad valorem taxes for the current fiscal year. Said statements shall
be made as provided by the 68 Oklahoma Statutes sections 3002 and 3003, and
other applicable provisions of law, and shall be filed as required by said
statutes with the Oklahoma State Auditor. Said statements shall be published as
required by law. (2011 Code § 12-1; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Supplemental appropriations may be made as provided by 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 3021, and other applicable provisions of law.
      3.   The Mooreland Public Works Authority shall comply with and operate
in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Municipal Budget Act 1 .
(2011 Code § 12-1)
   B.   Transfer Of Appropriation Balances: Unencumbered appropriation balances
of items of less immediately urgent need, or any part thereof, may be
transferred to other items of appropriation to meet more immediately urgent
needs, as provided by Oklahoma Statutes. (2011 Code § 12-2)
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 17-201 - 17-301.
3-1-4: FUNDING AND ACCOUNTING:
   A.   General Provisions: The revenues and other resources of the Town shall
be divided into funds as provided by 62 Oklahoma Statutes section 331, and 11
Oklahoma Statutes sections 17-212 and 17-213, and other applicable provisions
of law, and accounted for as provided thereby. (2011 Code § 12-3)
   B.   Petty Cash Fund: The Town Petty Cash Fund is established to be
controlled by the Town Clerk-Treasurer in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the purpose of paying miscellaneous expenses of the Town. (2011
Code § 1-37)
   C.   Sinking Fund: It shall be the duty of the officers of the Town to
handle, deposit, invest and use the money in the Sinking Fund of the Town in
the manner provided by the 62 Oklahoma Statutes sections 431 – 451, and any
other applicable provisions of law. (2011 Code § 12-4)
3-1-5: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
   A.   Depositories Designated: All banks and all savings and loan
associations in the County which are incorporated under Federal or State law
are hereby designated as depositories for the funds of the Town.
   B.   Clerk-Treasurer Duties:
      1.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit daily all public funds
received by him/her in such banks or savings and loan associations. (2011 Code
§ 12-4)
      2.   With the approval of the Town Board of Trustees, the Town Clerk-
Treasurer shall have authority to deposit surplus funds of the Town in his
custody in banks on a time deposit basis at the highest rate of interest
obtainable for such time deposit, as authorized by the Oklahoma Statutes.
   C.   Securing Deposits: The deposits of the Town shall be secured by the
Security for Local Deposits Act 1 . (2011 Code § 12-6; amd. 2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 62 OS § 517.1 et seq.
3-1-6: INVESTMENT OF METER DEPOSITS:
Money deposited with the Town as water meter deposits may be invested as
provided by Oklahoma Statutes. (2011 Code § 12-5; amd. 2017 Code)
3-1-7: INSURANCE:
   A.   Property Insurance: The Town Board of Trustees may insure Municipal
property as authorized by Oklahoma Statutes. Any money received as a result of
destruction, damages or loss of such insured property shall be accounted for
and used as provided by the Statutes.
   B.   Vehicle And Equipment Insurance: The Town Board of Trustees may
purchase insurance to pay damages to persons sustaining injuries or damages to
property as a result of negligent operation of motor vehicles or motorized
equipment of the Town. (2011 Code § 12-16)
3-1-8: BONDS:
Bonds of the Town shall be issued, sold, paid, and handled in all respects as
provided by 62 Oklahoma Statutes section 351 et seq., and other applicable
provisions of law. (2011 Code § 12-18)
3-1-9: FINANCIAL BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   A.   Examination: The books of the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be subject to
examination by the Town Board of Trustees at all times, as provided by 11
Oklahoma Statutes section 12-106. Likewise, the records of all other officers
and employees of the Town shall be subject to inspection by the Board of
Trustees at all times.
   B.   Audit:
      1.   The Board of Trustees shall designate a qualified public accountant
to audit the financial records and transactions of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and
all other personnel of the Town who keep financial records and make financial
transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and the accountant
shall make such audit and shall report to the Board of Trustees.
      2.   Upon petition of a number of voters of the Town, as provided by 74
Oklahoma Statutes section 212, the financial books and records of the Town will
be audited by the State Examiner and Inspector, as provided by the statutes and
other applicable provisions of law. (2011 Code § 12-19)
3-1-10: DEBT COLLECTION FEE:
In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-138, there is hereby imposed
an additional fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e., fines, fees,
court costs, restitution, and other debts owed the Town that have been referred
to a private firm (Perdue) for collection. (Ord. 320, 2-8-2016; Ord. 321, 2-8-
2016; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND PROPERTY SALES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Contractual Services Defined
3-2-2: Purchasing Authority
3-2-3: Purchase Of Goods, Services Or Capital
3-2-4: Competitive Bidding
3-2-5: Sales Of Surplus Or Obsolete Property
3-2-6: Debt Service
3-2-7: Interfund Transfers
3-2-8: Petty Cash
3-2-9: Incurring Indebtedness
3-2-10: Applicability To Public Trusts
3-2-1: CONTRACTUAL SERVICES DEFINED:
"Contractual services", for the purposes of this chapter, means services
performed for the Town by persons not in the employment of the Town, and may
include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection
with the services under express or implied contract. "Contractual services"
shall include travel; freight, express; parcel post; postage; telephone;
telegraph; utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations and
maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges and other physical
facilities of the Town; and other services performed for the Town by persons
not in the employment of the Town. (2011 Code § 12-7)
3-2-2: PURCHASING AUTHORITY:
All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for
the offices, departments and agencies of the Town government shall be made by
the Town Board of Trustees or by other Town personnel in accordance with this,
Chapter 2 of Title 3 of the Mooreland Town Code. (2011 Code § 12-8; amd. Ord.
345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-3: PURCHASE OF GOODS, SERVICES OR CAPITAL:
   A.   The Town Administrator shall designate certain individuals as
purchasing officers empowered to purchase or contract against budget
appropriations. Only these designated individuals will be empowered to obligate
the Town.
   B.   For all purchases of goods, services or capital (all purchases or
disbursements other than payroll and debt service) for which the obligation and
final invoice for the payment of the obligation does not occur within the same
month, purchase orders or contracts shall be prepared and approved, in writing,
by a designated purchasing officer prior to the time the purchase commitment is
made. The approved purchase order or contract shall be forwarded to an officer
or employee charged with keeping the appropriation and expenditure records
(encumbering clerk) who shall determine that there exists available
unencumbered appropriation for that purpose. Upon such determination, the
encumbering clerk shall attest to that fact in writing. If appropriation is not
available for the proposed purchase or commitment, the purchase or commitment
shall not proceed until budget amendments are authorized to provide sufficient
appropriation.
      1.   Upon approval of the purchasing officer and encumbering clerk, an
encumbrance shall be recorded in the appropriation and expenditure records in
the amount or estimated amount of the commitment.
      2.   These encumbering requirements shall not apply to the following type
of purchases or commitments:
         a.   Payroll and payroll related expenses.
         b.   Debt Service payments.
         c.   Utility and telephone services by entities governed by State
Corporation Commission.
         d.   Insurance contracts.
         e.   Purchases where the obligation and final invoice are processed in
the same month.
   C.   The Town Administrator shall be empowered to purchase or contract
against budget appropriations, within the limitations identified in this
section.
      1.   For all purchases of goods, services or capital (all purchases or
disbursements other than payroll and debt service) up to seven thousand five
hundred dollars ($7,500.00), the Town Administrator may complete the purchase
subject to confirmation by the Town Board.
      2.   For purchases of goods, services, or capital between seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) and twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00),
the Town Administrator may complete the purchase with the solicitation of three
(3) written estimates, approval of the Mayor and confirmation by the Town
Board.
      3.   For all purchases of contracts for goods, services or capital over
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), Board approval shall be obtained
prior to the time the commitment is made, and such approval shall be recorded
in the minutes of the Board. For repairs or replacement of existing equipment
or capital assets that have been declared inoperable, the spending limit
without prior Board approval shall be less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00).
   D.   After satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or completion of
contract provisions, an invoice or claim form shall be obtained adequately
documenting request for payment. The officer or employee receiving satisfactory
delivery of merchandise or contract service shall acknowledge such fact by
signing the invoice, claim form, delivery ticket or receiving advice.
      The invoice or claims form, along with the written acknowledgment of
receipt, shall be forwarded to the officer or employee responsible for
processing accounts payable who shall review the invoice for accuracy and
propriety, including comparison to the authorized purchase order or contract,
if applicable.
      Upon completion of the accounts payable officer review, the invoices or
claim forms along with the related supporting documentation shall be submitted
to the Town Administrator for consideration and approval of payment, along with
an accompanying invoice or claims listing, which shall be approved in writing
Town Administrator. An invoice approval report or claims listing will be
presented to the Town Board at the next regular Board meeting.
   E.   Upon approval of the invoices or claims for payment by the Town
Administrator, checks or other payment documents as authorized by State law (11
O.S., section 17-102) shall be prepared and submitted to the Town Treasurer,
along with a copy of the approved invoice or claims listing.
      The Treasurer shall compare the checks or other payment documents to the
invoice or claims listing and verify their accuracy. Upon verification, the
Treasurer and the Town Clerk shall sign the checks or other documents and
prepare them for distribution. In addition, the Treasurer shall prepare or
caused to be prepared a check or disbursement register.
   F.   The Town Treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the
appropriate journals and ledgers the purchases and cash disbursements incurred
and paid. (Ord. 344, 12-10-2018; amd. Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-4: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
   A.   The Town shall adhere to the provisions of Oklahoma Statutes (2001),
Title 61, sections 101 et seq. when determining when competitive bidding is
required and the manner in which competitive bids will be obtained.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of (a) above, public trusts created
pursuant to O.S. Title 60, section 176, of which the Town is beneficiary, shall
also follow the competitive bidding provisions of section 176(g) of Title 60.
      Exceptions from the requirement of competitive bidding are the purchases
of or contracts for:
      1.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost in
a single transaction does not exceed the minimum amount defined in the "Public
Competitive Bidding Act of 1974" as set forth in 61 OkJa Stat section 102.
      2.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever
bought;
      3.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from
private dealers, including government surplus;
      4.   Equipment to replace existing equipment which has become inoperable
when the Board declares the purchase an emergency;
      5.   Contractual services, including, but not limited to, natural gas,
electricity, telephone service, purchased from a public utility at a price or
rate determined by the state corporation commission or other governmental
authority;
      6.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing
agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for
things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; and
      7.   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
architectural and medical services unless competitive bidding is required by
applicable law or regulation. (2011 Code § 12-11; amd. Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-5: SALES OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE PROPERTY:
   A.   Declaration Of Surplus Or Obsolete Property: No surplus or obsolete
supplies, materials or equipment may be sold until the Board of Trustees shall
have declared them obsolete or surplus.
   B.   Bidding Requirements:
      1.   Before the Town sells any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or
equipment, except as otherwise provided by the Board of Trustees, the Town
Purchasing Officer shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town or give notice in such other manner as the Town
Purchasing Agent deems necessary adequately to reach prospective buyers to give
them opportunity to make necessary bids.
      2.   All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction.
      3.   The Town may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice
again.
      4.   The Town Purchasing Officer shall sell such supplies, materials, or
equipment to the highest bidder.
      5.   In case of a tie, if necessary, the Town Purchasing Officer shall
cast lots to determine to whom to sell, or the Town Purchasing Officer may
divide the sale among two (2) or more tying, always selling to the highest
responsible bidder or bidders. (2011 Code § 12-12)
   C.   Sales Without Bids: The Town may sell the following without giving an
opportunity for competitive bidding: surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or
equipment whose total value does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in
a single transaction. (2011 Code § 12-13; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-6: DEBT SERVICE:
   A.   All long-term indebtedness, in the form of bonds, notes or lease
purchase obligations, shall only be incurred in the manner provided by law.
   B.   Once lawfully incurred, payments of principal and interest on the bonds
or notes and payments on the lease purchase obligations shall be paid in
accordance with the terms as specified in the bond indenture, note agreement or
lease purchase contract by the Town Treasurer without further approval of the
governing body.
   C.   The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for the
payment of purchases of goods, services or capital as described in section
3-2-3E above.
   D.   The Town Treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the
appropriate journals and ledgers the debt service payments and maintain current
records of the remaining amount of indebtedness. (Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-7: INTERFUND TRANSFERS:
   A.   All transfers of resources between funds shall only be made in
accordance with the appropriations provided by the Town Board for such
transfers. Such appropriations shall be contained in the original or amended
budget of the Town.
   B.   Once lawfully appropriated, interfund transfer payments may be made by
the Town Treasurer without further Town Board approval. Such transfers,
however, may not exceed the amount lawfully appropriated.
   C.   The manner of payment of these interfund transfers shall be consistent
with the manner used for the payment of purchases of goods, services and
capital as described in section
3-2-3E above.
   D.   The Town Treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded these interfund
transfers in the appropriate journals and ledgers. (Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-8: PETTY CASH:
   A.   As provided for in 11 O.S., section 17-102(D) of the Oklahoma State
Statutes, the Town may have petty cash accounts for use in making certain small
payments for costs incurred in operating the municipality.
   B.   Each petty cash account established shall require Town Board approval,
including the amount of the petty cash imprest balance. However, in no case,
should the imprest balance exceed five hundred dollars ($500).
   C.   The petty cash accounts shall be reimbursed by utilizing properly
itemized invoices or petty cash voucher slips and by then processing the
reimbursement in the manner used for payment of purchases of goods, services
and capital. (Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-9: INCURRING INDEBTEDNESS:
As provided for in Article 10, section 26 of the Oklahoma Constitution, the
Town is prohibited from becoming indebted in any manner for any purpose in an
amount exceeding the amount appropriated by the Town Board for such purpose,
without voter approval. (Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
3-2-10: APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC TRUSTS:
   A.   For all public trusts created pursuant to 60 O.S., sections 176-180,
for which the Town is beneficiary and for which the trust's governing body
(Trustees) are comprised entirely of members of the Town Board, the above noted
requirements of section
3-2-1 through section
3-2-8 above, excluding section
3-2-9 on Incurring Indebtedness, shall apply.
   B.   For the purposes of the public trusts, as used above, the terms
governing body shall mean board of trustees of the trust, Chief Executive
Officer shall mean Trust Administrator as appointed by the trustees, Town
Treasurer shall mean Trust Treasurer as appointed by the trustees or required
by the trust indenture. (Ord. 345, 8-12-2019)
CHAPTER 3
TOWN TAXES
ARTICLE A. SALES TAX
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Short Title
3-3A-2: Definitions
3-3A-3: Taxes Imposed; Rates; Purposes
3-3A-4: Subsisting State Permits
3-3A-5: Classification Of Taxpayers
3-3A-6: Sales Subject To Tax; Exemptions
3-3A-7: Tax Due Date
3-3A-8: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
3-3A-9: Collection By Vendor
3-3A-10: Returns, Remittances And Discounts
3-3A-11: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
3-3A-12: Fraudulent Returns
3-3A-13: Refund Of Erroneous Payments
3-3A-14: Records Confidential
3-3A-15: Administration And Enforcement
3-3A-16: Amendments
3-3A-17: Provisions Cumulative
3-3A-18: Severability
3-3A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article constitutes authority and shall be known and may be cited as the
TOWN OF MOORELAND, OKLAHOMA, SALES TAX ORDINANCE. (2011 Code § 12-20)
3-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   State Definitions Adopted: The definitions of words, terms and phrases
contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code 1 , as amended, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this article.
   B.   Additional Definitions:
    GROSS RECEIPTS: Augmented to contain the additional following words: The
total retail sale price received for the sale of mixed beverages, ice and
nonalcoholic beverages to be mixed with alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises where such sale, preparation or service occurs shall constitute
the gross receipts from such transaction.
   SALE: The sale, preparation or service of ice or nonalcoholic beverages that
are sold, prepared or served for the purpose of being mixed with alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where such sale, preparation or
otherwise occurs.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The department of the Municipal government or the official
agency of the State duly designated according to law, or contract authorized by
law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. (2011 Code §§ 12-
21, 12-22)
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS § 1350 et seq.
3-3A-3: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES; PURPOSES:
The following Town sales taxes, in the total amount of four percent (4%), shall
be imposed and effective as indicated. Said taxes have been approved by a
majority of the registered voters of the Town voting on same in elections
conducted in the manner prescribed by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 16-112.
(2017 Code)
   A.   A three percent (3%) Sales Tax, which is designated to provide revenues
for the support of the functions of the Municipal government of the Town. This
tax shall become and be effective at the specified time set forth by the
Oklahoma Tax Commission and the ordinances referenced by number in the title of
this article. (2011 Code §§ 12-25, 12-26, 12-27; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Effective September 1, 2016, a one percent (1%) Sales Tax (in addition
to any and all other excise taxes now in force), which is designated to provide
revenues for capital expenditures for the use and benefit of the Town and/or
for payment of debt service in connection with obligations issued to finance
said capital expenditures. (Ord. 322, 4-11-2016)
3-3A-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax
Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
article, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional Municipal permit for the same purpose. (2011 Code § 12-24)
3-3A-5: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be prescribed by State Statutes for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax
Code. (2011 Code § 12-23)
3-3A-6: SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The Town Sales Tax shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of
such sales as specified by Oklahoma Statutes, and exemptions from such taxes
shall be allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes. (2017 Code)
3-3A-7: TAX DUE DATE:
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the State Sales Tax under the Oklahoma Sales
Tax Code. (2011 Code § 12-34)
3-3A-8: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of the State Sales Tax. (2011
Code § 12-35; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the Town Sales Tax by the tax
collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
Town and the tax collector, in the collection of both the Town Sales Tax and
the State Sales Tax. (2011 Code § 12-35)
3-3A-9: COLLECTION BY VENDOR:
   A.   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It is the duty of each and every vendor in the Town to collect from the
consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or an
amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same
manner as other debts. (2011 Code § 12-37)
   C.   A vendor, as defined in the State Sales Tax Code, who wilfully or
intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax
levied by this article, or wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses
to comply with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user,
either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the
tax herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise,
any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for
the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 12-37; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3A-10: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be subject to
the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code for
collection of State sales taxes. (2011 Code § 12-38)
3-3A-11: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Failure To Pay Tax: 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 217 is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in
amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases
of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article. The
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause
such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a
period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount
allowed under this chapter. (2011 Code § 12-39)
   B.   Waiver Of Interest Or Penalty: The interest or penalty or any portion
thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the Town tax herein
levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver
or as applied in administration of the State Sales Tax provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 220. To accomplish the purposes of this subsection, the
applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this article. (2011 Code § 12-40)
3-3A-12: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
article shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 12-42)
3-3A-13: REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
Refund of erroneous payment of the Town Sales Tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and
under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the State
Sales Tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227. To accomplish the
purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. (2011 Code § 12-
41)
3-3A-14: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the Town Sales Tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code, 68
Oklahoma Statutes section 205, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted
by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of
the Town Sales Tax as if here set forth in full. (2011 Code § 12-14)
3-3A-15: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Administration Of Provisions: The agreements for the administration of
the Sales Tax ordinance found in ordinances 158, 192, and 208, and any
amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective
and applicable to the administration of the Town Sales Tax as if here set forth
in full. (2011 Code § 12-44)
   B.   Enforcement Of Payment: The taxes, penalty and interest due under this
article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as
against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any
other debt. (2011 Code § 12-36)
3-3A-16: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the Town, by their approval of the Sales Tax ordinances, hereby
authorize the Town Board of Trustees, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the Town as provided by law. (2017 Code)
3-3A-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any or
all other taxing provisions of the Town. (2011 Code § 12-45)
3-3A-18: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable, and if any
section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held
invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. (2011
Code § 12-46)
ARTICLE B. GAS UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Tax Levied; Rate
3-3B-2: Application Of Tax; Exemptions
3-3B-3: Term Of Tax; Payment; Disposition Of Funds
3-3B-4: Failure To Pay Tax
3-3B-5: Enforcement Of Payment
3-3B-1: TAX LEVIED; RATE:
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the
gross receipts from residential and commercial sales of gas in the Town, which
tax shall be in lieu of any other Franchise, License, Occupation, or Excise Tax
levied by the Town, all as provided by State law. (2011 Code § 12-47)
3-3B-2: APPLICATION OF TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The tax levied under this article shall, when levied, apply to all persons,
firms, associations, or corporations engaged in business of furnishing gas
within the Town limits, except it shall not apply to any person, firm,
association, or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the Town.
(2011 Code § 12-48)
3-3B-3: TERM OF TAX; PAYMENT; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
The tax levied under this article on gas receipts shall be levied for a term of
not less than one (1) year and shall be payable monthly and placed in the
General Revenue Fund of the Town. (2011 Code § 12-49; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3B-4: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied
shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the Town, and in
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or
corporation for the amount of tax, and all expenses of collecting same,
including reasonable attorney fees. (2011 Code § 12-50)
3-3B-5: ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets
located within the Town of any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
business of selling gas within the Town limits. (2011 Code § 12-51)
CHAPTER 4
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
SECTION:
3-4-1: Inspection Fee And Service Charge
3-4-2: Conditions
3-4-3: Failure To Pay Inspection Fee
3-4-1: INSPECTION FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon
each person operating a telephone exchange in the Town in an amount equal to
two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange
telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the Town to
compensate the Town for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to
the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation, and police
control of the construction of lines and equipment of such telephone company in
the Town.
   B.   The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the Town on
or before March 1 of each year, and shall be paid into and appropriated and
expended from the general revenue fund of the Town. (Ord. 358, - -2022)
3-4-2: CONDITIONS:
During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this article by the
owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue
to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes;
provided, however, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any
existing arrangement whereby the Town is permitted to use underground conduit,
duct space or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm and/or police
call systems of the Town. (Ord. 358, - -2022)
3-4-3: FAILURE TO PAY INSPECTION FEE:
Should any person, firm or corporation fail or refuse to pay such fee when
levied, action may be taken against such person, firm or corporation for the
amount of such fees. All expenses for collection of the same, including
reasonable attorney fees, shall be paid by the party or parties that said
action is taken against. (Ord. 358, - -2022)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Town License And State Sales Tax Permit Required
4-1-2: Application For License; Compliance With Provisions; Issuance Of License
4-1-3: Expiration Of License
4-1-4: License Fees
4-1-5: Separate Licenses Required
4-1-6: Duplicate Licenses
4-1-7: Nontransferability Of License
4-1-8: Display Of License
4-1-9: Revocation Of License
4-1-10: Violations; Penalty
4-1-1: TOWN LICENSE AND STATE SALES TAX PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Town License: It is unlawful for any person, firm, association, or
corporation to engage in, exercise, or pursue any business, profession, trade,
occupation, or privilege for which a license fee is levied by any provision of
this Code or Town ordinance without paying the license fee, and securing and
possessing a valid license therefor. (2011 Code § 5-1; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   State Sales Tax Permit: In order to receive a license under this
chapter, the applicant shall possess a valid and current State Sales Tax permit
unless the applicant can prove to the Town Clerk-Treasurer's satisfaction that
he is not a "vendor" within the definition of the State Sales Tax Code. A copy
of the State Sales Tax permit shall be provided by the applicant to the Clerk-
Treasurer. (2011 Code § 5-10)
4-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; ISSUANCE OF
LICENSE:
Upon making proper application to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, the payment of the
license fee, and fulfillment of any other condition which may be prescribed by
law and/or ordinance, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license therefor;
provided, that the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue any license pursuant to
this chapter until the Town Board has approved the application therefor. (2011
Code § 5-1; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-3: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
Annual licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. (2011 Code § 5-1; amd.
2017 Code)
4-1-4: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fees Established: The fees for occupation licenses in the Town shall be
as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees. (2017 Code)
   B.   Proration Of Fees: When an annual license is issued after July 1 for
the remainder of the fiscal year to a person, firm, association, or corporation
just beginning to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession, trade,
occupation, or privilege, the fee collected shall be a fractional part of the
annual fee equal to the fraction of the fiscal year remaining. (2011 Code § 5-
1; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-5: SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED:
Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege for which a license is required, at
or from more than one (1) place in the Town, or who engages in, exercises, or
pursues more than one (1) business, profession, trade, occupation or privilege,
shall pay the fee and secure a separate license for each such place and/or each
business. (2011 Code § 5-2)
4-1-6: DUPLICATE LICENSES:
Whenever any license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business, profession,
trade, occupation, or privilege has been lost or destroyed without any wrongful
act or connivance by the holder, the Town Clerk-Treasurer, upon application,
shall issue a duplicate license for the unexpired time. Before the duplicate is
issued, the holder shall make and file with the Town Clerk- Treasurer an
affidavit that the license has not been transferred, that it has been lost or
destroyed without any wrongful act or connivance by the holder and that if
believed lost, he has made diligent search for it and has not been able to find
it. The fee for every duplicate license issued, payable to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, shall be as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of
the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 5-6; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-7: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-107 prohibits the assignment or transfer of
licenses, and hence, assignment or transfer of licenses shall not be permitted
in the Town. (2011 Code § 5-5)
4-1-8: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise, or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege shall conspicuously display the
license at all times in some part of his place of business or activity where a
person who has entered the place may readily see it; or, if he has no
particular place of business or activity, shall carry the license and shall
display it to any person who requests to see it. Provided, that in lieu of the
above manner of display such license, when licenses are required for coin
operated amusement devices, vending machines, and similar devices and
equipment, the license may be placed on or attached to such devices or
equipment in such position and manner that it will be clearly visible, and
shall be so placed or attached that the license is readable. It is unlawful to
fail or refuse to display the license as required in this section. (2011 Code §
5-3)
4-1-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued by the Town to any person, firm, association or corporation
to engage in, exercise, or pursue any business, profession, trade, occupation,
or privilege may be revoked by the Town Board of Trustees, after adequate
opportunity for hearing, for the following reasons:
   A.   That the licensee is engaging in, exercising, or pursuing the business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege in such a manner that he has
created a public nuisance as defined by 50 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1 and 2.
(2011 Code § 5-4)
   B.   Serious or repeated violation of the law, this Code or Town ordinances.
Provided, that a valid license may be revoked only when the business,
profession, trade, occupation, or privilege is one which the Town Board of
Trustees has power to prohibit because of its nature or because of the manner
in which it is engaged in, exercised, or pursued. (2011 Code § 5-4; amd. 2017
Code)
4-1-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or exchange, or offer
for sale, barter, or exchange, any foods, wares, merchandise, or other physical
thing of value for which a license is required by this chapter without said
license. (2011 Code § 5-7)
   B.   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any legal order or regulation made pursuant hereto shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 5-25)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE A. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-2A-1: Purpose
4-2A-2: Definition Of Terms
4-2A-3: Certificates Of Compliance; Occupation Tax
4-2A-4: Location Restrictions
4-2A-5: Conditions Of Sales And Conduct Of Business
4-2A-6: Prohibitions Regarding Specific Licensees
4-2A-7: Additional Regulations For Retail Package Stores (Rep. by Ord. 343, 9-
19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-8: Sales, Furnishing To Certain Persons Prohibited
4-2A-9: Persons Under Twenty One
4-2A-10: Consumption In Public
4-2A-11: Transporting Intoxicating Beverages
4-2A-12: Violations; Penalty
4-2A-1: PURPOSE:
This article is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the Town to
preserve the public peace, safety, health, and good order thereof, and to aid
the enforcement of the policy of the State of Oklahoma as established by the
Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (2011 Code § 9-16)
4-2A-2: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
ABLE COMMISSION OR COMMISSION: Means the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission.
ACT: The Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
ALCOHOL: Means and includes hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or
spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does
not include wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced as
denatured in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Means alcohol, spirits, beer and wine as those terms are
defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings.
APPLICANT: Means any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any
individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold
any license issued in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act.
BEER: Means any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. "Beer" may or may not contain hops or other vegetable
products. "Beer" includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as
Japanese rice wine.
BEER DISTRIBUTOR: Means and includes any person licensed to distribute beer for
retail sale in the State, but does not include a holder of a small brewer self-
distribution license or brewpub self-distribution license. The term
"distributor", as used in this Act, shall be construed to refer to a beer
distributor.
BEER KEG: Means any manufacturer-sealed, single container that contains not
less than four (4) gallons of beer.
BOTTLE CLUB: Means any establishment in a county which has not authorized the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required
to be licensed to keep, mix and serve alcoholic beverages belonging to club
members on club premises.
BRAND: Means any word, name, group of letters, symbol or combination thereof,
that is adopted and used by a licensed manufacturer to identify a specific beer
and to distinguish that product from another beer.
BRAND EXTENSION: Means:
   A.   After the effective date of this Act, any brand of beer introduced by a
manufacturer in this State which either:
      1. Incorporates all or a substantial part of the unique features of a
preexisting brand of the same licensed manufacturer, or
      2. Relies to a significant extent on the goodwill associated with the
preexisting brand, or
   B.   Any brand of beer that a manufacturer, the majority of whose total
volume of all brands of beer distributed in this State by such manufacturer on
January 1, 2016, was distributed as low-point beer, desires to sell,
introduces, begins selling or theretofore has sold and desires to continue
selling a strong beer in this State which either:
      1. Incorporates or incorporated all or a substantial part of the unique
features of a preexisting low-point beer brand of the same licensed
manufacturer, or
      2. Relies or relied to a significant extent on the goodwill associated
with a preexisting low- point beer brand.
BREWER: Means and includes any person who manufactures for human consumption by
the use of raw materials or other ingredients any beer upon which a license fee
and a tax are imposed by any law of this State.
BREWPUB: Means a licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food
and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises consumption.
CIDER: Means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of
fruit juice, including but not limited to flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider. For the purposes of the distribution of this product, cider may be
distributed by either wine and spirits wholesalers or beer distributors.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Means any person primarily engaged in retailing a limited
range of general household items and groceries, with extended hours of
operation, whether or not engaged in retail sales of automotive fuels in
combination with such sales.
CONVICTED AND CONVICTION: Mean and include a finding of guilt resulting from a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the decision of a court or Magistrate or the
verdict of a jury, irrespective of the pronouncement of judgment or the
suspension thereof.
DIRECTOR: Means the Director of the ABLE Commission.
DISTILLER: Means any person who produces spirits from any source or substance,
or any person who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for distillation or
for the production of spirits (except a person making or using such material in
the authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by
fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits
from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort
or wash, has also in his or her possession or use a still.
DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT: Means the written agreement between the distributor and
manufacturer as set forth in title 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 3-108.
DRUG STORE: Means a person primarily engaged in retailing prescription and
nonprescription drugs and medicines.
DUAL-STRENGTH BEER: Means a brand of beer that, immediately prior to the
effective date of this Act, was being sold and distributed in this State:
   A.   As a low-point beer pursuant to the Low-Point Beer Distribution Act in
effect immediately prior to the effective date of this Act, and
   B.   As strong beer pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act in effect
immediately prior to the effective date of this Act.
Dual-strength beer does not include a brand of beer that arose as a result of a
brand extension as defined in this section.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: Means the value in the subject territory covered by the
written agreement with the distributor or wholesaler that would be determined
in an arm's length transaction entered into without duress or threat of
termination of the distributor's or wholesaler's rights and shall include all
elements of value, including goodwill and going-concern value.
GOOD CAUSE: Means:
   A.   Failure by the distributor to comply with the material and reasonable
provisions of a written agreement or understanding with the manufacturer, or
   B.   Failure by the distributor to comply with the duty of good faith.
GOOD FAITH: Means the duty of each party to any distributor agreement and all
officers, employees or agents thereof to act with honesty in fact and within
reasonable standards of fair dealing in the trade.
GROCERY STORE: Means a person primarily engaged in retailing a general line of
food, such as canned or frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh
and prepared meats, fish and poultry.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Means an establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink and which contains guestroom accommodations
with respect to which the predominant relationship existing between the
occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the establishment is that of
innkeeper and guest. For purposes of this section, the existence of other legal
relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator thereof shall
be immaterial.
LEGAL NEWSPAPER: Means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for
publication of legal notices as prescribed in sections 101 through 114 of title
25 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, and any agent, servant or employee of such licensee while
in the performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed business
or on the licensed premises.
LOW-POINT BEER: Shall mean any beverages containing more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths
percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, including but not limited to, beer or cereal
malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion by barley
or other grain, malt or similar products.
MANUFACTURER: Means a brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of any
alcoholic beverage and its subsidiaries, affiliates and parent companies.
MANUFACTURER'S AGENT: Means a salaried or commissioned salesperson who is the
agent authorized to act on behalf of the manufacturer or nonresident seller in
the State.
MEALS: Means foods commonly ordered at lunch or dinner and at least part of
which is cooked on the licensed premises and requires the use of dining
implements for consumption. Provided, that the service of only food such as
appetizers, sandwiches, salads or desserts shall not be considered "meals".
MINI-BAR: Means a closed container, either refrigerated in whole or in part, or
nonrefrigerated, and access to the interior of which is:
   A.   Restricted by means of a locking device which requires the use of a
key, magnetic card or similar device, or
   B.   Controlled at all times by the licensee.
MIXED BEVERAGE COOLER: Means any beverage, by whatever name designated,
consisting of an alcoholic beverage and fruit or vegetable juice, fruit or
vegetable flavorings, dairy products or carbonated water containing more than
one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol measured by volume but not more
than seven percent (7%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F)
and which is packaged in a container not larger than three hundred seventy five
milliliters (375 mL). Such term shall include but not be limited to the
beverage popularly known as a "wine cooler".
MIXED BEVERAGES: Means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal
size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a
mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or
special event license.
MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Means an establishment which is licensed by section
4-1-1 of this title to sell alcoholic beverages by the individual drink and
where motion pictures are exhibited, and to which the general public is
admitted.
NONRESIDENT SELLER: Means any person licensed pursuant to 37A Oklahoma Statutes
section 2-135.
OCCUPATION (As Used In Connection With Occupation Tax): Means the sites
occupied as the places of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, beer
distributors, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, on-premises beer and wine
licensees, bottle clubs, caterers, public event and special event licensees.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Means any container of alcoholic beverage filled and stamped
or sealed by the manufacturer.
PACKAGE STORE: Means any sole proprietor or partnership that qualifies to sell
wine, beer and/or spirits for off-premises consumption and that is not a
grocery store, convenience store or drug store, or other retail outlet that is
not permitted to sell wine or beer for off-premises consumption.
PATRON: Means any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a licensee
or who is not a licensee.
PERSON: Means an individual, any type of partnership, corporation, association,
limited liability company or any individual involved in the legal structure of
any such business entity.
PREMISES: Means the grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining to
the grounds including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect
control of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the control of the
licensee and used in connection with or in furtherance of the business covered
by a license. Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the
purpose of:
   A.   Allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages by private
parties which are closed to the general public, or
   B.   Allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages provided
by a private party.
This exception shall in no way limit the licensee's concurrent responsibility
for any violations of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act occurring on
the licensed premises.
PRIVATE EVENT: Means a social gathering or event attended by invited guests who
share a common cause, membership, business or task and have a prior established
relationship. For purposes of this definition, advertisement for general public
attendance or sales of tickets to the general public shall not constitute a
private event.
PUBLIC EVENT: Means any event that can be attended by the general public.
RECTIFIER: Means any person who rectifies, purifies or refines spirits or wines
by any process (other than by original and continuous distillation, or original
and continuous processing, from mash, wort, wash or other substance, through
continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is complete),
and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining spirits, shall by
mixing (except for immediate consumption on the premises where mixed) such
spirits, wine or other liquor with any material, manufactures any spurious,
imitation or compound liquors for sale, under the name of whiskey, brandy, rum,
gin, wine, spirits, cordials or any other name.
REGULATION OR RULE: Means a formal rule of general application promulgated by
the ABLE Commission as herein required.
RESTAURANT: Means an establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
by the individual drink for on-premises consumption and where food is prepared
and sold for immediate consumption on the premises.
RETAIL CONTAINER FOR SPIRITS AND WINES: Means an original package of any
capacity approved by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
RETAIL SALESPERSON: Means a salesperson soliciting orders from and calling upon
retail alcoholic beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
RETAILER: Means a package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off- premises consumption pursuant to
a retail spirits license, retail wine license or retail beer license.
SALE: Means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor or as an agent, servant or employee. The term "sale" is
also declared to be and include the use or consumption in this State of any
alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without this State, upon
which the Excise Tax levied by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act has
not been paid or exempted.
SHORT-ORDER FOOD: Means food other than full meals including but not limited to
sandwiches, soups and salads. Provided that popcorn, chips and other similar
snack food shall not be considered "short-order food".
SMALL BREWER: Means a brewer who manufactures less than twenty five thousand
(25,000) barrels of beer annually pursuant to a validly issued small brewer
license hereunder.
SMALL FARM WINE: Means a wine that is produced by a small farm winery with
seventy five percent (75%) or more Oklahoma-grown grapes, berries, other
fruits, honey or vegetables.
SMALL FARM WINERY: Means a wine-making establishment that does not annually
produce for sale more than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons of wine as
reported on the United States Department of the Treasury, Alcohol and Tobacco
Tax and Trade Bureau, Report of Wine Premises Operations (TTB Form 5120.17).
SPARKLING WINE: Means champagne or any artificially carbonated wine.
SPECIAL EVENT: Means an entertainment, recreation or marketing event that
occurs at a single location on an irregular basis and at which alcoholic
beverages are sold.
SPIRITS: Means any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more than
one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by
distillation, whether or not mixed with other substances in solution and
includes those products known as whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs,
cordials and fortified wines and similar compounds, but shall not include any
alcohol liquid completely denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and
regulations pursuant thereto.
STRONG BEER: Means beer which, prior to the effective date of this Act, was
distributed pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, section
501 et seq., of title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SUCCESSOR MANUFACTURER: Means a primary source of supply, a brewer or an
importer that acquires rights to a beer brand from a predecessor manufacturer.
TAX COMMISSION: Means the Oklahoma Tax Commission.
TERRITORY: Means a geographic region with a specified boundary.
WINE: Means and includes any beverage containing more than one- half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume and not more than twenty four percent
(24%) alcohol by volume at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) obtained by the
fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or
other products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added,
and includes vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
WINE AND SPIRITS WHOLESALER OR WINE AND SPIRITS DISTRIBUTOR: Means and includes
any sole proprietorship or partnership licensed to distribute wine and spirits
in the State. The term "wholesaler", as used in this Act, shall be construed to
refer to a wine and spirits wholesaler.
Words in the plural include the singular, and vice versa, and words imparting
the masculine gender include the feminine, as well as persons and licensees as
defined in this section. (Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-3: CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE; OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Application Requirements: Every applicant for a certificate of
compliance with the Zoning, Fire, Health and Safety Codes of the Town, required
by Oklahoma Statutes, shall apply at the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer by
filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office.
   B.   Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of
compliance, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall cause an investigation to be made to
determine whether the premises proposed for licensed operations complies with
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any Health, Fire, Building and other
Safety Codes applicable thereto.
   C.   Time Required For Action: The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall act on all
such applications within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof.
   D.   Issuance Of Certificates; Signatures Required:
      1.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is
in compliance with all applicable Zoning Ordinances, a certificate of zoning
shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
      2.   Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is
in compliance with all applicable Fire, Safety, and Health Codes, a certificate
of compliance shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
      3.   The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the Mayor or
the Board of Trustees.
   E.   Taxes Enumerated:
      1.   There is hereby levied an annual tax upon the following occupations
hereinafter named, and in the sum set opposite the names of such occupation:
Brewer license                                       $1,250.00
Small brewer license                                 125.00
Distiller license                                    3,125.00
Winemaker license                                    625.00
Small farm winery license                            75.00
Rectifier license                                    3,125.00
Wine and spirits wholesaler license                  3,000.00
Beer distributor license                             750.00
The following retail spirits license fees shall be    
determined by the latest Federal Decennial Census:
 Retail spirits license for cities and towns from   305.00
  200 to 2,500 population
 Retail spirits license for cities and towns from   605.00
  2,501 to 5,000 population
 Retail spirits license for cities and towns over   905.00
  5,000 population
Retail wine license                                  1,000.00
Retail beer license                                  500.00
Mixed beverage license                               1,005.00 (initial license)
                                                     905.00 (renewal)
Mixed beverage/caterer combination license           1,250.00
On-premises beer and wine license                    500.00 (initial license)
                                                     450.00 (renewal)
Bottle club license                                  1,000.00 (initial license)
                                                     900.00 (renewal)
Caterer license                                      1,005.00 (initial license)
                                                     905.00 (renewal)
Annual special event license                         55.00
Quarterly special event license                      55.00
Hotel beverage license                               1,005.00 (initial license)
                                                     905.00 (renewal)
Airline/railroad beverage license                    1,005.00 (initial license)
                                                     905.00 (renewal)
Agent license                                        55.00
Employee license                                     30.00
Industrial license                                   23.00
Carrier license                                      23.00
Private carrier license                              23.00
Bonded warehouse license                             190.00
Storage license                                      23.00
Nonresident seller license or manufacturer's license 750.00
Manufacturer's agent license                         55.00
Sacramental wine supplier license                    100.00
Charitable auction license                           1.00
Charitable alcoholic beverage license                55.00
Winemaker self-distribution license                  750.00
Annual public event license                          1,005.00
One-time public event license                        255.00
Small brewer self-distribution license               750.00
Brewpub license                                      1,005.00
Brewpub self-distribution license                    750.00
 
(Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-4: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any beer distributor, bottle club, brewery, brew pub
or winery, which has been licensed by the ABLE Commission and which has as its
main purpose the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises, or package store, to be located within three hundred feet (300')
of any public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used
for worship services and religious activities; however, a college or university
located within an improvement district created pursuant to section 39-103.1 of
title 11 of the Oklahoma Statutes may waive the three hundred foot (300')
requirement by providing written notice to the establishment seeking the
license and to the ABLE Commission. Provided, a college or university prior to
waiving the three hundred foot (300') requirement found in this section shall
publish a notice of its intention to waive such requirement in a legal
newspaper of general circulation within the State at least thirty (30) days but
not more than forty (40) days prior to providing any written notice, waiving
the three hundred foot (300') requirement, to the establishment seeking the
license or to the ABLE Commission. As used in this section "legal newspaper of
general circulation in this State" means a newspaper meeting the requisites of
a newspaper for publication of legal notices as prescribed in section 106 of
title 25 of the Oklahoma Statutes in a majority of the counties in this State.
The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest
property line of such public or private school or church to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage establishment, beer
and wine establishment, bottle club or package store which has been licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments, or bottle clubs,
which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000; provided, if at
the time of application for license renewal the licensed location has not been
in actual operation for a continuous period more than sixty (60) days, the
license shall not be renewed. If any school or church shall be established
within three hundred feet (300') of any package store, mixed beverage
establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club subject to the
provisions of this section after such package store, mixed beverage
establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club has been licensed,
the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the renewal of such
license if there has not been a lapse of more than sixty (60) days. When any
mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment or bottle club
subject to the provisions of this section which has a license to sell alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption, or package store, changes ownership or
the operator thereof is changed and such change of ownership results in the
same type of business being conducted on the premises, the provisions of this
section shall not be a deterrent to the issuance of a license to the new owner
or operator if he or she is otherwise qualified. (Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-
1-2018)
4-2A-5: CONDITIONS OF SALES AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
No licensee of the ABLE Commission shall:
   A.   Receive, possess, or sell any alcoholic beverage except as authorized
by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and by the license which he
holds.
   B.   Employ any person under the age of twenty one (21) in the selling or
handling of alcoholic beverages. Provided, that a mixed beverage, beer and
wine, caterer, public event or special event licensee may employ servers who
are at least eighteen (18) years of age, except persons under twenty one (21)
years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas, and a mixed
beverage, caterer, public event or special event licensee may employ or hire
musical bands who have musicians who are under twenty one (21) years of age if
each such musician is either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has
on his person, to be made available for inspection upon demand by any ABLE
Commission officer or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit
from the parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to
perform in designated bar or lounge areas.
   C.   Operate an establishment or do business in the Town unless the current
Occupation Tax has been paid.
   D.   Permit or allow any patron or person to exit the licensed premises with
an open container of any alcoholic beverage. Provided, that this prohibition
shall not be applicable to closed original wine containers removed from the
premises of restaurants, hotels, and motels, or to closed original containers
of alcoholic beverages transported to and from the place of business of a
licensed caterer by the caterer or his employee. (2011 Code § 9-9; amd. 2017
Code)
   E.   Use any of the following means or inducements to stimulate the
consumption of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to:
      1.   Deliver more than two (2) drinks to one person at one time,
      2.   Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks
at a price that is less than six percent (6%) below the markup of the cost to
the mixed beverage licensee; provided, a mixed beverage licensee shall be
permitted to offer these drink specials on any particular hour of any
particular day and shall not be required to offer these drink specials for an
entire calendar week or from open to close,
      3.   Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions
not open to the public,
      4.   Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day or portion thereof at prices less than those charged the general
public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public,
      5.   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink
without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink
during the same calendar week, or
      6.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes. (Ord. 343, 9-19-
2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
   F.   Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium, or consideration for
any lottery, game of chance or skill or any type of competition. (2011 Code)
Provided, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the
advertising or offering of food or entertainment in licensed establishments.
(Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-6: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING SPECIFIC LICENSEES:
   A.   Package Store Licensees: No package store licensee shall:
      1.   Suffer or permit any retail container to be opened or any alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on his licensed premises. (2011 Code § 9-10)
      2.   Sell any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Monday
through Saturday, and shall not be permitted to be open on Thanksgiving Day or
Christmas Day; provided, if Custer County, pursuant to the provisions of
subsections B and C of section 3-124, title 37A of the Oklahoma Statutes, elect
to allow such sales between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday. Retail spirits licensees shall be permitted
to sell alcoholic beverages on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary
or special election whether on a national, State, County, or Town election,
provided that the election day does not occur on any day on which such sales
are otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
      3.   Sell any alcoholic beverage on credit; provided, that acceptance by
a retail liquor store of a cash or debit card, or a nationally recognized
credit card, in lieu of actual cash payment does not constitute the extension
of credit.
      4.   Offer or furnish any prize, premium, gift or similar inducement to a
consumer in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages. (2011 Code § 9-10)
   B.   Mixed Beverage Licensees: No mixed beverage licensee shall:
      1.   Purchase or receive any alcoholic beverage other than from a person
holding a wholesaler or Class B wholesaler license issued pursuant to the
provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act;
      2.   Transport alcoholic beverages from the place of purchase to his
licensed premises unless said licensee also holds a private carrier license
issued by the ABLE Commission; or
      3.   Keep or knowingly permit any alcoholic beverage to be kept, brought
or consumed upon his licensed premises which is not allowed to be sold or
served upon such premises. (2011 Code § 9-11)
      4.   No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and
wine Occupational Tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such
establishment shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any mixed
beverages, beer or wine on the premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
   C.   Special Event Or Caterer Licensees: No special event or caterer
licensee shall: (2011 Code § 9-12)
      1.   Purchase or receive any alcoholic beverage other than from a person
holding a wholesaler or Class B wholesaler license issued pursuant to the
provisions of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act; provided, a special
event or caterer licensee may purchase wine produced at wineries in the State
directly from an Oklahoma winemaker as provided in section 3 of article XXVIII
of the Oklahoma Constitution; or (2011 Code § 9-12; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Transport alcoholic beverages from the place of purchase to his
licensed premises unless said licensee also holds a private carrier license
issued by the ABLE Commission. (2011 Code § 9-12)
   D.   Additional Prohibitions For Mixed Beverage, Caterer, Charitable Event,
Public Event Or Special Event Licensees And Employees: No mixed beverage,
caterer, charitable event, public event or special event licensee, or any
employee, manager, operator or agent thereof, shall: (2011 Code § 9-14; amd.
2017 Code)
      1.   Consume or be under the influence of alcoholic beverage during the
hours he is on duty. For the purpose of this subsection, the licensee will be
deemed to be on duty from the time he first comes on duty until the time he
goes off duty at the end of the shift, including any break periods permitted by
management. This subsection D1 shall not apply to any person who works on the
premises as an entertainer only;
      2.   Permit or tolerate any conduct or language which is intended to
threaten another with physical harm or any fighting of offensive physical
contact in or upon the licensed premises or areas just outside the licensed
premises which are controlled by the licensee;
      3.   Permit empty or discarded alcoholic beverage containers to be in
public view outside the licensed premises. All empty or discarded containers
shall be disposed of in accordance with ABLE Commission rules and regulations;
      4.   Permit any illegal gambling activity, violations of the State
narcotics and dangerous drugs laws, or prostitution activity, or any other
criminal conduct to occur on the licensed premises;
      5.   Refuse or fail to promptly open a door to the licensed premises upon
request of an agent or inspector of the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission or any other peace officer to enter the premises when the licensee
or employee knows or should know that such request is made by an agent or
inspector of the ABLE Commission or any other peace officer. This subsection D5
shall not be construed to deny agents of the ABLE Commission or any other peace
officer access at any time to any licensed premises;
      6.   Permit a sealed or unsealed container of alcoholic beverage to be
removed from the licensed premises. Provided, that restaurants, hotels and
motels may permit the removal of closed original wine containers, the contents
of which have been partially consumed. This subsection D6 shall not be
construed to prohibit or restrict hotels or motels who are holders of mixed
beverage licenses from allowing alcoholic beverages to be served away from the
bar area anywhere on the licensed premises; or
      7.   Destroy, damage, alter, remove or conceal potential evidence, or
attempt to do so, or refuse to surrender evidence when lawfully requested to do
so by an inspector, agent or any other peace officer, or incite another person
to do any of the above. (2011 Code § 9-14)
4-2A-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL PACKAGE STORES:
(Rep. by Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-8: SALES, FURNISHING TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
No person, at any place in the Town, shall knowingly sell, furnish, or give any
alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty one (21) years of age, or to any
intoxicated person, or to any person who has been adjudged insane, or mentally
deficient. (2011 Code § 9-8)
4-2A-9: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE:
   A.   Employment:
      1.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be employed
in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic
beverages at any place within the Town.
      2.   No person shall employ or assist, or aid in causing the employment
of, any person under the age of twenty one (21) years at any place within the
Town limits in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of
alcoholic beverages.
   B.   Presence On Package Store Premises: No person under the age of twenty
one (21) years shall be permitted to remain within or to loiter about the
premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store. Violation of this subsection
shall subject the owner or proprietor, as well as the underage person, to
prosecution.
   C.   False Identification: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years
shall misrepresent his age in writing or by presenting false documentation of
age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages or
to influence his employment. (2011 Code § 9-8)
   D.   Possession: It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years to be in possession of or to have under his or
her control within the Town any alcoholic beverages of any kind, including
beer, ale or wine, which contains more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%)
alcohol, measured by weight, and which is capable of being used as a beverage,
or to carry on his or her person or in any vehicle which he or she is operating
or in which he or she is riding within the Town. (2011 Code § 9-8; amd. 2017
Code)
4-2A-10: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC:
   A.   Prohibition: Except as otherwise provided by law, any person who shall,
in any public place or building, or upon any public or private road or alley,
or upon any parking or vacant lot, drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating
beverage or liquor of any kind or beer or, who shall be intoxicated in any
public place or building or public or private road, street or alley, or any
public gathering, or who shall be drunk or intoxicated and shall disturb the
peace of any person, shall be guilty of an offense.
   B.   Public Place Defined: "Public place" shall mean any place other than
the premises of a licensee of the ABLE Commission who is authorized to sell or
serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink or on the premises of any
place for which any person has received a special event or caterer's license
from the ABLE Commission. (Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
4-2A-11: TRANSPORTING INTOXICATING BEVERAGES:
   A.   As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection:
    BUS: A vehicle, as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-105, chartered
for transportation of persons for hire. It shall not mean a school bus, as
defined by 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-160, transporting children or a
vehicle operated pursuant to a franchise with the Town operating over a
regularly scheduled route.
   LIMOUSINE: A chauffeur driven motor vehicle, other than a bus or taxicab, as
defined by 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-174, designed and used for
transportation of persons for compensation.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any operator to knowingly transport or for any passenger to
possess in any moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any
intoxicating beverage as defined by 37 Oklahoma Statutes section 163.1, except
in the original container which shall not have been opened and from which the
original cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container
be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire
compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which
is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is
in motion.
   C.   The provisions of subsection B of this section shall not apply to the
passenger area of buses and limousines; however, it shall be unlawful for the
driver of the bus or limousine to consume or have in the driver's immediate
possession any intoxicating beverage. (2017 Code)
4-2A-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Any State licensee who violates the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act shall be in violation of this article. (2011 Code § 9-15)
   B.   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
article or any legal order or regulation made pursuant hereto shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 9-40)
CHAPTER 3
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition Of Terms
4-3-2: Medical Marijuana Licenses
4-3-3: Commercial Growth And Production Of Medial Marijuana
4-3-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS:
 
                                 Means an establishment licensed under title
                                 63, section 422 of the Oklahoma Statutes
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION:   whereby the growing of medical marijuana is
                                 conducted on the premises and then sold to a
                                 licensed retailer or processor.
                                 Means an establishment licensed under title
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY:    63, section 421 of the Oklahoma Statutes
                                 whereby the retail sale of medical marijuana
                                 is conducted on the premises.
                                 Means an establishment licensed under title
                                 63, section 423 of the Oklahoma Statutes,
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSOR:     whereby marijuana plants are processed
                                 (packaged) into concentrates, edibles, and
                                 other forms for consumption.
                                 Medical marijuana dispensaries, medical
                                 marijuana processors, and medical marijuana
RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS: cultivation and defined and allowed for
                                 herein. (Ord. 340, 8-13-2018; amd. Ord. 349,
                                 2-8-2021)
 
4-3-2: MEDICAL MARIJUANA LICENSES:
   A.   All operators of Retail Marijuana Establishments are required to
annually obtain a Retail Marijuana Establishment permit from the City Clerk.
   B.   The Municipal Governing body will establish by resolution a fee to
obtain the Retail Marijuana Establishment Permit. The fee shall be used to
offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
   C.   A Retail Marijuana Establishment Permit will not be granted to any
applicants where the proposed location would be located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any of the following uses:
      1.   Private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or
trade school, college or university;
      2.   Any library or museum;
      3.   Any public playground;
      4.   Any child care center;
      5.   Any place of worship or religious assembly;
      6.   Any public park, pool, or recreation facility.
   D.   For the distance requirements outlined in this ordinance, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the proposed Medical Marijuana Dispensary to the
nearest entrance of the building or unit described above.
   E.   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off
premises.
   F.   Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the
Retail Marijuana Establishments permit.
   G.   It is the intent of the Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma that nothing in the
Retail Marijuana Establishment Ordinance be construed to:
      1.   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public
nuisance;
      2.   Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or
      3.   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
state law. (Ord. 340, 8-13-2018; amd. Ord. 349, 2-8-2021)
4-3-3: COMMERCIAL GROWTH AND PRODUCTION OF MEDIAL MARIJUANA:
   A.   Medical marijuana processing facility permit or medical marijuana
cultivation permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed
location is outside of an Industrial or Commercial Zone.
   B.   [KW/hr rate]. (Ord. 349, 2-8-2021)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Abandoned Containers
5-1-2: Expectorating In Public
5-1-3: Storage Of Explosives And Toxic Substances
5-1-4: Enforcement And Penalties
5-1-1: ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
No person, firm or corporation shall abandon or discard, in any place
accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest, of a capacity
of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid or
door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, and no
person, firm or corporation who, being the owner, lessee, or manager of such
place, shall permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice
chest to remain in such condition. (2017 Code)
5-1-2: EXPECTORATING IN PUBLIC:
Any person expectorating on the streets, sidewalks, doorways, or stairways
within the Town limits shall be guilty of an offense. (2011 Code § 10-21)
5-1-3: STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND TOXIC SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Explosives:
      1.   Prohibitions:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep or to have
on his premises or in his possession any explosive articles in the nature of
dynamite, blasting powder or other explosive materials of any kind or nature
without first having complied with the laws of the State of Oklahoma for the
purpose of selling, storing or keeping such articles.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or store any
explosive on any premises which is occupied as a dwelling, school, theater or
other place of public amusement, and any person storing explosives for sale to
the general public must comply with the general Statutes of the State of
Oklahoma in the sale and storage of said explosives. (2011 Code § 8-35)
      2.   Violation; Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this subsection A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 8-36)
   B.   Anhydrous Ammonia: It shall be unlawful for any person, company, or
corporation to store anhydrous ammonia within the corporate limits of the Town
for a period of more than twenty four (24) hours, and storage of anhydrous
ammonia for more than twenty four (24) hours is hereby prohibited by this
subsection. Provided, that this subsection shall not prohibit any such
installations in existence at the effective date hereof. (2011 Code § 10-23)
5-1-4: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   County Health Department To Enforce:
      1.   Anywhere in this title where the words "Health Officer" are used
shall be construed to mean the Director of the County Health Department or his
duly designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of the Mayor and
Town Board of Trustees to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of
the Town as set out in this subsection and any such decisions rendered under
this subsection shall be subject to review by the governing board upon appeal
from an offender. (2011 Code § 10-26)
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct or interfere with
any health officer charged with enforcement of the health laws of the Town.
(2011 Code § 10-27; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Violation; Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this
title is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. (2011 Code § 10-28; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Powers Of Town
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Certain Public Nuisances Enumerated
5-2-4: Nuisances Prohibited
5-2-5: Persons Liable
5-2-6: Lapse Of Time; Effect
5-2-7: Remedial Action
5-2-8: Abatement Of Nuisances Generally
5-2-9: Abatement By Suit In District Court
5-2-10: Abatement Of Health Nuisances
5-2-11: Procedures Cumulative
5-2-12: Violation; Penalty
5-2-1: POWERS OF TOWN:
As provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16, the Town has power to determine
what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and,
for the protection of the public health, the public parks, and the public water
supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the
Town has power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner
and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. (2011 Code § 14-6)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
NUISANCE: Unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or any thing
or any condition which either:
   A.   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of
others;
   B.   Offends decency;
   C.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders
dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal, or basin, or
any public park, square, street or other public property; or
   D.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
PRIVATE NUISANCE: Every nuisance not included in the definition of "public
nuisance" in this section.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: A nuisance which affects at the same time an entire community
or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of
the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. (2011
Code § 14-1)
5-2-3: CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Nuisances Enumerated: In addition to other public nuisances declared by
other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be
nuisances:
      1.   Unwholesome Food Or Drink: The sale, or offering for sale, of
unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or
offerings are made. (2011 Code § 14-7; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Liquor Violations: The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of
alcoholic beverages in violation of State law, this Code or ordinances of the
Town; or the keeping of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for
sale, or furnished in violation of State law, this Code or ordinances of the
Town. (2011 Code § 14-7; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 343, 9-19-2018, eff. 10-1-2018)
      3.   Obscene Materials: The exposure, display, sale or distribution of
obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or
the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold, or distributed.
      4.   Bawdy, Disorderly Houses:
         a.   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards,
slot machines, punchboards, or otherwise.
         b.   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced.
         c.   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of State
law, this Code or Town ordinance are practiced or carried on.
      5.   Noisy Conditions: The continued making of lewd or unusual noises
which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal
which makes such noises.
      6.   Interfering With Wireless Reception: The operation or use of any
electrical apparatus or machine which materially and unduly interferes with
radio or television reception by others.
      7.   Assemblies Obstructing Traffic: Any use of a street or sidewalk or a
place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to
obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which obstructs traffic
thereon, except as may be authorized by law, this Code or Town ordinances.
      8.   Water Flowing, Ice Or Snow Falling Upon Streets: Permitting water or
other liquid to flow or fall or ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk.
      9.   Stagnant Water Bodies: All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies, or
containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which
are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public
safety.
      10.   Conditions Attracting Pests: Rank weeds or grass, carcasses,
accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things which are, or are likely to
be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease causing germs,
and the premises on which such exist.
      11.   Dangerous Structures: Any building or structure which is dangerous
to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition.
      12.   Dangerous Premises: Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so
constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety.
      13.   Fire And Explosive Hazards: Any fire or explosion hazard which
endangers the public safety.
      14.   Dangerous Businesses: Any occupation or activity which endangers
the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare.
      15.   Wrecked, Junked Vehicles: Any partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle or vehicles and/or other material commonly
known as "junk" which is allowed to remain attended or unattended and exposed
to the elements upon any private property or any lot, alley, parkway or
sidewalk, or space abutting thereon, to the center of the street or to the
center of the alley in the Town, except where said vehicles and/or junk shall
remain under the control of a licensed salvage yard dealer and in a zoning
district which allows salvage dealers.
   B.   Provisions Cumulative: The enumeration of certain public nuisances in
subsection A of this section shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions
of law, this Code or Town ordinances defining public or private nuisances
either in more general or more specific terms. (2011 Code § 14-7; amd. 2017
Code)
5-2-4: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person including, but not limited to, any owner, lessee
or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the Town or to permit a
nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the Town. (2011 Code §
14-10)
5-2-5: PERSONS LIABLE:
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance
upon or in the use of such property created by a former owner, is liable
therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. (2011 Code § 14-2)
5-2-6: LAPSE OF TIME; EFFECT:
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right. (2011 Code § 14-3)
5-2-7: REMEDIAL ACTION:
   A.   Public Nuisances: The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      1.   Prosecution on complaint before the Municipal Court.
      2.   Prosecution in information or indictment before another appropriate
court.
      3.   Civil action.
      4.   Abatement:
         a.   By the person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section
12. (2011 Code § 14-4)
         b.   By the Town in accordance with law, this Code or Town ordinance.
(2011 Code § 14-4; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Private Nuisances: The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      1.   Civil action; or
      2.   Abatement:
         a.   By the person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes
sections 14 and 15; or (2011 Code § 14-5)
         b.   By the Town in accordance with law, this Code or Town ordinance.
(2011 Code § 14-5; amd. 2017 Code)
5-2-8: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES GENERALLY:
   A.   Summary Abatement: Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a
grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of
one (1) or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that
circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the Chair of the
Board of Trustees or other appropriate officer or agency of the Town government
to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to
reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward
such abatement. (2011 Code § 14-8)
   B.   Statement Of Nuisances: The Chief of the Fire Department, the Town
Marshal, the Town Attorney and the building official, the electrical inspector,
the plumbing inspector or any other officer subordinate to the Board of
Trustees may submit to the Board of Trustees a statement as to the existence of
a nuisance as defined by this Code, the ordinances of the Town or law, and a
request or recommendation that it be abated. The Health Officer, any Town
Trustee, or any resident or residents of the Town may submit such a statement
and request or recommendation to the Board of Trustees.
   C.   Determination Of Nuisance Existence; Notice: The Board of Trustees
shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For
the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the Board shall have the
power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects.
Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, the Board shall
give notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property
concerned and to any other person alleged or deemed responsible for or to be
causing the nuisance, an adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and
opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the owner and other
persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by service by a police
officer, if their names and addresses are known; but, if the names and
addresses are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of
the person, persons or public adversely affected would not be unduly
jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town. (2011 Code § 14-8; amd.
2017 Code)
   D.   Abatement By Responsible Person Or Town; Costs: If the Board finds that
a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner and/or other persons
responsible for or causing the nuisance to abate it within a specified time if
the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or persons or public
adversely affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or
if the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not
abate it within the specified time, the Board shall direct the Chair of the
Board to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is
practical, as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16. The Town Clerk-
Treasurer shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the
owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just
under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid,
such cost shall constitute a debt to the Town collectible as other debts of the
Town may be collected. (2011 Code § 14-8)
5-2-9: ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT:
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the Town
may bring suit in the District Court of the County, as provided in 50 Oklahoma
Statutes section 17. (2011 Code § 14-9; amd. 2017 Code)
5-2-10: ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES:
   A.   Order To Abate: Pursuant to authority granted by 63 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1-1011, the Health Officer shall have authority to order the owner or
occupant of any private premises in the Town to remove from such premises, at
his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to
the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of
disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within
twenty four (24) hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable, and a
failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing
and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or
authorized agent thereof, by the Health Officer or by a police officer, or a
copy thereof may be left at the usual place of abode of the owner, occupant, or
agent, if known and within the State. If the premises is unoccupied and the
residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown, or is without the State,
the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by
publication in at least one (1) issue of a newspaper having a general
circulation in the Town.
   B.   Failure To Comply; Abatement By Town; Costs: If there is not compliance
with the order, the Health Officer may cause the order to be executed and
complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to
the water bill or other Town utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a
user of water from the Town water system or such other utility service. The
cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added and
shall become due and payable and subject to the same regulation relating to
delinquency in payment as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is
not a user of any Town utility service, such cost, after certification to the
Town Clerk-Treasurer, may be collected in any manner in which any other debt
due the Town may be collected. (2011 Code § 14-25)
5-2-11: PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of law, this Code and Town ordinance shall be cumulative on
any other penalties or procedures authorized. (2011 Code § 14-26; amd. 2017
Code)
5-2-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation found violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 14-27)
ARTICLE A. WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH; DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Weeds, Grass And Trash
5-2A-2: Abatement Of Dilapidated Buildings
5-2A-3: Exemptions From Provisions
5-2A-1: WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH:
   A.   Weeds And Grass Declared A Nuisance: It is unlawful for the owner,
tenant or person in charge of a lot, tract, or parcel of land, whether vacant
or not, to permit an obnoxious growth of weeds, grass, or other vegetation
thereon or in the adjacent streets (including parking) and alleys. Such
obnoxious growth of weeds, grass, or other vegetation is also hereby declared a
public nuisance, and may be dealt with and abated as such. (2011 Code § 10-22)
   B.   Abatement Procedures:
      1.   State Regulations Adopted: The Town Board of Trustees, hereinafter
known as "the Board", as a Municipal Governing Body, herein adopts in whole,
but not as an exclusive remedy, the provisions, definitions, and procedures of
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-111 to cause property within the Town limits to
be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed. (2011 Code §§ 4-37,
14-11)
      2.   Summary Abatement: If the Town Board of Trustees causes property
within the corporate limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut
or mowed in accordance with procedures provided in this section, any subsequent
accumulations of trash or excessive weeds or grass growth on the property
occurring within a six (6) month period may be declared to be a nuisance and
may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. At
the time of each such summary abatement, the Town shall notify the property
owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the
property owner may request a hearing within ten (10) days after the date of
mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided in subsection C
of this section. Provided, however, that this subsection B2 shall not apply if
the records of the County Clerk show that the property was transferred after
notice was given pursuant to subsection C of this section. (2011 Code § 14-12)
   C.   Enforcement And Appeals: The Town hereby designates the Town Chief of
Police or his designee as the Administrative Officer to carry out the duties of
the Board in this section. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to
the Town Board of Trustees, as the Municipal Governing Body, from any order of
the Town Chief of Police. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice
of appeal with the Town Clerk-Treasurer within ten (10) days after the
administrative order is rendered. (2011 Code § 14-11)
5-2A-2: ABATEMENT OF DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
   A.   State Regulations Adopted: The Town Board of Trustees, hereinafter
known as "the Board", as a Municipal Governing Body, hereby adopts, in whole,
but not as an exclusive remedy, the provisions, definitions, and procedures of
11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 22-112 and 22-112.1 to cause the removal and/or
boarding and securing of dilapidated buildings within the Town limits. (2011
Code §§ 4-35, 14-15)
   B.   Enforcement And Appeals: The Town hereby designates the Town Chief of
Police or his designee as the Administrative Officer to carry out the duties of
the Board in this section. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to
the Town Board of Trustees, as the Municipal Governing Body, from any order of
the Town Chief of Police or his designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk-Treasurer within ten (10) days
after the administrative order is rendered. (2011 Code § 14-15)
5-2A-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used
for agricultural purposes. (2011 Code § 14-13)
CHAPTER 3
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-3-1: Prohibited Burning Generally; Exceptions
5-3-2: Burning During Burn Bans
5-3-3: Residential Burning
5-3-4: Violation; Penalty
5-3-1: PROHIBITED BURNING GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do or cause to be done
any open burning within the corporate limits of the Town including, but not
limited to, the burning of lawns, grass, trash, lumber, leaves, straw, garbage,
refuse, paper, or any other combustible material, unless one (1) of the
following exceptions applies:
   A.   Burning conducted by the Fire Department for training purposes, when
authorized by the Fire Chief.
   B.   Bonfires for community activities with Fire Department supervision,
when authorized by the Fire Chief in writing. (Ord. 323, 4-11-2016; amd. 2017
Code)
5-3-2: BURNING DURING BURN BANS:
   A.   Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to set fire to any forest,
grass, range, crop, or other wild lands, or to build a campfire or bonfire, or
to burn trash or other material that may cause a forest, grass, range, crop or
other wild lands fire within the Town, where, because of emergency drought
conditions, there is a gubernatorial proclaimed extraordinary danger from fire,
unless the setting of any backfire during the drought emergency is necessary to
afford protection as determined by a representative of the Division of
Forestry, or unless it can be established that the setting of the backfire was
necessary for the purpose of saving lives or property. The burden of proving
the necessity shall rest on the person claiming a defense.
   B.   State And County Proclamations:
      1.   Any proclamation promulgated by the Governor shall be effective
immediately upon the Governor's signed approval of the emergency proclamation
and shall supersede any resolution passed by the Town Board.
      2.   Any burn ban promulgated by the County Commissioners shall be
effective immediately upon the signed approval of the burn ban and shall
supersede any resolution passed by the Town Board. (Ord. 323, 4-11-2016; amd.
2017 Code)
5-3-3: RESIDENTIAL BURNING:
Residential (one- or two-family dwellings) burning is allowed within the
corporate limits of the Town with the following restrictions and conditions:
   A.   Burning is only allowed to be conducted within outdoor fireplaces
constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other noncombustible material. Said
fireplaces shall be located over noncombustible surfaces located not less than
fifteen feet (15') from any structure.
   B.   The Fire Department shall have full authority to extinguish any fire
that may create or add to a hazardous or objectionable situation, with the
discretion of the Fire Department, or becomes offensive due to smoke emissions.
   C.   Outdoor open flame cooking shall be permitted within the corporate
limits of the Town so long as said open flame cooking is contained in a device
to be operated over noncombustible surfaces and not less than ten feet (10')
from any structure. (Ord. 323, 4-11-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
5-3-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
JUNKED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definition
5-4-2: Junked, Wrecked Vehicles Prohibited
5-4-3: Notice To Remove; Impoundment
5-4-4: Exceptions
5-4-5: Violation; Penalties
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, a partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked,
junked, or discarded vehicle shall also include, but is not limited to, the
following:
   A.   A vehicle upon which a current license plate is not displayed;
   B.   A vehicle from which tires or wheels have been removed or deflated; or
   C.   A vehicle which has obviously been abandoned and left on any street or
private property by the owner of the vehicle. (2011 Code § 21-25)
5-4-2: JUNKED, WRECKED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person in charge or control of any property within the Town, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on
such property. (2011 Code § 21-25)
5-4-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE; IMPOUNDMENT:
The owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise of any vehicle as provided in
this chapter shall first be given ten (10) days' notice in writing to remove
such dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle from his
property. If such owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise shall allow such
a vehicle to remain on the property after the expiration of the ten (10) days'
notice, the Police Chief or other officer shall cause the vehicle to be
impounded as provided herein and enforce the penalty provision by issuing a
citation to the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise. (2011 Code § 21-
25)
5-4-4: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building;
a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business or enterprise; or
a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the Town. (2011 Code § 21-25)
5-4-5: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and, if convicted, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 21-25; amd. 2017 Code)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Policy And Procedure Manual
6-1-2: Unclaimed Property
6-1-1: POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL:
There is a Policy and Procedure Manual for the Town Police Department which is
on file in the Office of the Police Department. All members of the Police
Department, including reserves, shall adhere to the rules and regulations set
forth in said manual. (2017 Code)
6-1-2: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
   A.   Record Required: All personal property which comes into the possession
of any police officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person
or out of the possession of any prisoner or person suspected of or charged with
being a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim
thereto, shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into
the charge of the Chief of Police. The Chief shall, in a permanent record book
kept for that purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with
the date and circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from
whom it was taken and the place where it was found, and the record shall also
disclose the subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and
address of the purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. (2011 Code §
18-3)
   B.   Disposition Of Property:
      1.   Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains
in the possession of the Chief of Police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which
is not to him satisfactorily established, for a period of thirty (30) days,
shall be sold, and the proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, who shall issue a receipt therefor, and deposit the same to the
credit of the General Fund of the Town, except such personal property as, in
the opinion of the Board of Trustees, can be more advantageously used by some
department or office of the Town government.
      2.   Ten (10) days before a sale of such unclaimed property, the Chief of
Police shall sign and have posted in at least three (3) public places in the
Town, notices of the time, place, manner of such sale, and list of property to
be sold.
      3.   If, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, all or any portion of
the personal property can be more advantageously used by some department or
office of the Town government, the Board shall so instruct the Chief of Police,
in writing, and the Chief shall thereupon deliver the personal property
designated to that department or office of Town government and make a permanent
record of its disposition.
      4.   In the alternative, the Chief of Police may proceed under the
provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 34-104 for the disposition of the
property referred to herein. (2011 Code § 18-4)
   C.   Property Found By Private Person: Any personal property found by a
person other than a public official or employee, which is delivered to any
police officer for identification, if not claimed or identified within thirty
(30) days, shall, within ten (10) additional days thereafter, if requested by
the finder, be returned to him, and a record of such disposal made thereof. If
the finder does not request return of the property to him within such
additional ten (10) days, then the Chief of Police shall sell the property as
if it had been found by a public official or employee or, on instruction by the
Board of Trustees, deliver it to some department or office of the Town
government for its use. (2011 Code § 18-5)
   D.   Recovery By Owner: If any property is sold as herein provided, and the
owner thereof takes and recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the
amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim
being submitted and approved by the Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 18-6)
   E.   Violation; Penalty: Any person, firm, association, corporation, or
copartnership who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
severally for each and every such violation, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 18-7)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Department Established; Volunteer Department
6-2-2: Duties Of Department
6-2-3: Fire Chief
6-2-4: Other Department Personnel
6-2-5: New Members
6-2-6: Bylaws
6-2-7: Department Property
6-2-8: Rules And Regulations
6-2-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Chief
of the Fire Department.
   B.   The term "volunteer firefighter" means one who is enrolled as a member
of the Fire Department of the Town and who serves in that capacity without
receiving a regular salary. A person who is a salaried public safety employee
of the Town shall not serve as a volunteer firefighter of the Fire Department
unless the person is off duty and such service is not a condition of
employment. A "public safety employee" is a person employed to serve as a
salaried firefighter, police or other law enforcement officer or emergency
medical technician. The size of the Volunteer Fire Department of the Town shall
be not less than eight (8) nor more than thirty (30) members. (2011 Code § 8-1;
amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-2: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish fires; to
rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid
to persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an
emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to
enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention and safety of persons
from fire in public and private buildings. (2011 Code § 8-1)
6-2-3: FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Appointment, Term And Removal From Office: The head of the Fire
Department shall be the Fire Chief who shall be appointed by the Board of
Trustees for an indefinite term, and shall be removable by a majority vote of
the Board of Trustees.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Fire Chief shall have the following powers and
duties, and he may assign duties to other members of the department:
      1.   Shall be responsible for the general condition and efficient
operation of the department, the training of members, and the performance of
all other duties imposed upon him.
      2.   Have supervision and control of the Fire Department, subject to the
supervision and control of the Board of Trustees.
      3.   May inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the department,
the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at least twice
each year. (2011 Code § 8-2)
      4.   Shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire prevention
and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage of all
members. (2011 Code § 8-2; amd. 2017 Code)
      5.   Shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the officers
and members in the performance of their duties.
      6.   Shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in the
community and on the activities of the department.
      7.   Shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its
cause and, in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson, shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case.
      8.   Is authorized to enter any building or premises in the Town at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written
notice on persons for any violations that may be found.
      9.   Shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections,
apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the department and
shall make reports to the Board of Trustees as it may require.
      10.   Shall keep the Board of Trustees informed regarding the Fire
Department and its needs. (2011 Code § 8-2)
      11.   Shall file the appropriate activity report forms with the Office of
the State Fire Marshal in Oklahoma City on an annual basis. The activity report
forms shall be designed by the State Fire Marshal and shall include, but not be
limited to, the amount of property and vehicle fire loss, types of fires,
inspections and investigations. The report shall include notification of all
fire related civilian deaths and injuries in the Town and of firefighter deaths
in the line of duty and of firefighter injuries in the line of duty requiring
the services of a hospital or physician or both. (2017 Code)
      12.   Have other such duties as may be assigned by the Mayor or Board of
Trustees. (2011 Code § 8-2)
6-2-4: OTHER DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
   A.   Assistant Chief: In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on
duty shall command the department and be held responsible therefor in all
respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the Chief. The Assistant
Chief shall be elected from among the members of the Fire Department. (2011
Code § 8-3)
   B.   Company Officers: Company officers shall be selected by the Chief based
upon the following criteria:
      1.   Knowledge of firefighting;
      2.   Leadership ability; and
      3.   Knowledge of firefighting equipment. (2011 Code § 8-4)
   C.   Secretary-Treasurer: One (1) member elected by the members of the Fire
Department shall be a Secretary-Treasurer. His duties shall consist of the
following:
      1.   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      2.   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      3.   Collecting any money due the department by the members. (2011 Code §
8-5)
6-2-5: NEW MEMBERS:
New members of the Volunteer Department shall be recommended by the Chief. New
members shall be on probation for one (1) year after their appointment. Upon
completion of their probationary period, new members must be approved by the
majority of the other members of the Fire Department and the Board of Trustees.
(2011 Code § 8-6)
6-2-6: BYLAWS:
The bylaws of the department shall include the following:
   A.   All volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
   B.   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters;
   C.   At least one (1) regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month;
   D.   Any member having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three (3)
unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will be expelled from the
Fire Department rolls;
   E.   Any member leaving the Town for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Chief;
   F.   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the department will be expelled; and
   G.   Any member of the Fire Department may be expelled from the rolls for
the following offenses:
      1.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      2.   Any act of insubordination;
      3.   Neglect of duty;
      4.   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department;
      5.   Conviction of a felony; or
      6.   By majority vote of the members of the company and approval of the
Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 8-7; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-7: DEPARTMENT PROPERTY:
   A.   Maintenance Required: The Volunteer Fire Department is responsible for
all equipment and maintenance as well as the orderliness of the fire station.
(2011 Code § 8-30)
   B.   Equipment Use Restrictions:
      1.   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away
or conceal any article used in any way by the department.
      2.   No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the department. (2011 Code § 8-9)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 8-36)
6-2-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, may adopt and change
regulations relating to the Fire Department, its organization, operation and
compensation. (2011 Code § 8-8)
ARTICLE A. SERVICE OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Mutual Aid Agreements Authorized
6-2A-2: Service Fee
6-2A-3: Authority To Answer Calls
6-2A-4: Firefighters Serving In Regular Line Of Duty
6-2A-5: Department Considered Agent Of State
6-2A-1: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED:
The Town is hereby authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements with any
political or Municipal subdivision of the State. (2011 Code § 8-10)
6-2A-2: SERVICE FEE:
There shall not be a fee charged for fire protection outside the corporate
limits, except to Santa Fe Railroad when a passing train has caused a fire. A
fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees shall be charged for every fire call. The Fire Chief shall be
responsible for turning in each of the fires on a quarterly basis to the Town
Clerk-Treasurer for the purposes of billing Santa Fe. (2011 Code § 8-11; amd.
2017 Code)
6-2A-3: AUTHORITY TO ANSWER CALLS:
The Town Fire Department is hereby authorized and directed to answer all calls
outside the corporate Town limits within fifty (50) miles of the nearest fire
station or at the discretion of the Fire Chief. The Fire Department may not
answer such outside calls if, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, it is
inexpedient to do so on account of another fire in the Town, broken apparatus,
impassable or dangerous highways, or other physical conditions. (2011 Code § 8-
12)
6-2A-4: FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY:
All volunteer firefighters of the Town Fire Department attending and serving at
fires or doing fire prevention work or rescue, resuscitation, first aid,
inspection or any other official work outside the corporate limits of the Town,
as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of
duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the Town.
The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any Firefighters
Pension and Retirement Fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire
prevention work or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection or any other
official work was being done within the corporate limits of the Town.
Compensation of firefighters shall be as provided by the Board of Trustees by
ordinance or resolution. (2011 Code § 8-13; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2A-5: DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE:
The Town Fire Department answering any fire alarm or call, or performing any
fire prevention services or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection or any
other official work outside the corporate limits of the Town, shall be
considered as an agent of the State, and acting solely and alone in a
governmental capacity, and the Town shall not be liable in damages for any act
of commission, omission or negligence while answering or returning from any
fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work or rescue,
resuscitation, first aid, inspection or any other official work under and by
virtue of this article. (2011 Code § 8-14; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
6-3-1: Organization Created; Purpose And Duties
6-3-2: Department Established
6-3-3: Emergency Manager
6-3-4: Emergency Powers
6-3-5: Compensation Of Members; Nonliability Of Town For Injuries
6-3-1: ORGANIZATION CREATED; PURPOSE AND DUTIES:
An Emergency Management Organization is created for the Town to carry out
preparations for and to function in the event of emergencies endangering the
lives and property of the people of the Town. The duty of the Emergency
Management Organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of the
citizens of the Town and of property and property rights, both private and
public, and to perform all functions necessary and incidental thereto. (2011
Code § 7-1)
6-3-2: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Department of Emergency Management which shall
consist of an Emergency Manager, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Board of Trustees, who shall serve at the pleasure of said
Board and may be the Chief of Police. (2011 Code § 7-2; amd. 2017 Code)
6-3-3: EMERGENCY MANAGER:
The Emergency Manager shall be the executive head of the Emergency Management
Department and shall be responsible for carrying out the Emergency Management
Program of the Town. The Emergency Manager may be reimbursed for expenses
incurred in the performance of his duties. It shall be the duty of the
Emergency Manager, as soon as practicable after his appointment, to perfect an
organization to carry out the purposes set forth in this chapter, and he shall
have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies and
to appoint and designate the Chair or Chief Officer of such bodies as may be
necessary to perfect such an organization. He shall have such further duty and
responsibility to cooperate with all emergency management agencies of other
governmental units including the State of Oklahoma and the Federal government.
The Emergency Manager is further authorized to formulate written plans and
gather information and keep written records thereof to govern the functions of
the Emergency Management Organization. (2011 Code § 7-3)
6-3-4: EMERGENCY POWERS:
   A.   In the event of an enemy caused emergency or emergency resulting from
natural causes, the Emergency Manager, after due authorization from the Mayor,
shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations
relating to emergency management for the purpose of protecting the civilian
population. He shall cooperate in every way with the activities of the
governmental agencies or emergency management organizations; and if required by
the Chair of the Board of Trustees, shall have control over any and all funds
allocated from any source for the purpose of alleviating distress conditions in
the Town. (2011 Code § 7-4)
   B.   The Emergency Manager and other members of the Emergency Management
Organization created by him shall have the power and authority to enforce the
laws of the State of Oklahoma, this Code and ordinances of the Town during the
period of emergency, and shall, at such time, have the further power to make
arrests for violations of such laws or ordinances. (2011 Code § 7-5; amd. 2017
Code)
6-3-5: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS; NONLIABILITY OF TOWN FOR INJURIES:
All members of the Emergency Management Organization created hereunder shall
serve without compensation. The Town shall not be liable for any personal
injury received by any member of such organization while acting in the line of
duty; provided, however, the Town may contribute to expenses jointly with the
County in an amount as provided by resolution, which amount shall be added to
the budget and drawn upon by claim of the Chair of the Emergency Management
Organization. (2011 Code § 7-6)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Compliance With Provisions
6-4-3: Prohibited Animals
6-4-4: Animals At Large Or Insufficiently Restrained
6-4-5: Pasturing Animals
6-4-6: Animal Nuisances
6-4-7: Animal Houses And Premises
6-4-8: Treatment Of Animals
6-4-9: Rabies Control
6-4-10: Enforcement
6-4-11: Violation; Penalties
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those cases where the
context clearly indicates or specifically provides for a different meaning:
ANIMAL: All animals, whether domesticated or wild, including, but not limited
to, bees, birds and fowl (including parakeets), cattle, cats, chickens, dogs,
ducks, geese, goats, horses, livestock of all types, mammals (including
elephants), rabbits, all reptiles, rodents, sheep, swine and turkeys.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The person(s) responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter and the Town ordinances and regulations pertaining to animal control in
the Town.
AT LARGE: Not securely confined by a fence or other means on premises under the
control of or occupied by the owner, and/or not under the control of the owner,
a member of his immediate family over twelve (12) years of age or an agent of
the owner by leash or otherwise, whether on the owner's premises or not.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
   A.   Has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on
public or private property;
   B.   Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having
received notice of such by the animal control officer in writing and the dog
thereafter aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans; or
   C.   Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having
received notice of such by the animal control officer in writing and the dog
thereafter attacks a dog which results in the death of said dog either on
public or private property.
EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any animal which is not native to but is foreign to this area.
HARBORING: Allowing any animal to habitually remain or be fed on premises under
his control.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which are kept three (3) or more dogs more than
six (6) months of age.
LIVESTOCK: All animals other than dogs, cats, small caged birds or small
aquatic or amphibious animals.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an animal.
Occupants of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal customarily
returns for a period of ten (10) days or more shall be deemed to be harboring
or keeping the animal, and thereby considered to be an owner of said animal.
PET: Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog that:
   A.   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human either on public or private
property; or
   B.   When unprovoked, attacks a dog which results in the death of said dog
either on public or private property.
RESTRAINT: If confined on the premises of its owner, if on a leash and
accompanied by a responsible person, or in the case of a hunting dog, if
accompanied by its owner engaged in the act of hunting.
TOWN: The local government of Mooreland, Oklahoma.
VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL: Any dog or animal which has bitten or attempted to bite
any person without undue provocation, or which attacks, barks, or growls at,
and acts as if it intended to attack or bite any person or persons when not
unduly provoked. The refusal of a postal carrier to deliver mail or parcels to
an address because of the threat of an animal attack shall be prima facie
evidence that an animal is vicious. (2011 Code § 3-1)
6-4-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to keep any animals within
the corporate limits of the Town except under those conditions and provisions
which may hereinafter specifically regulate the keeping of certain types of
animals. (2011 Code § 3-4)
6-4-3: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
   A.   If no specific provisions are listed in this chapter for keeping of a
particular type of animal, said animal type shall not be kept at all within the
corporate limits of the Town.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or in any way possess
within the corporate limits of the Town:
      1.   Any warm blooded carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animal;
      2.   Any animal having a poisonous bite; or
      3.   Any vicious or dangerous dog, cat, or other animal. (2011 Code § 3-
4)
6-4-4: ANIMALS AT LARGE OR INSUFFICIENTLY RESTRAINED:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for the owner of any animal,
domestic or wild, (except a domestic cat), to permit the same to run at large
or trespass upon the premises of another person, or be unlawfully at large at
any time within the corporate limits of the Town.
      2.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to:
         a.   Keep, own, harbor or possess any dog or animal within the
corporate limits of the Town without providing a substantial and secure pen in
which said dog or animal shall be confined (which pen shall be sufficient in
size so that no sanitation or health problems shall be involved).
         b.   Allow a dog or animal to be placed on an adequately sized leash
so that it can reach or bite any person who may be using the public
thoroughfares of the Town, so the dog or animal can reach beyond the limits of
the lot or premises upon which said dog or animal is kept and confined, or so
the dog or animal may reach any person who may be rendering necessary services
to the house of such owner upon the premises where said dog or animal may be
kept, harbored or possessed. (2011 Code § 3-2)
   B.   Turning Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for any person to open
any enclosure in which an animal is confined (as required by ordinance) so as
to turn such animal at large, or to in any other manner turn such animal at
large. (2011 Code § 3-7)
6-4-5: PASTURING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on
any public property (Federal, State, Municipal or other) or on any railroad
right-of-way without the consent of the person owning or controlling such
property. (2011 Code § 3-8)
6-4-6: ANIMAL NUISANCES:
   A.   Nuisances Enumerated:
      1.   Noisy Animals: It shall be a public nuisance for any person to keep
any dog or other animal which, by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the
peace and quiet of, or creates a nuisance for, any person.
      2.   Dangerous Animals: It shall be a public nuisance for any person to
keep any dog or other animal which attacks other animals or damages private or
public property. (2011 Code § 3-3)
      3.   Excrement:
         a.   It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, custody or
control of any animal to permit such animal to defecate and to allow the feces
to thereafter remain on any public sidewalk, park or any other public property
or on any private property other than that of the owner or person who has
custody or control of the animal.
         b.   No person having the care, custody, charge or control of any
animal shall permit or allow that animal on any public sidewalk, park or any
other public property, or on any private property other than that of the owner
or person who has custody or control of the animal, unless that person has, in
his or her possession, an implement or device capable of removing any feces
deposited by the animal.
         c.   The provisions of this subsection A3 shall not be applicable to:
            (1)   Any guide dog while being used by a blind person or any dog
being trained to be a guide dog for the blind pursuant to a recognized program
of training, provided the dog is on a leash and the person in charge has an
official identification card issued for the such purposes.
            (2)   Any blind person.
            (3)   Any animal or person having charge, custody or control of any
animal while being used in an organized parade or Town activity. (2011 Code §
3-16)
   B.   Abatement Provisions: Abatement of public nuisances enumerated in this
section shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of the nuisances
chapter in this Code. (2011 Code §§ 3-3, 3-16)
6-4-7: ANIMAL HOUSES AND PREMISES:
   A.   Every structure wherein any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, goat,
sheep, fowl, or animal raised for furbearing purposes is kept within the
corporate limits of the Town shall be constructed of such material and in such
a manner that it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and it shall be
maintained in said condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from
objectionable odors, in order to avert the creation of a nuisance to the public
health. Every such structure, if located within two hundred feet (200') of any
tenement, apartment, house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food
store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or
residence (other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises
upon which such animal is kept), shall be provided with a watertight and
flytight receptacle for manure of such size as to hold all accumulations of
manure. (2011 Code § 3-4; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal for breeding
purposes within the corporate limits of the Town, except in the private,
enclosed locations, entirely out of the public view, or to permit any such
animals to have sexual intercourse in any place except a private, enclosed
place. (This subsection shall not be construed as permitting the conditional
keeping of any animals otherwise prohibited or regulated by this Code.) (2011
Code § 3-4)
6-4-8: TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, wilfully, or maliciously
to:
      1.   Pour on or apply to any animal any drug or other thing which
inflicts pain.
      2.   Treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
      3.   Neglect an animal belonging to him or in his custody in a cruel or
inhumane manner.
      4.   Poison or expose to poison any dog or other animal except a noxious,
nondomesticated animal.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate or encourage a fight
between animals, or to keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between
animals. (2011 Code § 3-6)
6-4-9: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Vaccination Required:
      1.   Any warm blooded animal, capable of transmitting the virus rabies,
maintained or harbored at any time in the Town shall be vaccinated against
rabies with an approved vaccine administered by a veterinarian or other
authorized person who shall maintain a record of the vaccination for a period
of at least three (3) years, and who shall issue the owner of such animal a
vaccination certificate (which shall be retained by said owner until it expires
and is renewed). The failure to procure such certificate when requested by the
animal control officer shall be prima facie evidence that such animal has not
been so vaccinated. (2011 Code § 3-9)
      2.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or harboring any dog or
cat which is six (6) months old or older within the corporate limits of the
Town to procure a rabies vaccination certificate from a graduate licensed
veterinarian, or agent authorized by the Town, showing by whom the vaccination
was administered and the date when such vaccination shall expire. (2011 Code §
3-9; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   It shall be unlawful to not abide by the Municipal vaccination
requirements after fifteen (15) days of residency within the Town.
   B.   Animal Bites; Quarantine For Observation:
      1.   The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a
person shall be promptly furnished to the animal control officer and the County
Health Department. The animal, regardless of its immunization status, shall be
securely quarantined at the veterinary hospital of the owner's choice at the
owner's expense. The animal shall be observed by a licensed veterinarian for a
period of ten (10) days, and may not be released until such reasonable
determination has been made that the animal is not infected with rabies, unless
the bite was a severe bite by an unimmunized animal. In circumstances of a
severe bite (bite on the head, face, neck or upper extremities; or deep
laceration; or multiple bite wounds) by an unimmunized animal, the biting
animal should be humanely killed immediately, without damaging the head, and
the head removed and shipped, under refrigeration, for examination at the
Oklahoma State Department of Health. If the animal is not immediately available
for testing, the individuals exposed should consult with their physician
concerning the need for immediate initiation of rabies prophylaxis. In case of
animals whose ownership is unknown, the quarantine shall be at the Town animal
shelter. If an owner becomes known, the animal may be reclaimed by the owner if
adjudged free of rabies, and such owner shall then pay any related charges for
confinement. Signs of rabies in wild animals cannot be interpreted reliably;
therefore, any wild animal that exposes a person should be killed at once
(without unnecessary damage to the head) and the head submitted for examination
for evidence of rabies.
      2.   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other
practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of
persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other
information as will be helpful in rabies control.
      3.   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the
animal control officer his diagnosis of any animal observed by him to be a
rabies suspect.
      4.   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid,
or is suspected of having rabies, by a licensed veterinarian, and dies while
under such observation, the animal control officer, veterinarian or other
designated person shall immediately send the necessary part of such animal to
the State Health Department for pathological examination and shall notify the
proper health officer of any reports of human contact.
   C.   Rabies Crisis:
      1.   Declaration Of Crisis: When the report gives a positive diagnosis of
rabies and the State Health Director feels that a rabies crisis may be
imminent, the Health Department may recommend to the Town Board of Trustees a
Townwide quarantine. Upon the invoking of such quarantine by the Town Board of
Trustees, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the
streets, except for short periods of exercise (under leash and control of a
competent adult). During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or removed
from the Town without written permission of the animal control officer.
      2.   Destruction Of Animals During Crisis Period: During the period of
rabies quarantine, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall
be forthwith destroyed; or, at the owner's expense and option, shall be treated
for a rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian; or held under six (6) months
quarantine by the owner in the same manner as a female in season. The period of
quarantine may be extended from time to time.
   D.   Surrender Of Suspected Animals: No person shall remove from the Town
any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which has
bitten a human except as herein provided. The carcass of any dead animal
exposed to rabies shall be surrendered to the animal control officer upon
demand, and the animal control officer shall direct disposition of said animal.
No person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction
when such demand is lawfully made by the animal control officer. (2011 Code §
3-9)
6-4-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The animal control officer or any member of the Town Board of Trustees,
upon complaint of any person or on his own initiative, shall inspect any
structure or place wherein an animal is kept.
   B.   The animal control officer may issue any such reasonable order as he
may deem necessary to the owner of such animal to cause such animal to be kept
as provided in this chapter, or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance.
   C.   The animal control officer may make a complaint before the Municipal
Judge against any person for violation of any provision of this chapter or for
any such reasonable order, but this shall not abridge the right of others to
make such complaints. (2011 Code § 3-15)
6-4-11: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter or
who violates or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by any health
officer, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer, pursuant to
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The penalty provided herein shall be in addition to other
remedies of the Town and shall not be construed as exclusive. Every day's
violation of any provision of this chapter or of such order of the Health
Officer, animal control officer, or law enforcement officer shall constitute a
separate offense. (2011 Code § 3-30; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Dog Licensing Requirements
6-4A-2: Dogs At Large; Impoundment
6-4A-3: Authority To Kill Certain Dogs
6-4A-4: Stray Cats
6-4A-5: Female Dogs Or Cats In Heat
6-4A-1: DOG LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Dog Tax:
      1.   Tax Imposed; Exemptions: A tax as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees for every dog more than
three (3) months of age is hereby levied upon the owner of any such dog kept or
harbored within the Town. The tax shall not apply to a dog only temporarily
brought and kept within the Town, nor to a dog brought within the Town to
participate in a dog show, nor to a service dog when such dog is actually being
used by a person to aid him in going from place to place, nor to dogs being
kept in kennels or pet shops for sale. (2011 Code § 3-20; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Payment Of Tax: The owner shall pay such tax to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer for every calendar year before May 1, or upon acquiring after said
day any dog within the Town upon which the tax has not been paid for during the
year in which acquired, or upon bringing the dog into Town after said day.
   B.   Certificate Of Rabies Vaccination Required: Before the Town Clerk-
Treasurer accepts any money offered in payment of the tax for a dog or issues a
license therefor, the person offering the tax shall present to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer the certificate of veterinarian or other person legally authorized to
immunize dogs, showing that the dog has been immunized against rabies during
the calendar year (that is since December 31 of the last December).
   C.   Registration Of Dog:
      1.   The owner of the dog shall, at the time of paying the tax, register
the dog by giving to the Town Clerk-Treasurer the name and address of the
owner, the name, breed, color, and sex of the dog, and such other reasonable
information as the Town Clerk- Treasurer may request.
      2.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer thereupon shall deliver an original receipt
to the taxpayer and also an appropriate tag to him for the dog. Such tag shall
constitute a license for the dog. (2011 Code § 3-20)
   D.   Dog Tags:
      1.   The owner shall cause the tag received from the Town Clerk-
Treasurer to be affixed to the collar of the dog upon which the tax has been
paid so that the tag can easily be seen by officers of the Town, and the owner
shall see that the tag is so worn by the dog at all times. (2011 Code § 3-21)
      2.   In case the tag is lost before the end of the year for which it was
issued, the owner may secure another for the dog by applying to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, presenting to him the original receipt, and paying him a fee as
provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees. (2011 Code § 3-21; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   No person shall counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit any tag issued
for a dog as provided in this section, or take from any dog a tag legally
placed upon it, or place such tag upon a dog for which the tag was not
specifically issued. (2011 Code § 3-22)
6-4A-2: DOGS AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, or is in charge of
or has control of a dog within the corporate limits of the Town to permit such
dog to run at large within the corporate limits, regardless of whether or not
such dog has been issued a license under the provisions of this article or
whether or not such dog has been vaccinated for rabies under the provisions of
this chapter. However, if said dog has been vaccinated and issued a license
tag, it shall not be unlawful for such dog to be lead by a person on the
streets or sidewalks or any public property of the Town where dogs are
permitted if said dog is wearing a good strong collar and harness, which is
attached to a leash of sufficient strength to hold said dog and not more than
six feet (6') in length. (2011 Code § 3-12)
   B.   Should any dog be found running at large within the corporate limits of
the Town, said dog may immediately be taken into custody and taken to the
County dog pound and impounded and then humanely destroyed unless sooner
redeemed by the owner, who shall produce satisfactory evidence that said dog
has been vaccinated against rabies as provided in this chapter or has said dog
vaccinated against rabies while impounded, provide collar and/or harness,
procure a license as required, and pay any impoundment fees established by the
County or by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 3-13; amd.
2017 Code)
6-4A-3: AUTHORITY TO KILL CERTAIN DOGS:
   A.   Any person may kill a dog in self-defense or in defense of another when
the dog, without undue provocation, bites him or another, or attacks, or
attempts to bite or attack, him or another in such manner that an ordinarily
prudent person would be led to believe that the person toward whom the efforts
of the dog are directed is about to be bitten or otherwise physically harmed.
   B.   Any person may kill a dog, the appearance or conduct of which is such
as would cause an ordinarily prudent person to believe the dog to be afflicted
with rabies. (2011 Code § 3-11)
6-4A-4: STRAY CATS:
A "stray cat" is any cat without a collar that is running at large and which a
reasonable person, upon reasonable inquiry, cannot determine the owner. Any cat
which is apparently a stray cat may be impounded upon complaint of any citizen
having knowledge thereof. If such cat cannot be captured, it may be immediately
destroyed. Any such cat so impounded shall be kept for a period of at least
seventy two (72) hours during which time said cat may be redeemed by the owner
thereof, upon the payment of the fees provided for impounded cats. In the event
such cat is not redeemed within such period, it may be destroyed or disposed of
in a humane manner. (2011 Code § 3-14)
6-4A-5: FEMALE DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT:
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure in such a manner that such animal cannot come into contact with
another animal, except for planned breeding. (2011 Code § 3-10)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5-1: State Penal Code Adopted
6-5-2: State Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act Penal Provisions
Adopted
6-5-3: Discharging Weapons; Throwing Missiles
6-5-4: Trespassing
6-5-5: Violation; Penalty
6-5-6: Restrictions On Smokable Medical Marijuana And Medical Marijuana
Products
6-5-1: STATE PENAL CODE ADOPTED:
The Penal Code of the State of Oklahoma, as set forth in 21 Oklahoma Statutes,
as may be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully and to the same
extent as if set out herein. Pursuant to the authority of State law, the title
and brief gist or summary of said 21 Oklahoma Statutes, as amended, are hereby
ordered published in conformity to the provisions. A copy of said provisions is
on file in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer for public use and
inspection. (2011 Code §§ 15-1, 15-2; amd. 2017 Code)
6-5-2: STATE UNIFORM CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES ACT PENAL PROVISIONS
ADOPTED:
The penal provisions of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act of the
State of Oklahoma, as set forth in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101 et seq.,
as amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated fully and to the same extent as
if set out herein. Pursuant to the authority of State law, the title and brief
gist or summary of said Uniform Dangerous Controlled Substances Act, as set
forth in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101 et seq., as amended, are hereby
ordered published and for the purpose of said publication. A copy of said
provisions is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer for public use
and inspection. (2011 Code §§ 15-3, 15-4; amd. 2017 Code)
6-5-3: DISCHARGING WEAPONS; THROWING MISSILES:
No person shall wilfully discharge any pistol, rifle, shotgun, airgun, BB gun,
pellet gun, paintball gun, or other weapon, or throw any other missile within
the Town limits. (2011 Code § 15-5.3; amd. 2017 Code)
6-5-4: TRESPASSING:
   A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to enter upon the property
of another or into an area or structure on that property, whether the property,
area or structure is public or private, when the entrance is plainly forbidden
by signs or otherwise, or when the property, area or structure is enclosed.
(Ord. 312, 8-11-2014)
   B.   The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply when
entrance upon the property of another or into an area or structure on such
property is in the line of duty, or when such entrance is upon the expressed or
tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or when such entrance is
otherwise authorized by law, this Code or Town ordinance. (2011 Code § 18-2;
amd. 2017 Code)
6-5-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code §§ 15-7, 18-7; amd. 2017 Code)
6-5-6: RESTRICTIONS ON SMOKABLE MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA
PRODUCTS:
   A.   All smokable, vaporized, vapable and e-cigarette medical marijuana and
medical marijuana products ingested, smoked, or consumed by a patient license
holder is subject to the same restrictions for tobacco under section 1-1521 et
seq., of title 63 of Oklahoma Statutes, commonly referred to as the "Smoking in
Public Places and Indoor Workplaces Act".
   B.   All smokable, vaporized, vapable and e-cigarette medical marijuana and
medical marijuana products consumed or smoked by a patient medical marijuana
license holder shall not be smoked nor consumed in the presence of a minor
under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. 341, 8-13-2018)
CHAPTER 6
MINORS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Curfew Regulations
6-6-2: Tobacco And Vapor Products
6-6-3: Truancy
6-6-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Legislative Findings: The Town Board of Trustees hereby makes the
following findings:
      1.   The Town has a compelling governmental interest in restricting
certain late night activities of juveniles in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of juveniles and other persons and their property; and
      2.   The occurrences of juvenile crime have continued to substantially
increase over the past several years, both nationally, Statewide, and locally;
and
      3.   The intent of this section is to narrowly tailor the restriction of
late night activities of juveniles to the extent juvenile crime and violence is
reduced and juveniles as well as other citizens and their property are
protected from harm; and
      4.   Juveniles are particularly vulnerable to the influence of persons
who do not have the best interest of the juvenile in mind, due to the inability
of juveniles to make important or critical decisions in an informed and mature
manner and to avoid choices that could be detrimental to their health, safety
or welfare; and
      5.   The Town and many public spirited citizens have expended a great
deal of time and energy in trying to deter criminal conduct, assist parents and
protect juveniles; and
      6.   A concern has arisen in the community that certain activities by
juveniles and adults during the night hours endanger the health, safety, and
welfare of other persons and their property; and
      7.   The Town does not desire to interfere with the parent-child or
parent-juvenile relationship or the parental right to raise their children or
juveniles; and
      8.   While the Town recognizes parents and/or responsible adults need
wide latitude in supervising their children, the Town desires to protect
juveniles from nocturnal dangers and encourage parental responsibility; and
      9.   The Town desires to assist the State of Oklahoma in the effective
communication and documentation of juvenile offenses, the prevention of
juvenile crime, the prevention of child and juvenile abduction, and the
adoption of programs to assist in the welfare, development, and counseling of
juveniles. (2011 Code § 15-5.1; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:
      1.   Promote the general welfare and protect the general public through
the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the Town;
      2.   Promote the safety and well being of the Town's youngest citizens,
persons under the age of eighteen (18), whose inexperience renders them
particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities,
particularly unlawful drug and alcohol activities, and to being victimized by
older perpetrators of crime; and
      3.   Foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children. (2011
Code § 15-5.2)
   C.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CURFEW HOURS: The hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. through five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. of the following day on Sunday through Thursday, and one minute
after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. through five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on Saturday
and Sunday.
   EMERGENCY: Unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting
therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property. The
term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile
accidents, or other similar circumstances.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business within the Town,
operated for a profit, to which the public is invited including, but not
limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such
establishment, the term "operator" shall mean any person, and any firm,
association, partnership (and the members or partners thereof), and/or any
corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that
establishment.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who has not been
emancipated by court order or otherwise had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with State law.
   OFFICER: A police or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the laws of the State of Oklahoma, this Code and/or the ordinances of
the Town of Mooreland.
   PARENT: 1. A person who is a minor's biological or adoptive parent and who
has legal custody of a minor (including either parent, if custody is shared
under a court order or agreement);
      2.   A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a minor
regularly resides;
      3.   A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the minor; and/
or
      4.   A person eighteen (18) years of age or older standing in loco
parentis (as indicated by the authorization of an individual listed in
subsection 1, 2, or 3 of this definition, for the person to assume the care or
physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances).
   PERSON: An individual, not any association, corporation, or any other legal
entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access including, but not limited to, streets, highways, roads,
sidewalks, alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities and
shops.
   REMAIN: The following actions:
      1.   To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or
      2.   To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or by
the owner, operator or other person in control of that place.
   TEMPORARY CARE FACILITY: A nonlocked, nonrestrictive shelter at which minors
may wait, under visual supervision, to be retrieved by a parent. No minors
waiting in such facility shall be handcuffed and/or secured (by handcuffs or
otherwise) to any stationary object. (2011 Code § 15-5.2; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Violating Curfew Prohibited; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for a
minor, during curfew hours, to remain in or upon any public place within the
Town, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or
to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment within the Town, unless:
      1.   The minor is accompanied by a parent; or
      2.   The minor is involved in an emergency; or
      3.   The minor is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or
returning home from such activity, without detour or stop; or
      4.   The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or
she resides with a parent; or
      5.   The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious,
or civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another
similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or
the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour or
stop; or
      6.   The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the
minor has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing
the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone number of
the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number where the parent may be
reached during the errand, the name of the minor, and a brief description of
the errand, the minor's destination(s) and the hours the minor is authorized to
be engaged in the errand; or
      7.   The minor is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or
terminating in, the Town; or
      8.   The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly.
   E.   Responsibility Of Various Persons:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for a minor's parent to knowingly permit, allow
or encourage such minor to violate subsection D of this section.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner or operator of
any motor vehicle to knowingly permit, allow or encourage a violation of
subsection D of this section.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any establishment, or for
any person who is an employee thereof, to knowingly permit, allow or encourage
a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the operator or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a
minor was present at the establishment after curfew hours and refused to leave.
   F.   Giving False Information Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person (including any minor) to give a false name, address, or telephone number
to any officer investigating a possible violation of this section.
   G.   Enforcement:
      1.   Minors:
         a.   Before taking any enforcement action hereunder, an officer shall
make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not
the presence of a minor in a public place, motor vehicle and/or establishment
within the Town during curfew hours is in violation of subsection D of this
section;
         b.   If such investigation reveals that the presence of such minor is
in violation of subsection D of this section, then:
            (1)   If the minor has not previously been issued a warning for any
such violation, the officer shall issue a verbal warning to the minor, which
shall be followed by a written warning mailed by the Police Department to the
minor and his or her parent(s); or (2011 Code § 15-5.2)
            (2)   If the minor has previously been issued a warning for any
such violation, the officer shall charge the minor with a violation of this
section and shall issue a summons requiring the minor to appear in court,
reference 10A Oklahoma Statutes subs
2-2-101B; and (2011 Code § 15-5.2; amd. 2017 Code)
         c.   As soon as practicable, the officer shall:
            (1)   Release the minor to his or her parent(s); or
            (2)   Place the minor in a temporary care facility for a period not
to exceed the remainder of the curfew hours so that his or her parent(s) may
retrieve the minor; or (2011 Code § 15-5.2)
            (3)   If a minor refuses to give an officer his or her name and
address, refuses to give the name and address of his or her parent(s), or if no
parent can be located prior to the end of the applicable curfew hours, or if
located, no parent appears to accept custody of the minor, the minor may be
taken to a nonsecure crisis center or juvenile shelter and/or may be taken to a
Judge or intake officer of the Juvenile Court to be dealt with in the manner
and pursuant to such procedures as required by law, reference 10A Oklahoma
Statutes subs
2-2-101B. (2011 Code § 15-5.2; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Others: If an investigation by an officer reveals that a person has
violated subsection E of this section, and if the person has not previously
been issued a warning with respect to any such violation, an officer shall
issue a verbal warning to the person, which shall be followed by a written
warning mailed by the Police Department to the person. However, if any such
warning has previously been issued to that person, then the officer shall
charge the person with a violation and shall issue a summons directing the
person to appear in court. (2011 Code § 15-5.2)
   H.   Penalties:
      1.   A person who violates this section is guilty of a separate offense
for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The court may require community service work prescribed by
the court in lieu of a fine if the product of multiplying the number of minimum
hours of community service work by the prevailing wage does not result in a
number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by law.
      2.   The Municipal Court's jurisdiction over a juvenile who violates this
section shall be expressly subject to 10A Oklahoma Statutes, as amended by HB
2640 of the 1994 Regular Session of the Oklahoma legislature. (2011 Code § 15-
5.2; amd. 2017 Code)
   I.   Review Of Provisions: The Chief of Police, at the Town Board of
Trustees' request, shall review this section and report and make
recommendations to the Board concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing
need for the juvenile curfew. The Chief's report shall specifically include the
following information:
      1.   The practicality of enforcing the curfew and any problems with
enforcement identified by the Police Department;
      2.   The impact and cost of the curfew;
      3.   Other data and information which the Police Department believes to
be relevant in assessing the effectiveness of the curfew; and
      4.   Information from citizens regarding whether the curfew has been
administered and enforced fairly, including information regarding the age,
gender and race of those charged or detained under the curfew. (2011 Code § 15-
5.2)
6-6-2: TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    LICENSE: A license issued by the Town of Mooreland for the retail sale of
tobacco products.
   LICENSEE: The holder of a valid license for the retail sale of tobacco
products.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE: A driver's license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
eighteen (18) years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness
of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
   SAMPLE: A tobacco or vapor product distributed to members of the public at
no cost for the purpose of promotion of the product.
   SAMPLING: The distribution of samples to the members of the public.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption.
   VAPOR PRODUCTS: Noncombustible products, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. "Vapor products" shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic device. "Vapor products"
do not include any products regulated by the United States Food and Drug
Administration under chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   B.   Furnishing Or Selling Tobacco Or Vapor Products To Minors:
      1.   Prohibited; Exemptions: It is unlawful for any person to sell or
furnish in any manner any tobacco or vapor product to another person who is
under eighteen (18) years of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco or
vapor product on behalf of any such person. Provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful for an employee under eighteen (18) years of age to handle such
products when required in the performance of the employee's duties.
      2.   Identification Requirements:
         a.   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco or vapor
products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if
an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the
prospective purchaser may be under eighteen (18) years of age.
         b.   When duly authorized by State or Federal law, a person engaged in
the sale or distribution of tobacco or vapor products shall demand proof of age
from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude
on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under twenty
seven (27) years of age.
      3.   Violation; Penalties:
         a.   Penalties: When a person violates subsection B1 or B2 of this
section, the Town may impose the following fines:
            (1)   Not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense;
            (2)   Not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
offense within a two (2) year period following the first offense;
            (3)   Not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third
offense within a two (2) year period following the first offense. In addition
to any other penalty, the store's license to sell tobacco products or the
store's Sales Tax permit for a store that is predominantly engaged in the sale
of vapor products in which the sale of other products is merely incidental may
be suspended for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days; or
            (4)   Not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a fourth or
subsequent offense within a two (2) year period following the first offense. In
addition to any other penalty, the store's license to sell tobacco products or
the store's Sales Tax permit for a store that is predominantly engaged in the
sale of vapor products in which the sale of other products is merely incidental
may be suspended for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days.
         b.   Responsibility For Violations:
            (1)   If the sale is made by an employee or the owner of a store at
which tobacco or vapor products are sold at retail, the employee shall be
guilty of the violation and shall be subject to a fine.
            (2)   When duly authorized by State or Federal law, the owner of
the store shall also be subject to any fine which is assessed against an
employee of the store.
            (3)   For purposes of determining the liability of a person
controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations for a
violation of subsection B1 or B2a of this section, each individual franchise or
business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
      4.   Failure To Pay Fine: Upon failure of a person to pay such fine
within ninety (90) days of the day of such assessment, the Town may notify the
Oklahoma ABLE Commission. The ABLE Commission shall then notify the Department
of Public Safety, and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's
license to said person until proof of payment has been furnished to the
Department of Public Safety.
   C.   Purchase, Receipt Or Possession Of Tobacco Or Vapor Products By Minors:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age
to purchase, receive, or have in his or her possession a tobacco product or
vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age
which is false or fraudulent, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any
tobacco product or vapor product. It shall not be unlawful for an employee
under eighteen (18) years of age to handle tobacco products or vapor products
when required in the performance of the employee's duties.
      2.   a. When a person violates subsection C1 of this section, the Town
shall impose a fine of:
            (1)   Not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
offense; and
            (2)   Not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second or
subsequent offense within a one (1) year period following the first offense.
         b.   Upon failure of the individual to pay the fine within ninety (90)
days of the day of the fine, the Town shall notify the ABLE Commission. The
ABLE Commission shall then notify the Department of Public Safety, and the
department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to said person until
proof of payment has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
   D.   Enforcement:
      1.   Municipal police officers are authorized and empowered to enforce
and penalize conduct under the manner that can be expected to prevent tobacco
or vapor products from being sold or distributed to persons under eighteen (18)
years of age.
      2.   Other persons may be enlisted by Municipal police officers to assist
in enforcement as may be allowed by State and Federal law.
      3.   Persons under eighteen (18) years of age may be enlisted by
Municipal police to assist in enforcement. Provided, however, that such persons
may be used to test compliance in a manner prescribed by the Oklahoma ABLE
Commission. All official notices and/or reporting of such testing shall be
provided to the ABLE Commission as required by State law.
      4.   Persons under eighteen (18) years of age may be used to test
compliance if the compliance test is being conducted by or on behalf of a
retailer of cigarettes, as defined in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 301, at any
location the retailer of cigarettes is authorized to sell cigarettes.
   E.   Nonretaliation: No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire
or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant or customer who
reported violations of any provisions of this section. (2011 Code § 10-29; amd.
2017 Code)
6-6-3: TRUANCY:
It shall be unlawful for a student or person between the ages of five (5) and
eighteen (18), as defined in 70 Oklahoma Statutes section 10-105, to fail or
refuse to attend school, as provided in 70 Oklahoma Statutes section 10-101 et
seq., as amended. (Ord. 327, 3-13-2016)
CHAPTER 7
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Fireworks Prohibited; Exceptions
6-7-2: Violation; Penalty
6-7-1: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
The manufacture, sale, possession, display for sale, use, or discharge of
fireworks shall be unlawful in the Town. The prohibitions of this section shall
not apply to any public demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if
conducted under proper supervision of the Mooreland Volunteer Fire Department.
(2011 Code § 8-31)
6-7-2: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 8-36)
CHAPTER 8
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
6-8-1: Removal Of Graffiti
6-8-1: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
The Town hereby adopts, in whole but not as an exclusive remedy, the procedure
found in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112.2 for causing graffiti to be
removed from property within the Town. (2011 Code § 4-36)
CHAPTER 9
DISCRIMINATION IN HOUSING
SECTION:
6-9-1: Purpose
6-9-2: Prohibited Acts
6-9-3: Exemptions
6-9-4: Fair Housing Board
6-9-5: Grievance Procedure
6-9-6: Service Of Notices
6-9-7: Violation; Penalty
6-9-1: PURPOSE:
The general purpose of this chapter is:
   A.   To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods;
and
   B.   To preserve the public safety, health and welfare. (2011 Code § 5-24)
6-9-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, commercial lending institution, real
estate broker, real estate salesman or agent:
   A.   To refuse to sell, lease, rent, or otherwise transfer the title or
other interest in any housing, or real property upon which residential housing
is to be constructed to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit
because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin.
   B.   To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or leasing
of any residential property, or to represent that such property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease, when in fact it is so
available, because of such person's race, color, sex, religion, or origin.
   C.   To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person
owning any interest in any residential housing to sell, rent, or lease, or not
to sell, rent or lease, such housing to any person on the ground of loss of
value due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person
or persons of another race, color, sex, religion, or origin, either by direct
solicitation or inducement or by the purchase of other property in the
neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, or to distribute, or cause to
be distributed, or make statements designed to induce a residential property
owner to sell or lease his property due to such change in neighborhood.
   D.   To deny or make different terms or conditions for home loans by a
commercial lender, such as a bank, savings and loan association, mortgage
institution and/or insurance company.
   E.   To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with
knowledge that such complaint is false in any material respect, or to file such
complaint for the sole purpose of harassment. (2011 Code § 5-24)
6-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall apply to:
   A.   Any religious nonprofit organization or association or society
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society from limiting the sale or rental of
dwelling units owned and operated for other than a commercial purpose.
   B.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such
private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family
houses at any one time; and provided further, that only one (1) such sale may
be made within any twenty four (24) month period.
   C.   Any dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four (4) families living independent of each other and
the owner actually occupies one (1) such living quarters as his residence.
(2011 Code § 5-24)
6-9-4: FAIR HOUSING BOARD:
The Town Board of Trustees shall be and have the duties of the Fair Housing
Board of the Town (hereinafter referred to as "board"), and such is created
hereby. (2011 Code § 5-24)
6-9-5: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
The following procedure is hereby adopted for any grievance under this chapter:
   A.   Complaint Filed: Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice
prohibited by this chapter may file with the Fair Housing Board a complaint, in
writing, under oath. Said complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to
be aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to
have violated the provisions of this chapter, and shall further set forth the
particulars of said violation, and may include such other information as may be
required by the board. Complaints filed under this chapter must be filed within
thirty (30) days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within the
said time shall be considered a waiver of the application of this chapter. The
board may issue a complaint on its own initiative at any time it is within the
knowledge of the board that the person has violated any of the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Investigation: The board shall investigate each complaint filed with
the board, and shall attempt an adjustment of said complaint by means of
conference and conciliation. Sixty (60) days shall be allowed for the purpose
of investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a
complaint is not well founded, the board shall dismiss said complaint and
notify the complainants and respondent in writing of said dismissal. If it
appears that the complaint might have merit, the complainants shall be advised
of their rights of existing State and Federal laws.
   C.   Notice Of Complaint And Hearing: If conference or conciliation does not
result in compliance with this chapter, the board shall cause to be issued and
served in the name of the Town a written notice, together with a copy of said
complaint, requiring the person named in said complaint, hereinafter referred
to as "respondent", to answer charges of said complaint at a hearing before the
board at a time and place to be specified in the notice.
   D.   Hearing: At the hearing provided for in subsection C of this section,
the complaint shall be heard by the board. At the hearing, the complainant or
person aggrieved may appear in person and/or by counsel, and the respondent may
file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by legal
counsel. The board, when conducting any hearing pursuant to this chapter, may
permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the
hearing shall be under oath and shall be transcribed at the request of either
party or, at the direction of the board, the party requesting the
transcription, to be responsible for the costs thereof. If the board finds at
said hearing that the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice or
practices prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its findings of fact and
shall so certify the matter to the Town Attorney for appropriate action. No
prosecution shall be brought under this chapter except upon such certification.
If the board, upon hearing, finds that the respondent has not engaged in any
discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact and shall issue
and file an order dismissing the complaint.
   E.   Rules And Regulations: The board shall establish rules and regulations
to govern and expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure and shall
maintain the files provided for herein. (2011 Code § 5-24)
6-9-6: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be served
upon any person may be served personally on such person or by mailing a copy
thereof, by certified or registered mail, with the return receipt requested, to
the most current business or residence address of such person. (2011 Code § 5-
24)
6-9-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful and constitute an offense for any person to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, and any person found guilty of violating any
provision shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and is subject, upon
conviction, to the penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this Code, and each day that an act or omission is continued shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and be construed as a separate offense.
(2011 Code § 5-24; amd. 2017 Code)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: State Traffic Code Adopted
7-1-2: Authority Of Mayor And Board Of Trustees
7-1-3: Play Streets
7-1-4: Impoundment Of Vehicles
7-1-5: Violation, Penalties And Costs
7-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
The provisions of the Uniform Vehicle Code of the State of Oklahoma as set
forth in 47 Oklahoma Statutes, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted
and incorporated fully and to the same extent as is set out herein. A copy of
said provisions is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer for public
use and inspection. (2011 Code § 21-1; amd. 2017 Code)
7-1-2: AUTHORITY OF MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
   A.   Make Traffic Regulations Effective; Determine Emergency And
Experimental Regulations: The Mayor, subject to any direction which the Board
of Trustees may give by motion or resolution, is hereby empowered to make
effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the Town and to make
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in
effect for more than ninety (90) days. (2011 Code § 21-2)
   B.   Designate Crosswalks And Safety Zones: The Mayor, subject to any
direction which the Town Board may give by motion or resolution, is hereby
authorized:
      1.   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in its
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at
such other places as it may deem necessary; and
      2.   To establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and
at such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(2011 Code § 21-8)
   C.   Sign One-Way Streets And Alleys: Whenever the Town Board of Trustees,
by motion or resolution, designates any street or alley or part thereof as a
one-way street or alley, the Town shall have placed and maintained signs giving
notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are
in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited. (2011 Code § 21-13)
   D.   Designate And Sign Through Streets:
      1.   The Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, may designate
any street or part of a street "a through street". (2011 Code § 21-14)
      2.   Whenever the Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, so
designates and describes a through street, the Town shall have placed and
maintained a stop sign, or if deemed more appropriate at any intersection, a
yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless
traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control
signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through
streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street
not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of
said streets as may be determined by the Town Board of Trustees, if deemed
desirable. (2011 Code § 21-15)
   E.   Designate And Sign Stop Or Yield Intersections: The Mayor, subject to
any direction given by the Town Board of Trustees by motion or resolution, is
hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular
hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine:
      1.   Whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event, he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place where a stop is required; or (2011 Code § 21-16)
      2.   Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection, in which event, he shall cause to be
erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. (2011
Code § 21-16; amd. 2017 Code)
   F.   Designate And Sign Angle Parking Areas: The Town Board of Trustees, by
motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets
angle parking shall be permitted and shall have such streets marked or signed.
(2011 Code § 21-18)
7-1-3: PLAY STREETS:
   A.   Authority To Establish And Sign: The Mayor, subject to any direction
which the Town Board of Trustees may give by motion or resolution, shall have
the authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have
placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to
protect the same. (2011 Code § 21-6)
   B.   Use Restrictions: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business
or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(2011 Code § 21-7)
7-1-4: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Authority To Impound: In addition to the authority granted in 47
Oklahoma Statutes, members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of safety under any
of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
      1.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or
causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.
      2.   When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic, and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are,
by reason of physical injury or otherwise, incapacitated to such an extent as
to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
      3.   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
      4.   When any vehicle has been parked for more than one (1) hour in
excess of the time allowed for parking in any place.
      5.   When any vehicle which has been involved in two (2) or more
violations of this title for which citation tags have been issued and not
presented as required, is parked in violation of any provision of this title.
      6.   When any vehicle is in violation of title 5, chapter 4 of this Code.
      7.   When any vehicle which is in violation of section
7-3-1 of this title or section
8-1-2 of this Code following proper notification.
   B.   Release Of Vehicle: A vehicle impounded as provided herein shall be
delivered back to the owner or other person to whom it may properly be
delivered only after such fine or fines and costs as may be properly assessed
by the Municipal Judge for the violation or violations for which such vehicle
was impounded and any reasonable costs or charges for impounding and storage
shall have been paid. (2011 Code § 21-25)
   C.   Impound And Storage Fees:
      1.   When a vehicle is impounded as provided herein, the Town may assess
an impound fee in the amount as provided in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. Said impound fee shall be paid in
full prior to the release of the vehicle from the Town impound lot.
      2.   When a vehicle is impounded as provided herein and stored on Town
property, the Town shall assess a storage rate in the amount as provided in the
fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. Any portion
of a day which the impounded vehicle is stored on Town property shall
constitute a full day for calculation of the total storage fee. Said storage
fee shall be paid in full prior to the release of the vehicle from the Town
impound lot. (Ord. 324, 8-8-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
7-1-5: VIOLATION, PENALTIES AND COSTS:
   A.   Violation; Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. However, penalty may not be greater than that established
by statute for the same offense. (2011 Code § 21-36; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Court Costs: The Municipal Court shall assess court costs in all
matters in which an offender is found guilty or pleads guilty or no contest to
the offense. Such costs shall be set at the maximum amount allowed by the State
legislature. (Ord. 325, 8-8-2016)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Authority To Install Devices
7-2-2: Manual And Specifications
7-2-3: Marked Traffic Lanes
7-2-4: Testing Devices
7-2-5: Falsely Actuating Pedestrian Control Signal
7-2-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL DEVICES:
The Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, shall have placed and
maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required
under this title and the traffic ordinances of the Town to make effective the
provisions of this title and such ordinances, and may have placed and
maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals and devices as it may
deem necessary to regulate traffic under this title and the traffic ordinances
of the Town or under State law to guide or warn traffic. (2011 Code § 21-4;
amd. 2017 Code)
7-2-2: MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the State Highway Department. All signs and signals
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be
uniform as to type and location throughout the Town, and all traffic control
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State law or
this title shall be official traffic control devices. (2011 Code § 21-4)
7-2-3: MARKED TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   Authority: The Mayor, subject to any direction which the Town Board of
Trustees may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to have traffic
lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary. (2011 Code § 21-9)
   B.   Driving In Marked Lanes: Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it
is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise
authorized by this title or Town ordinance. (2011 Code § 21-9; amd. 2017 Code)
7-2-4: TESTING DEVICES:
The Mayor may have traffic control devices tested under actual conditions of
traffic. (2011 Code § 21-2)
7-2-5: FALSELY ACTUATING PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNAL:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to actuate a pedestrian
control signal without intent to use the pedestrian crossing, or any manner to
deceive or attempt to deceive vehicular traffic at the intersection of a
pedestrian crossing, or knowingly to cause vehicular traffic to stop or yield
at a pedestrian crossing without intent to use the pedestrian crossing.
   B.   Violation; Penalties:
      1.   A person who violates this section is guilty of an offense. Each
offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00), plus costs. The court may require community service work
prescribed by the court in lieu of a fine if the product of multiplying the
number of minimum hours of community service work by the prevailing wage does
not result in a number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by law. (2011
Code § 21-5)
      2.   The Municipal Court's jurisdiction over a juvenile who violates this
section shall be expressly subject to 10A Oklahoma Statutes. (2011 Code § 21-5;
amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Obstructing Traffic Prohibited
7-3-2: Duty Of Driver At Uncontrolled Intersections
7-3-3: Speed Limits
7-3-4: Turning Movements
7-3-5: Riding Bicycles On Sidewalks
7-3-6: Use Of Roller Skates And Toy Vehicles
7-3-7: Vehicle Braking
7-3-1: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED:
   A.   Except as authorized by this Code or ordinance of the Town and in a
manner prescribed by the Town, no person shall obstruct the free movement of
vehicles or pedestrians using the streets, sidewalks or other public ways.
(2011 Code § 21-35; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   No person shall park or stand a vehicle in such a manner or location
that it impedes traffic or obstructs the view or constitutes a hazard to public
safety or an obstruction on a street, sidewalk, or other public way. (2011 Code
§ 21-35)
7-3-2: DUTY OF DRIVER AT UNCONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection without any traffic control
device to regulate the flow of traffic entering the intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles already in the intersection or to any vehicle
from his right whenever that vehicle is so close as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (2011 Code § 21-16)
7-3-3: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Basic Rule: Any person driving a vehicle on a street shall drive the
same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of
the highway, and any other condition then existing; and no person shall drive
any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it
to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
   B.   Maximum Limits: Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower
speed for compliance with subsection A of this section, the limits specified in
this title or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful
speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess
of such maximum limits as follows:
      1.   Fifteen Miles Per Hour: Fifteen (15) miles per hour on any street
adjacent to any school between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. on days when school is in session except as otherwise required by
State authority.
      2.   Twenty Five Miles Per Hour: Twenty five (25) miles per hour on other
streets and on streets adjacent to schools at other times than that specified
in subsection B1 of this section; provided, that the Town Board of Trustees, by
motion or resolution, may reduce or increase this speed limit, and when it does
so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets
indicating the lower or higher speed limit.
      3.   Specific Roadways:
         a.   SH 50 B:
45 miles per hour beginning at a point 2,800 feet west of SH 50 and extending
east to a point 1,750 feet west of SH 50 (0.20 miles).
35 miles per hour beginning at a point 175 feet west of SH 50 and extending
east to SH 50 (0.33 miles).
Total approximate length zoned 0.53 miles.
         b.   SH 50 And SH 412 As Posted:
25 miles per hour zone from the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) west 55.1 feet
to 896.9 feet west of the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) when school zone
lights are activated.
30 miles per hour zone from the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) east 205.5 feet
to 1,657.2 feet west of the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street).
40 miles per hour zone from the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) east 205.5 feet
to 557.11 feet east of the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) and from the center
of U.S. 50 (Main Street) west 1,657.2 feet to 2,630.7 feet west of the center
of U.S. 50 (Main Street).
50 miles per hour zone from the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) east 1,543.4
feet to 2,790.0 feet east of the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) and from the
center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) west 2,630.7 feet to 3,791.0 feet west of the
center of U.S. 50 (Main Street).
55 miles per hour zone from the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) east 2,790.0
feet to 3,418.4 feet east of the center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) and from the
center of U.S. 50 (Main Street) west 3,791.0 feet to 4,152.4 feet west of the
center of U.S. 50 (Main Street).
   C.   Driving Too Slowly: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive at
such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic.
   D.   Excessive Acceleration: No driver shall either purposely or
inadvertently cause his vehicle to accelerate at such an excessive rate of
speed so as to spin or squeal the tires of said vehicle. (2011 Code § 21-10)
7-3-4: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Authority To Place And Obedience To Turning Markers:
      1.   The Mayor, subject to any direction which the Town Board of Trustees
may give by motion or resolution, is authorized to have placed markers, buttons
or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law
or ordinance.
      2.   When authorized markers, buttons or other indicators are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indicators. (2011 Code § 21-11)
   B.   Authority To Place Restricted Turn Signs: The Town Board of Trustees,
by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine those intersections
at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn or U-turn and
shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns
may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other
hours, in which event, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or
they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (2011 Code § 21-12)
   C.   U-Turns:
      1.   Prohibited U-Turns:
         a.   It shall be unlawful to cross the centerline of the street and
park the vehicle at the curb on what was the left side of the street to said
driver prior to his crossing said centerline from Highway 412 (6th and Main)
north to the railroad tracks; or
         b.   To proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the Town
except at an intersection, and furthermore, it is unlawful for the driver of a
vehicle to make such a turn at any intersection:
            (1)   Where traffic control signals are installed;
            (2)   Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the
latter's direction; or
            (3)   Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and
maintained.
      2.   Method Of Turning: When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be made
only when it can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(2011 Code § 21-19)
7-3-5: RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Prohibited In Business District: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a
sidewalk within a business district. (2011 Code § 21-17)
   B.   Signs Posted: The Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, is
authorized to have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway which prohibit the
riding of bicycles on a sidewalk within a business district, and when such
signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same. (2011 Code § 21-17; amd.
2017 Code)
   C.   Yield To Pedestrians: Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrians. (2011 Code
§ 21-17)
7-3-6: USE OF ROLLER SKATES AND TOY VEHICLES:
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk; and so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street
as authorized by this Code or ordinance of the Town. (2011 Code § 21-3; amd.
2017 Code)
7-3-7: VEHICLE BRAKING:
   A.   Noise Control upon Braking Or Slowing Down:
      1.   Prohibition: The driver of any vehicle, including, but not limited
to, motor carriers, trucks, semitrailers, and tractor trailers, shall not cause
their vehicle to brake or slow by any method which increases the noise emission
levels of the engine, including, but not limited to, the method where engin
compression is used to slow the vehicle in lieu of applying the clutch or
brakes.
   B.   Violation: Any violation of this section shall be a violation of the
traffic regulations of the City and is subject to punishment in accordance with
1-4-1 of the Mooreland Town Code.
(Ord. 263, 6-17-2004; amd. Ord. 354, - -2021)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic
7-4-2: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
7-4-3: Parking More Than Seventy Two Hours Prohibited
7-4-4: Time Limit Parking; Prohibited Parking
7-4-5: Parking On One-Way Roadways
7-4-6: Curb Loading Zones
7-4-7: Violations; Prima Facie Proof
7-4-1: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle within Main Street of the Town in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than adequate width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle within a street in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than adequate width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within a street in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (2011 Code § 21-20)
7-4-2: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
   A.   Displaying the vehicle for sale.
   B.   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things.
   C.   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency. (2011 Code § 21-22)
7-4-3: PARKING MORE THAN SEVENTY TWO HOURS PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle on any street or in any alley for a period of
time longer than seventy two (72) hours. This section shall not affect parking
limits established for shorter periods. (2011 Code § 21-23)
7-4-4: TIME LIMIT PARKING; PROHIBITED PARKING:
The Mayor, subject to any direction which the Board of Trustees may give by
motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to establish parking time limits or
to prohibit parking on designated streets and parts of streets by having
appropriate signs placed thereon. When such signs are in place, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation thereof. (2011 Code §
21-21)
7-4-5: PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS:
In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle upon the left hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs
or markings are placed to permit such standing or parking. The Town Board of
Trustees, by motion or resolution, is authorized to determine when standing or
parking may be permitted upon the left hand side of such one-way roadway and to
have signs or markings placed giving notice thereof. (2011 Code § 21-24)
7-4-6: CURB LOADING ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Designate; Signs Posted: The Mayor, subject to any
direction which the Town Board of Trustees may give by motion or resolution, is
hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb
loading zones, and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs
indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this
section are applicable. By the same authority, such loading zones may be
changed or discontinued.
   B.   Request By Individuals; Responsibility For Costs: When such a loading
zone is established on request of any person, the Town shall not have signs
placed until the applicant has paid to the Town an amount of money established
by the Town Board to be adequate to reimburse the Town for all costs of
establishing and signing the same. (2011 Code § 21-26)
7-4-7: VIOLATIONS; PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the
standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described
in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time
of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred. This stated presumption shall
apply only when the procedure of giving a citation tag has been followed. (2011
Code § 21-29)
CHAPTER 5
TRUCK TRAFFIC
SECTION:
7-5-1: Short Title
7-5-2: Findings
7-5-3: Definition
7-5-4: Truck Traffic Restricted
7-5-5: Truck Routes Designated
7-5-6: Emergency Permits
7-5-7: Signs Posted
7-5-8: Penalties
7-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the TOWN OF MOORELAND TRUCK ROUTE ORDINANCE.
(2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-2: FINDINGS:
The Town Board of Trustees hereby finds and determines that it is necessary for
the public health, safety, and welfare to designate certain streets, roads, or
highways located in the Town as appropriate or inappropriate for use by
commercial trucks in route to various destinations in the Town. In recent years
the Mooreland area has experienced significant growth or increases in the
volume of commercial truck traffic, and along with the increases in such
traffic, the Town has noted increased complaints from the residents of certain
areas in the Town through which the commercial truck traffic passes en route to
various industrial or commercial enterprises which are either located in the
Town or nearby. (2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-3: DEFINITION:
   A.   The word "truck", when used in this chapter, shall mean any "truck",
"truck-tractor", or "vehicle", as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes, and further
defined as any motor vehicle constructed or used for the transportation of
goods, wares, merchandise, raw materials, or materials which have been
processed, although the manufacturing process has not been completed or there
are other steps to be completed in the manufacturing process. The word "truck"
does not include the following:
      1.   Bus;
      2.   School bus;
      3.   Fire truck;
      4.   Other emergency vehicles;
      5.   Motor home;
      6.   Farm tractors and equipment;
      7.   Utility service vehicles or vehicles used for construction in the
Town while in performance of that work;
      8.   Road construction and maintenance equipment, so long as being used
for that purpose;
      9.   "Wreckers" as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes;
      10.   Trucks on a public way which is not an approved truck route as
designated in subs
7-5-5A of this chapter; provided, that the truck is engaged in a pick up or
delivery within the Town, and the public way on which the truck is being
operated to reach its destination or return to its point of origin is the
shortest direct route between the pick up and delivery point and the closest
designated truck route within the Town. However, trucks qualifying for this
exception must comply with the length restrictions in subs
7-5-5B of this chapter;
      11.   Town owned vehicles;
      12.   Detoured trucks;
      13.   Wide loads or house trailers with escorts and permission of the
Chief of Police; and
      14.   Private automobiles and pickup trucks. (2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-4: TRUCK TRAFFIC RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate or cause to be
operated a commercial truck, as herein defined, on any street, road, public
right-of-way, or highway unless that route has been designated by this chapter
as one on which commercial truck traffic is permitted. (2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-5: TRUCK ROUTES DESIGNATED:
   A.   No person shall operate or allow the operation of any truck on a public
way within the Town except Highway 412 and Highway 50.
   B.   No person shall operate or allow the operation of vehicles on any
public way within the Town if the total length exceeds forty eight feet (48'),
except on Highway 412 and Highway 50. (2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-6: EMERGENCY PERMITS:
The Chief of Police may issue emergency permits for use of a street otherwise
prohibited by this chapter when the Chief finds that it is necessary for public
safety reasons. (2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-7: SIGNS POSTED:
The Town shall, with the approval of Woodward County and/or the Oklahoma
Department of Transportation, cause all routes which are designated as truck
routes to be posted. (2011 Code § 20-21)
7-5-8: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, or corporation which violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a traffic violation pursuant to section
1-7-13 of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 20-21; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 6
GOLF CARTS AND RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Vehicles Permitted; Use Regulations
7-6-3: Permit Requirements
7-6-4: Use Of Roadways
7-6-5: Equipment And Inspections Required
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
GOLF CART: A small four (4) wheeled motorized vehicle having nonstraddle
seating for transporting golfers and their equipment around a golf course.
RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE: Manufactured and used exclusively for off
highway use, traveling on four (4) or more nonhighway tires, having nonstraddle
seating and steered by a steering wheel. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014)
7-6-2: VEHICLES PERMITTED; USE REGULATIONS:
Golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles may be operated in the Town
limits on residential streets with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per
hour or less. A Town permit and insurance are required where golf carts and
recreational off highway vehicles are used as general transportation. Golf
carts or recreational off highway vehicles will be governed by all motor
vehicle laws as applied by Town, State and Federal agencies. Remaining on
streets with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour will be strictly
enforced. The driver must be sixteen (16) years old with a valid Class D
driver's license. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014)
7-6-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles that require permits
must be inspected by the Town Police Department.
   B.   Golf cart or recreational off highway vehicle owners must provide
evidence of valid insurance when applying for a permit.
   C.   Inspection certificate renewal notices will not be provided by the
Town. It is the responsibility of the vehicle owner to ensure that his permit
is renewed. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014)
   D.   The cost of permits shall be as provided in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and said cost shall be disbursed as
provided in the fee schedule. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   All permits will expire on December 31 of the year issued. (Ord. 313,
9-8-2014)
7-6-4: USE OF ROADWAYS:
   A.   The crossing of a State highway can only be completed on a road with a
twenty five (25) mile per hour speed zone and only at an intersection. Golf
carts and recreational off highway vehicles cannot travel upon any State or
Federal highway. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the vehicle owner to know what roads
are designated as permissible for operation of golf carts or recreational off
highway vehicles. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014)
7-6-5: EQUIPMENT AND INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Golf carts or recreational off highway vehicles must have the following
minimum equipment: (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014)
      1.   A working amber color rotating or strobe light that can be seen from
all directions or a slow moving vehicles orange triangle on the rear.
      2.   Windshield or DOT approved eyewear.
      3.   Full roof or approved roll cage.
      4.   If equipped with headlamps, taillights, stoplights, mirror, brakes,
parking brake, and seat belts, they must all be in proper working order and
subsection A1 of this section will not be required. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014; amd.
2017 Code)
   B.   Each item of equipment must meet the following Town Police Department
inspection requirements:
      1.   Current valid Class D driver's license in possession of a driver
sixteen (16) years or older.
      2.   Operating with all lights on and working.
      3.   Operated solely on roads designated by the Town.
      4.   No rear facing passengers. (Ord. 313, 9-8-2014)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Obstructing Public Ways
8-1-2: Parking Or Storage Of Personal Property On Public Ways And Property
8-1-3: Sidewalk Maintenance Required
8-1-4: Depositing Materials And Substances Prohibited
8-1-5: Drainage Of Water And Other Substances
8-1-6: Removal Of Snow And Ice Required
8-1-7: Street Names And Numbers
8-1-8: Closing Public Ways Or Easements
8-1-9: Auctions On Public Ways
8-1-10: Violation; Penalty
8-1-1: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct or cause
to be obstructed any public street, sidewalk, or public alley in the Town in a
manner to interfere to any extent in the use thereof by the public, by placing
in said street or alley or upon said sidewalk anything of any character by
which the use thereof to the full extent and width thereof is obstructed;
provided, that it shall be lawful for any such person, firm, or corporation to
occupy such portion of any such streets, alleys, or sidewalks as may be
necessary for the loading and unloading of any merchandise or farm products or
the use thereof for placing material within boundaries to be prescribed by the
Mayor during the erection of buildings therein and to no greater extent than
shall not prohibit the construction of steps on the sidewalk leading to the
first floor of buildings. (2011 Code § 20-7)
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the
Town in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon,
or to use or obstruct the streets or alleys of the Town in any manner so as to
interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon. (2011 Code § 20-5)
8-1-2: PARKING OR STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of the Town Board to prohibit long term
storage of vehicles and personal property on Town streets, alleys, rights-of-
way or other public property. Moving a vehicle or personal property from place
to place on public ways or property does not constitute compliance with
subsection B of this section.
   B.   Parking Or Storage Prohibited:
      1.   No person shall store, or permit to be stored, on a public right-of-
way or other public property, a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or any
other trailer, boat, camper or any other personal property within a period in
excess of seventy two (72) hours. Failure to remove such property from the
street or public property within a period of seventy two (72) hours constitutes
prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
      2.   No person shall store, or permit to be stored, on a public right-of-
way or other public property an inoperable motor vehicle for a period in excess
of twenty four (24) hours. Failure to remove such a motor vehicle from public
property within a period of twenty four (24) hours constitutes prima facie
evidence of a violation of this subsection.
   C.   Written Warning Or Notice; Citation: When a police officer finds a
vehicle or property in violation of this section, a written warning may be
issued to the registered owner or other person responsible for the vehicle or
property, and/or a notice of intent to impound, allowing a reasonable period
for the person to comply with this section. Failure of the person to comply
within the time allowed shall result in the issuance of a citation, and the
vehicle or property in violation of this section may be towed/removed at the
owner's expense. (2011 Code § 21-35)
   D.   Penalties: In addition to paying any expense incurred by the Town in
connection with the impoundment and/or storage of a vehicle or property which
is in violation of this section, a person found guilty of violating subsection
B1 or B2 of this section shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, plus impoundment and storage fees. (2011 Code § 21-35; amd.
2017 Code)
8-1-3: SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the
property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
Such area shall be cleaned upon notification by Town authorities. (2011 Code §
20-8)
8-1-4: DEPOSITING MATERIALS AND SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon the
streets, alleys, parkings, or sidewalks of the Town any paper, rubbish, grass,
weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes, or other refuse of any kind.
(2011 Code § 20-6)
8-1-5: DRAINAGE OF WATER AND OTHER SUBSTANCES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, being the
owner, agent, or tenant of any building in the Town, to drain or allow to be
drained stormwaters from the roof of the building upon the public sidewalks or
upon the space between the property line and the curb line on any street or
avenue in the Town. (2011 Code § 20-9)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any residence or business to allow drainage of
any pollution or waste into any street, alley or sidewalk. The term "pollution"
and the term "waste" shall have the same definition as in 82 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1084.2. (2011 Code § 20-11; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-6: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, being owner, agent,
or tenant of any building or of any vacant lot in the Town, to allow the
sidewalks abutting on and along the building or vacant lot to be or remain
covered with snow, ice, sleet, or other thing to exceed six (6) hours at any
one time, thereby rendering the sidewalk unsafe for travel. (2011 Code § 20-10)
8-1-7: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS:
   A.   Base Line: The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway track, as the same
now exists and extends east and west through the Town, is the base line for the
numbering of all existing streets as well as all streets that may hereafter be
laid out in the Town and extending east and west through the corporate limits
of the Town. (2011 Code § 20-12)
   B.   North Of Base Line: All streets lying north of said railway shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with the first street north of the track,
which shall hereafter be known as First Street North, and thence northward
consecutively as Second Street North, Third Street North, etc. (2011 Code § 20-
13; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   South Of Base Line: All streets lying south of said railway shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with the first street south of said track,
which shall hereafter be known as First Street South and thence southward
consecutively as Second Street South, Third Street South, etc. (2011 Code § 20-
14)
8-1-8: CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS OR EASEMENTS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    CLOSING: A legislative act of the Board of Trustees discontinuing the
public use of a public way or easement without affecting title to real
property.
   EASEMENT: Right in real property as set forth in 60 Oklahoma Statutes
section 48, as amended.
   PUBLIC WAY: An avenue, street, boulevard, alley, lane, or thoroughfare open
for public use. (2011 Code § 17-8)
   B.   Authority To Close: The Board of Trustees shall have the power by
ordinance to close public use to any public way or easement within the Town
whenever deemed necessary or expedient.
   C.   Notice: The Board of Trustees shall give written notice of any proposed
closings of a public way or easement to any holder of a franchise or other
deemed by the Board of Trustees to have a special right or privilege granted by
ordinance to use the public way or easement, at least thirty (30) days prior to
passage of any ordinance providing for closing of a public way or easement.
   D.   Reopening: The Board of Trustees shall retain the absolute right to
reopen the public way or easement without expense to the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees may reopen by:
      1.   Its own motion; or
      2.   Upon application of the property owners owning more than one- half
(1/2) in area of the property abutting on the public way or easement previously
closed.
   E.   Limitation On Effects Of Closing: Closing of the public way or easement
shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate, or remove
utility, public service corporation, or transmission company facilities of
service therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by
operation of law unless released in writing executed by the owners thereof.
(2011 Code § 17-9)
8-1-9: AUCTIONS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It is unlawful for any person to hold any public or private auction for sale of
property on any of the streets or sidewalks of the Town; provided, that this
section shall not apply to the sale of property under any lien or execution or
order of any court of the State of Oklahoma or of the United States of America.
(2011 Code § 5-8)
8-1-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter
or any legal order or regulation made pursuant hereto, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (2011 Code § 20-32)
ARTICLE A. STREET USE PERMITS
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Permit Required; Exceptions
8-1A-2: Application For Permit
8-1A-3: Hearing; Contents Of Permit
8-1A-4: Permit Fee
8-1A-5: Expiration Of Permit
8-1A-6: Revocation Of Permit; Appeal
8-1A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person, firm, or corporation shall use streets, avenues, alleys, or public
ways within the corporate limits of the Town without first obtaining a permit
from the Town Clerk-Treasurer; provided, however, that this article shall not
apply to the public utilities operating within the Town under valid franchise
nor to public utilities operating within the Town who pay a gross production
tax in lieu of a franchise. (2011 Code § 20-16)
8-1A-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Before a permit shall be issued granting permission for the applicant to use
the Town's streets, avenues, alleys, and public ways, a written application
must first be filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer, which application must
contain the following information:
   A.   Name of applicant.
   B.   Use for which the permit is intended.
   C.   Duration of the proposed use.
   D.   The service to be rendered by the applicant.
   E.   A statement that the applicant will conform to all restrictions imposed
by the Town in the applicant's use of the permit.
   F.   A statement that the applicant will assume all liability for personal
injuries and property damage caused by the applicant's property in the
applicant's use of the streets, avenues, alleys, and public ways.
   G.   A statement that the applicant's use of the streets, avenues, alleys,
and public ways shall be subject to the use of the same by residents of the
Town and franchise users and other users. (2011 Code § 20-17)
8-1A-3: HEARING; CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
The application required in section
8-1A-2 of this article shall be set for hearing before the Board of Trustees at
the first regular meeting after the filing of said application. At the hearing
before the Town Board of Trustees, the Board shall determine whether or not a
need for a service rendered by the applicant exists and determine whether or
not the use of the streets, avenues, and public ways by the applicant will
jeopardize the rights of the Town or others holding franchises or paying a
gross production tax in lieu of a franchise. If, in the judgment of the Board,
a permit should be granted, the Board of Trustees shall instruct the Town
Clerk-Treasurer to issue a permit to the applicant. All permits issued under
this article shall specifically provide the following:
   A.   That the applicant must assume full liability of any and all personal
injury or property damage caused by the applicant's use of the streets,
avenues, alleys, and public ways within the Town.
   B.   That the use by the applicant of the streets, avenues, alleys, and
public ways shall be subject to the normal use of the same by residents of the
Town for travel and subject to the use by other public utilities, and that such
permit shall not be considered as exclusive.
   C.   That the applicant shall install, service, and maintain its properties
in good condition at all times, and that, in the event wires, cables, and poles
are used, they shall be so placed as not to interfere with the normal use of
the streets, avenues, and alleys by the public for travel.
   D.   That the applicant shall file with the Town a map showing the location
of its properties within the streets, alleys, avenues, and public ways of the
Town.
   E.   That the applicant shall be subject to regulation and supervision of
the Town and agrees to move its installations when, in the judgment of the
Town, such installations should be moved.
   F.   That the permit shall not be assigned except on written approval of the
Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 20-18)
8-1A-4: PERMIT FEE:
Before issuance of any permit under this article, the applicant shall pay the
annual permit fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees, and on the payment of the annual permit fee, the permit
shall be renewable from year to year, subject to the conditions of this
article. (2011 Code § 20-19; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1A-5: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
All such permits shall expire on June 30 in each year. (2011 Code § 20-19; amd.
2017 Code)
8-1A-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEAL:
The permit granted by the Town may be revoked by the Board of Trustees for good
cause shown and after a full hearing before the Board of Trustees. Such hearing
shall be held after ninety (90) days' notice to the holder of the permit. After
a full hearing before the Board, the Board may, in its discretion, and for good
cause shown, revoke the permit granted thereby under the terms of this article.
The holder of the permit may appeal from the ruling of the Board directly to
the District Court of Woodward County, where the hearing shall be held de novo.
(2011 Code § 20-20)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Tree Board
8-2-3: Arborist Licensing Requirements
8-2-4: Authority Of Property Owner
8-2-5: Permit May Be Required
8-2-6: Street Tree Species Permitted
8-2-7: Planting Requirements And Restrictions
8-2-8: Tree Care Generally
8-2-9: Trimming Trees
8-2-10: Removal Of Dead Or Diseased Trees On Private Property
8-2-11: Injury To Trees And Shrubs Prohibited
8-2-12: Interference With Tree Board Prohibited
8-2-13: Review And Appeal Of Tree Board Decisions
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names and all areas owned by the Town or to which the
public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways
within Town. (2011 Code § 1-80)
8-2-2: TREE BOARD:
   A.   Board Created; Members: There is hereby created and established a Town
Tree Board for the Town which shall consist of Town Board of Trustees, unless
appointed by the Mayor, with approval of the Board of Trustees. Said board
shall consist of no more than five (5) members. (2011 Code § 1-81)
   B.   Responsibilities: The Town Tree Board or its agent shall be responsible
for the planting, pruning, and removal of all trees located within the street
rights-of-way, easements, alleys and parks of the Town. (2011 Code § 1-83)
   C.   Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(2011 Code § 1-82)
8-2-3: ARBORIST LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage
in the business or occupation of trimming, pruning, treating, or removing
street or park trees within the Town without first applying for and procuring a
license. (2011 Code § 1-93)
   B.   License Fee: The license fee shall be as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees and shall be paid in
advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public
service company or Town employee doing such work in the pursuit of his public
service endeavors. (2011 Code § 1-93; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Bond Requirements: Before any license shall be issued, each applicant
shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for bodily injury and five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damage indemnifying the Town or any
person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
herein described. (2011 Code § 1-93)
8-2-4: AUTHORITY OF PROPERTY OWNER:
The owner of land abutting on any street may, when acting within the provisions
of this chapter, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that part of the street
abutting his land not used for public travel. (2011 Code § 1-83)
8-2-5: PERMIT MAY BE REQUIRED:
A street tree permit shall be required only when the owner of property intends
to deviate from the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. (2011 Code
§ 1-83)
8-2-6: STREET TREE SPECIES PERMITTED:
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the Town.
No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street
trees without written permission of the Town Tree Board.
Small trees:
Bradford pear
Flowering crabapple
Flowering dogwood
Hawthorn
Purple leaf plum
Redbud
Medium trees:
Bald cypress
Chinese pistachio
Golden raintree
Honey locust
Japanese pagoda tree
Kentucky coffee tree
Osage orange (male, thornless)
Pine oak
Red mulberry (male)
River birch
Large trees:
American sycamore
Black walnut
Burr oak
Chinese lacebark elm
Cottonwood (cotton less)
Green ash
Hackberry
London planetree
Pecan
Red oak
Silver maple (2011 Code § 1-84)
8-2-7: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Spacing: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the
three (3) species size classes listed in section
8-2-6 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following: small trees, thirty feet (30'); medium trees, forty feet (40'); and
large trees, fifty feet (50'). (2011 Code § 1-85)
   B.   Distance From Curb And Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from
curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree species
size classes listed in section
8-2-6 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, three
feet (3'); and large trees, four feet (4'). (2011 Code § 1-86)
   C.   Distance From Street Corners And Fire Plugs: No street tree shall be
planted closer than twenty feet (20') of any street corner, measured from the
point of nearest intersection curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be
planted closer than ten feet (10') of any fire plug. (2011 Code § 1-87)
   D.   Small Trees Only Near Utility Line: No street trees other than those
species listed as small trees in section
8-2-6 of this chapter may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of
any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(2011 Code § 1-88)
8-2-8: TREE CARE GENERALLY:
The Town shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees,
plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure safety when serving
Town utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
The Town Tree Board may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or
part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature,
is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or other pest. (2011 Code § 1-89)
8-2-9: TRIMMING TREES:
   A.   1. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of- way
within the Town shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above
the surface of the street or right-of-way. (2011 Code § 1-90)
      2.   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses, or neglects to trim trees
and shrubbery as provided in subsection A1 of this section, after receiving
five (5) days' notice from the Town Code official or the Chief of Police to do
so, shall be guilty of an offense against the Town. Every day on which the
owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to trim such trees or shrubbery,
after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a separate offense.
(2011 Code § 20-2)
   B.   The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or
broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
   C.   The Town shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device
or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right-
of-way. (2011 Code § 1-90)
8-2-10: REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Authority: The Town shall have the right to cause the removal of any
dead or diseased trees on private property within the Town when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Town.
   B.   Notice To Remove: The Town Tree Board will notify in writing the owners
of such trees.
   C.   Removal By Owner Or Town: Removal shall be done by the owners at their
own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice. In the
event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the Town shall have
the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner
property tax notice. (2011 Code § 1-91)
8-2-11: INJURY TO TREES AND SHRUBS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on any street or
alley in the Town. This section shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care
and removal of such trees and shrubbery. (2017 Code)
8-2-12: INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Town Tree Board, or any of its agents or servants, while engaging in and about
the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any
street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this
chapter. (2011 Code § 1-92)
8-2-13: REVIEW AND APPEAL OF TREE BOARD DECISIONS:
   A.   The Board of Trustees shall have the right to review the conduct, acts
and decisions of the Town Tree Board.
   B.   Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Town Tree Board
to the Board of Trustees who may hear the matter and make final decision. (2011
Code § 1-94)
CHAPTER 3
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Town Parks Designated
8-3-2: Park Use Prohibitions And Restrictions
8-3-3: Fees, Deposits And Regulations For Specific Facilities
8-3-4: Enforcement Officials
8-3-5: Violation; Penalty
8-3-1: TOWN PARKS DESIGNATED:
The following are the locations of public parks in the Town:
Lots One (1), Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), and Six (6), and West 100
feet of Lots Eleven (11) and Twelve (12), in Block Thirteen (13), Original Town
of Mooreland, Oklahoma, According to record plat thereof.
A tract of land located in the NW1/4 of Block 18, in Original Town of
Mooreland, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof described by metes
and bounds as follows:
Beginning at NW corner of Block 18, thence East a distance of 240 feet, thence
South a distance of 150 feet, thence West a distance of 240 feet, thence North
a distance of 150 feet to the point of beginning; and Lots 1, 2, and 3 in Block
18 in Original Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat
thereof; and a track of land located in the SW1/4 Block 20, in Original Town of
Mooreland, Oklahoma according to the recorded plat thereof, described by metes
and bounds as follows: Beginning at SW corner of Block 20, thence East a
distance of 240 feet, thence North a distance of 150 feet, thence West a
distance of 240 feet, thence South a distance of 150 feet to the point of the
beginning; and
Meyer Park being Reserve "A" of Meyer's Second Addition to the Town of
Mooreland, Oklahoma, according to the recorded plat thereof, dedicated by the
instrument record in Book 263 of Miscellaneous Records, at page 469, in the
office of the County Clerk of Woodward County, Oklahoma;
and shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter. This chapter shall
regulate also all public parks of the Town which may, at any time, be acquired
or used as public parks by the Town. (2011 Code § 16-1)
8-3-2: PARK USE PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Discharging Firearms: No person shall discharge firearms in the public
parks. (2011 Code § 16-2)
   B.   Damaging Park Property:
      1.   No person shall write upon or mark or deface in any manner, or use
in any improper way, any water closet, park seat, building, fence, or other
property in any park. (2011 Code § 16-3)
      2.   No person shall break, cut, mutilate, injure, remove, or carry away
any trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, stone, stone walk, bench, chair, seat,
structure, fence, property, or anything whatsoever in, upon or near any park,
or any street, avenue, or highway around same. (2011 Code § 16-6)
      3.   No person may go or walk upon any space in the parks reserved for
flowers or other plants, or otherwise invade any plot reserved by the Town for
shrubbery, grass, or flowers, or for any other purpose. (2011 Code § 16-19)
   C.   Motor Vehicles And Traffic:
      1.   Use Of Roads Only: No person shall drive or ride upon the grass or
footways or walks or elsewhere than upon the roads provided for the use of
automobiles and other vehicles. (2011 Code § 16-4)
      2.   Compliance With Traffic Regulations: All automobiles, vehicles, and
equestrians, when meeting on the driveways in any park, shall keep to the right
and comply with all other requirements of this Code and the traffic ordinances
of the Town. (2011 Code § 16-15; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Speed Limit: No person shall drive or ride at a greater speed on
streets adjacent to a public park than fifteen (15) miles per hour. (2011 Code
§ 16-5)
      4.   Bicycles, Tricycles And Motorcycles: No person shall ride or drive a
bicycle, tricycle, or motorcycle in the parks, except upon the driveways
thereof; and when passing another vehicle or equestrian from the rear to the
front of such persons, shall pass to the left side and at a moderate rate of
speed. Bicycles, tricycles, and motorcycles may not travel more than two (2)
abreast. (2011 Code § 16-23)
      5.   Racing: Horse racing or racing with any automobile or other vehicle
is hereby prohibited in any park unless permission therefor is given by the
Mayor. (2011 Code § 16-22)
   D.   Animals:
      1.   Running At Large:
         a.   Prohibited Generally: No person shall permit any horse, cow, or
other domestic animal to go or run at large in the Town parks. All such animals
shall be taken up and impounded and, if not claimed within ten (10) days, shall
be sold as provided for the sale of animals impounded by this Code and the
ordinances of the Town; and the fact that such animals were found running at
large shall be evidence of permission therefor by the owners thereof. (2011
Code § 16-18; amd. 2017 Code)
         b.   Domestic Fowl: No person may permit any domestic fowl to run at
large in the parks unless permission therefor is granted by the Mayor. (2011
Code § 16-21)
      2.   Staking Animals: No person shall fasten any horse, cow, or other
animal to any tree, stake, building, post, or other fastening in any park.
(2011 Code § 16-14)
      3.   Hunting Or Trapping, Petting Park Animals: No person shall chase,
kill, set snares for, or pet any rabbit, squirrel, bird, fish, or any animal or
thing belonging to the parks or kept therein. (2011 Code § 16-9)
   E.   Nuisances Or Offensive Conduct:
      1.   No person shall commit any nuisance or any offense against decency
and good morals in a park. (2011 Code § 16-7)
      2.   No person shall curse, swear, or use abusive language, or fight,
throw stones, or behave in a riotous or disorderly manner in any park. (2011
Code § 16-11)
   F.   Disturbing Persons: No person may disturb or interfere with any picnic,
social gathering, or program of any group of persons. (2011 Code § 16-20)
   G.   Music, Speeches And Lectures: No person shall render any music, vocal
or instrumental, or deliver any oration, address, speech, sermon, or lecture in
any of the Town parks without permission from the Mayor. (2011 Code § 16-17)
   H.   Littering, Polluting Waters:
      1.   No person shall throw stones or rubbish of any kind into any lake,
pond, stream, or other place in the parks, except receptacles designated for
that purpose. (2011 Code § 16-8)
      2.   No person shall foul in any manner any spring or drinking fountain
or stream in any park. (2011 Code § 16-13)
   I.   Billposting: No person shall paste, affix, or inscribe any handbill,
poster, card, or device, or inscribe to or upon or against any fence,
structure, or property of or on any park or highway, street, or avenue
surrounding the same. (2011 Code § 16-10)
   J.   Fires: No person except park employees shall make a fire for any
purpose in the parks unless permission is given therefor by the Town Fire
Chief. This subsection shall not prohibit, however, fires for cooking purposes
in grills and fireplaces provided in said parks for such purposes. (2011 Code §
16-16)
   K.   Vending Stand: No person shall set up any booth, table, stand, or other
device for vending or retailing any candies, ice cream, or other article
whatsoever without first obtaining permission therefor from the Mayor or other
person authorized by him to grant such permission. (2011 Code § 16-12)
8-3-3: FEES, DEPOSITS AND REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC FACILITIES:
   A.   Swimming Pool: The Board of Trustees is authorized to operate, manage,
and control the swimming pool located in Mooreland Park. The Board of Trustees
shall fix the charge for use of the pool, by resolution, and establish
regulations concerning the use and operation of the pool and safeguards against
the spread of communicable diseases. (2011 Code § 16-25; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   South Park Concession Stand: There shall be a deposit of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) for the use of the South Park concession stand upon obtaining
the key for the entrance to the concession stand. Upon returning the key, an
inspection of the facility will be performed by the utility foreman. To receive
a full refund of the deposit, the facility must have been properly cared for,
cleaned, hosed down with water and there shall be no damages to any part of the
property, equipment or premises. The bathrooms must have been maintained,
cleaned and hosed down with water, and all trash must be picked up and put in a
provided container for disposal. The deposit will be refunded in full, partial
or not at all, depending on the outcome of the inspection and return of the
key. (2011 Code § 16-26)
   C.   Mooreland Community Center:
      1.   Fee: The fee for the use of the Mooreland Community Center shall be
as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees. (2011 Code § 16-27; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Deposit: There shall be a one hundred dollar ($100.00) refundable
deposit paid at the time of checking out a key for the rent of the Community
Center. Upon returning of the key, an inspection of the facility will be
performed by Town personnel. All trash must be picked up, floors swept, kitchen
and bathrooms left clean and no destruction to any part of the building,
equipment or premises. The deposit will be refunded in full, partial, or not at
all depending on the outcome of the inspection. If the community building is to
be used on a weekend, the key must be obtained by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. in
the Town Hall on Friday before the weekend and returned by nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. on the next working day upon completion of the use of the Community
Center. If not returned in a timely manner, an additional fee will be applied.
      3.   Rental Agreement: A rental agreement shall be approved by the Board
of Trustees with changes in the agreement being made by the Board of Trustees
as deemed necessary. (2011 Code § 16-27)
8-3-4: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The keepers and watchmen of the parks shall be sworn in as special police and
are entrusted with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. They
shall at all times have assistance of the regular police force in enforcing the
same. (2011 Code § 16-24)
8-3-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 319, 3-14-2016)
CHAPTER 4
MOORELAND CEMETERY
SECTION:
8-4-1: Cemetery Established
8-4-2: Board Of Cemetery Trustees
8-4-3: Financial Duties Of Town Clerk-Treasurer
8-4-4: Cemetery Funds
8-4-5: Certificates Of Conveyance Of Lots Or Burial Sites; Abandonment
8-4-6: Fees
8-4-7: Memorials, Headstones, Landscaping And Maintenance
8-4-8: Violations; Penalty
8-4-1: CEMETERY ESTABLISHED:
The lands conveyed to the Town by deeds recorded in Book 240 of Miscellaneous
Records at pages 471 and 472, and replatted by plat recorded in Book 4 of Plats
at page 45, and Book 1262, pages 91 – 92 in the records of the County Clerk,
and any other such lands conveyed for such purpose, shall be and they hereby
are created and established as a Municipal cemetery under the laws of the State
of Oklahoma, and shall be known as "Mooreland Cemetery", which cemetery is
owned by and shall be operated by the Town as hereinafter set forth. (2011 Code
§ 6-1)
8-4-2: BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES:
   A.   Board Created: The Town Board of Trustees shall serve as the Board of
Cemetery Trustees for the Town having all the rights, privileges and duties
provided by statute for the Board of Cemetery Trustees. (2011 Code § 6-2)
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Town Board of Trustees shall have charge of and
control of the Mooreland Cemetery and is authorized to make rules and
regulations governing the management, improvement, and establishment of the
cemetery, and to fix the price for which lots shall be sold or for which an
interment shall be made; and the Board of Trustees shall appoint all officers
and employees necessary for the control and management of the cemetery,
including the appointment of a superintendent, whose duties shall be to care
for and protect the grounds and improvements thereon, enforce the rules and
regulations of the Board, supervise repairs and construction of improvements
and the maintenance of all permanent improvements and embellishments of any
kind tending to beautify the cemetery or preserve it permanently as a cemetery.
The employment compensation of all such employees shall be subject to the prior
approval of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 6-3)
8-4-3: FINANCIAL DUTIES OF TOWN CLERK-TREASURER:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, under the direction
of the Board of Trustees, to receipt for all monies received from the sale of
lots or from interments or from any other source, and to deposit such funds
with the Town Clerk- Treasurer as a Cemetery Fund. The Clerk-Treasurer shall,
on order of the Board of Trustees, pay out such funds for repairs, materials,
and services in the management, care and preservation of such cemetery. (2011
Code § 6-4)
   B.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall, on the first Monday in January and July
of each year, and at such other times as may be requested, make a full report
to the Town Board of Trustees of all lots sold, interments made, and all monies
received and expended by him in and about the cemetery. Monies shall be paid
out only on claims filed with and approved by the Board of Trustees and
warrants issued and signed by the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer. (2011 Code § 6-4; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4-4: CEMETERY FUNDS:
   A.   Cemetery Care Fund: There is hereby created a permanent fund to be
known as "the Cemetery Care Fund". Of all monies received from the sale of lots
and interments and paid to the Town Clerk- Treasurer, twelve and one-half
percent (12.5%) thereof shall be by him segregated, set aside and placed in the
fund. The fund shall be invested as provided by 62 Oklahoma Statutes section
348.1 under the direction of the Town Board of Trustees. The corpus of the
Cemetery Care Fund may be used only in purchasing lands adjacent to the
Mooreland Cemetery when the same are necessary therefor and as by State law
provides. The interest or income on the fund may be used in improving, caring
for and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, parks and other necessary
improvements on Mooreland Cemetery. (2011 Code § 6-5)
   B.   Perpetual Care Fund: Donations, deposits, or bequests may be made to
the Town Board of Trustees in trust for the special care of specified lots,
monuments, or mausoleums in the Mooreland Cemetery, and the funds shall be
segregated and set aside as a permanent fund to be known as the "Perpetual Care
Fund". A separate account shall be kept for each amount so deposited, donated
and bequeathed for the special care of specified lots. The Perpetual Care Fund
may be invested in like manner as the Cemetery Care Fund, and only the interest
derived from the fund shall be used in the care, maintenance and repair of such
lots, monuments, and mausoleums, unless otherwise specified by the donor. (2011
Code § 6-6; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   General Cemetery Fund: There is hereby created a fund to be known as
the "General Cemetery Fund" for the Mooreland Cemetery. Of all the monies
received from the sale of lots and interments and paid to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, eighty seven and one-half percent (87.5%) thereof shall be by him
placed in the General Cemetery Fund. All monies received from sale of other
services with respect to or in about the cemetery shall be placed in the fund.
Donations, gifts and bequests made to the Board of Trustees or to the Town not
in trust but for care and for current and/or annual special care of the
cemetery of specified lots, monuments, or mausoleums and any interest or income
therefrom shall be used by the Board in the current and/or annual expenses in
the improving, caring for and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, parks and
other necessary improvements and the care, maintenance and repair of lots
specified by the donor. (2011 Code § 6-7)
8-4-5: CERTIFICATES OF CONVEYANCE OF LOTS OR BURIAL SITES; ABANDONMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Mayor of the Town to sign all Certificates of
Conveyance of lots or burial sites in the Mooreland Cemetery, and it shall be
the duty of the Town Clerk- Treasurer to countersign or attest all such
certificates under the Seal of the Town, showing the price for which the lot or
lots are sold, specifying the name of the person to whom they are issued and
that he is the owner of the lot or lots described therein by number, as laid
down on the plat, for the purpose of interment; and such certificate shall vest
in the purchaser and his heirs a right in fee simple to such lot or lots, for
the sole purpose of interment.
   A.   Designation; Order Of Interment: The owner of a space may present his
or her deed to the Town Clerk-Treasurer designating in writing persons entitled
to be buried in the space or spaces owned. This designation may be amended at
any time by the owner in the same manner as the original designation. In the
event the owner fails to designate burial rights for the space or spaces owned,
and in the event the property is not transferred or conveyed as provided
herein, the right of interment in the space or spaces shall be in the following
order:
      1.   One space, niche or crypt shall be forever reserved for the owner
and one for the owner's surviving spouse, if any.
      2.   The remaining spaces shall pass to the heirs or devises of the owner
in the same manner as real property passes under Oklahoma law; provided,
however, that no person shall be interred in a space passing under this section
unless such person would have been eligible under the provision of this chapter
to be designated for burial in such space at the date of such person's death.
   B.   Rights Upon Interment: Whenever an interment of the remains of any
person is made in a space, the space thereby becomes inalienable and shall be
held as the space of the interred person. (Ord. 336, 5-14-2018)
8-4-6: FEES:
The costs for interments, cremations and plots shall be as provided in the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 6-9;
amd. 2017 Code)
8-4-7: MEMORIALS, HEADSTONES, LANDSCAPING AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be lawful for the owner of any lot(s) in the Mooreland
Cemetery to place on said lot(s) during the owner's life, permanent and
temporary memorials or other formations made of cement, artificial stone,
composition, or wood, provided said owner shall pay all actual costs of
placing, replacing, and removing said memorials and formations. Cemetery
workers shall be permitted to remove trees, plants, obstacles, bricks, or other
items which are deemed a hazard to the mowing area provided that Owners shall
remain responsible for maintenance of their lots and payment therefore.
   B.   Landscaping: Grass is the only permitted plot cover. Effective October
1, 2021, only Cemetery staff are permitted to plant, trim, or remove tree,
bushes, and flowering shrubs of any kind.
   C.   Maintenance by Lot Owner: Mowing and edging of individual site(s) by
lot owner will be permitted but will not hinder or restrict cemetery workers in
the performance of their duties. If individual site(s) are not mowed and edged
when cemetery workers are mowing and edging the same section, those areas will
be kept at the same level as the entire section by cemetery workers. Lot owner
may request to Cemetery Sexton that City maintenance equipment not be used for
the upkeep of their lot(s) unless determined necessary by the cemetery staff.
Cemetery Sexton will obtain contact information including, but not limited to,
contact name, address, city, state, zip, phone number (cell and residential),
and email address for owners requesting individual maintenance. Individual
maintenance contact information, changes, updates, and all other pertinent
information will be provided by the Cemetery Sexton to the City Hall Cemetery
Clerk for record keeping. Cemetery staff will provide and place one reflective
marker per plot (eliminate red flags) for each lot owner who submits a request
to the Cemetery Sexton that City maintenance equipment not be used for the
upkeep of their lot(s). Reflective marker will be placed by cemetery employees
at a predetermined location and height by the headstone. Reflective markers
will designate that contact(s) are responsible for the maintenance and upkeep
of the plot(s), excluding City employees from mowing and/or edging on that
location. This allowance does not give said contact permission to violate any
other cemetery ordinance. It is the contact's responsibility to properly
maintain the plot while not disturbing the reflective marker. If the reflective
marker is removed and not replaced, cemetery employees will assume upkeep.
Plastic flags or markers of any other kind are not permitted, except for the
designated reflective marker. It is ultimately the owner's responsibility that
all their lots with reflective markers are properly maintained. If any lot
becomes unsightly, the city cemetery staff will immediately assume
responsibility of upkeep. Cemetery workers shall be permitted to remove any
obstacle from a mowing area. Plastic flags, flowers or markers of any kind,
other than Memorial Day as described below, are not permitted with the
exception of plots with the designated reflective marker and items placed on
headstones or areas that do not interfere with mowers.
   D.   Special flowers and decorations will be permitted anywhere on a plot
for Memorial Day. Plot owners shall remove items they want to keep, after
Memorial Day. Any flowers placed upon cemetery plots shall be removed and
disposed of ten (10) days after Memorial Day each year. Reflective marker may
be excepted from the removal requirement. (2011 Code § 6-11; amd. Ord. 353, - -
2021)
8-4-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Trespassing upon the ground of the Mooreland Cemetery or other violation or
desecration thereof, or any wilful violation of any of the rules and
regulations made by the Board of Trustees, shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and
any person convicted thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 6-10)
CHAPTER 5
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, INDOOR AND OUTDOOR
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Possession Of Lighted Tobacco And Smoking Vape Devices In Certain Places
Prohibited
8-5-3: Exemptions
8-5-4: Designated Smoking Rooms And Areas
8-5-5: Posting
8-5-6: Violation And Penalty
8-5-7: Enforcement
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
INDOOR AREA: Any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public, at
all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. Indoor Area includes
work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee
cafeterias, hallways, and other spaces used or visited by employees, as well as
all space between a floor and ceiling that is predorrunantly or totally
enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed
windows, stairways, or the like.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY: All building, Indoor Areas, and Outdoor Areas, including
but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or portions thereof
owned or operated by the City of Mooreland, including, but not limited to
vehicles and equipment owned by the City.
OUTDOOR AREA: Any area that is not an indoor area, and includes most
recreational areas.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than employees
are invited or permitted; the term is synonymous with the phrase "any indoor
place used by or open to the public.
RESTAURANT: Any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity.
SMOKING: The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
lighted smoking device including vape product devices.
STAND-ALONE BAR, STAND- ALONE TAVERN, AND CIGAR BAR: An establishment that
derives more than sixty percent (60%) of its gross receipts, subject to
verification by competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and
low-point beer and no person under twenty-one (21) years of age is admitted,
except for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in paragraph
2 of subsection B of Section 537 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes and that
is not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common indoor
area with, any other enclosed indoor area or workplace, including a restaurant;
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption Tobacco Product does not include any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Adrninistration for sale as a tobacco cessation product;
VAPE PRODUCTS: Any noncombustible product that may or may not contain nicotine
that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or
other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a
vapor in a solution or other form. Vapor Product shall include any vapor
cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that is
intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor
cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic device. (Ord. 347, 3-9-
2020)
8-5-2: POSSESSION OF LIGHTED TOBACCO AND SMOKING VAPE DEVICES IN CERTAIN PLACES
PROHIBITED:
   A.   The use of Tobacco and Vape Products is prohibited in all places where
the use of these products is prohibited by Oklahoma State Law.
   B.   The use of Tobacco and Vape Products is prohibited on all Municipal
Property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and recreational areas.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting
the use of Tobacco and Vape products on their own property, even if the use of
these products is not otherwise prohibited in that area.
   D.   No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of Tobacco and Vape
Products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity and in
which the use of Tobacco and Vape products is prohibited by law.
   E.   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such
as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person or
entity and in which the use of Tobacco and Vape products is prohibited by law.
However the presence of ash receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of
the use of Tobacco and Vape products in violation of any provision of this
code.
   F.   No person shall dispose of Tobacco or Vape products in an area where
such use is prohibited. (Ord. 347, 3-9-2020)
8-5-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The restrictions provided in Section
8-5-2 shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Stand-alone bars, stand-alone taverns and cigar bars;
   B.   The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being
operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games;
   C.   Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the guest rooms at a hotel or other
lodging establishment;
   D.   Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption
on the premises;
   E.   Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the
immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace,
and the work-place has only incidental public access. "Incidental public
access" means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is
not an employee, present at the business to transact business or make a
delivery. It does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for
any part of their business;
   F.   Work-places occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access;
   G.   Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers;
   H.   Private residences and workplaces within private residences, except
that smoking shall not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as
a licensed child care facility during hours of operation;
   I.   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment;
   J.   A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the Anned Forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to Sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19) of the Internal
Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C., Sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19), when
such facility is utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for
the conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event
or activity which is open to the public; and
   K.   Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking shall not
be allowed within fifteen (15) feet of any exterior public doorway or any air
intake of a restaurant.
   L.   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment. (Ord. 347, 3-9-2020)
8-5-4: DESIGNATED SMOKING ROOMS AND AREAS:
   A.   An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so under this article
may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for
cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking,
provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the
outside in such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking
area. No exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within fifteen (15) feet
of any entrance, exit or air intake.
   B.   If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in Section 8-5-3 of
this article or in a smoking room pursuant to subsection (1) of this section,
such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space or, if
it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking space shall
be fairy enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air from the
smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative air
pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a
door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room shall
not be exhausted within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance, exit or air intake.
Any employer may choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including being
totally smoke free.
   C.   A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act may
designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be
fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative
air pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is
recirculated to non-smoking areas of the building.
   D.   Restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking areas
and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such
designated smoking rooms, which shall be in a location which is fully enclosed,
directly exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot
escape when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of
the building. No exhaust from such room shall be located within fifteen (15)
feet of and entrance, exit or air intake. Such room shall be subject to
verification for compliance with the provisions of this subsection by the State
Department of Health. (Ord. 347, 3-9-2020)
8-5-5: POSTING:
   A.   The person who owns or operates a place where smoking, tobacco or vape
devise use is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or
decal, at least four (4) inches by two (2) inches in size, at each entrance to
the building indicating that the place is smoke-free or tobacco-free. Where
smoking or tobacco use or vape devise use is prohibited in an outdoor area, a
weather resistant sign at least fifteen (15) inches by fifteen (15) inches in
size with lettering of at least one (1) inch shall be posted indicating that
the outdoor area is smoke-free or tobacco-free.
   B.   Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows:
      1.   In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is
in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible;
      2.   In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility involved shallbe responsible; and
      3.   In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility shall be responsible.
      4.   In or on municipal property, the City Manager or designee shall be
responsible. (Ord. 347, 3-9-2020)
8-5-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who knowingly violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 347, 3-9-
2020)
8-5-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The state or local government or the person who owns or operates a public place
shall, at a minimum, do the following in order to prevent smoking in public
places:
   A.   Post signs at entrances to places where smoking is prohibited which
state that smoking is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of
tobacco or vape device smoke; and,
   B.   Ask smokers to refrain from smoking upon observation of anyone
violating the provisions of this act.
   C.   Any peace officer or code enforcement official may enforce this
chapter. (Ord. 347, 3-9-2020)
CHAPTER 6
AIRPORT HAZARDS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Declaration
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Hazards And Obstructions Prohibited
8-6-4: Use Restrictions
8-6-5: Nonconformities
8-6-6: Material Changes
8-6-7: Existing Uses
8-6-8: Variances
8-6-9: Conflicting Provisions
8-6-10: Violation; Penalty
8-6-1: DECLARATION:
It is hereby determined that airport hazards and obstructions endanger the
life, health, safety and property of users of the Town of Mooreland Airport and
also if the obstruction types in effect reduce the size area available for
landing, taking off, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or
impair the utility of the airport and the public investment therein.
Accordingly, it is declared:
   A.   The creation or establishment of an obstruction in the glide slope path
as set forth herein is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by
the Town of Mooreland Airport.
   B.   In the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the State of Oklahoma that the creation or establishment of
obstructions or airport hazards should be prevented to alleviate the
destruction or impairment of the utility of the airport and the public
investment therein.
   C.   The prevention of hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally
possible, by the exercise of the public power without compensation.
   D.   Both the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards
and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting
of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which political
subdivisions may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in
land. (2011 Code § 20-23)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the content otherwise requires, the following
words and terms shall have the following meanings:
AIRPORT: Town of Mooreland Airport, Mooreland, Oklahoma.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the air
space required for or is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport.
RUNWAY: The paved surface for landing and taking off of aircraft along its
length.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man including, but without
limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines.
TREE: Any object of natural growth. (2011 Code § 20-24)
8-6-3: HAZARDS AND OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, copartnership, or
corporation including the Town of Mooreland, a Municipal corporation, DBA Town
of Mooreland Airport, to construct, extend, or expand any structures which
would create an airport hazard or obstruction to the users of the Town of
Mooreland Airport, known as the glide slope path for approach to Runway 17 and
the glide slope path for approach to Runway 35. (2011 Code § 20-25)
8-6-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Absent regulation of airport hazards and obstructions in the vicinity of the
airport, there is a possibility that uses could be permitted which endanger
safe aircraft operations. The land area owned by the Town of Mooreland, DBA
Town of Mooreland Airport, is hereby designated for glide slope paths for
approach to Runway 17 and approach to Runway 35. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, no use shall be made of land within any glide slope
path established by this chapter in such a manner as to:
   A.   Release into the air any substance which would impair visibility or
otherwise interfere with the operation of aircraft, e.g., steam, dust, smoke;
   B.   Produce light emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective), which
would interfere with pilot vision;
   C.   Produce emissions which would interfere with aircraft communication
systems or navigational equipment;
   D.   Attract birds or water fowl such as, but not limited to, operation of
sanitary landfills, maintenance of feeding stations, or the procuring of
certain vegetables; and/or
   E.   Introduce any use which would endanger the landing, taking off, or
maneuvering of aircraft. (2011 Code § 20-26)
8-6-5: NONCONFORMITIES:
The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree
not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date hereof or otherwise
interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended
use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date hereof, and is diligently prosecuted. (2011 Code § 20-27)
8-6-6: MATERIAL CHANGES:
No material change shall be made in the use of the land, and no structure or
tree (natural growth) shall be erected, altered or otherwise established in the
glide slope path. (2011 Code § 20-28)
8-6-7: EXISTING USES:
There shall be no allowance granted that would permit the establishment or
creation of an airport hazard or permit a structure or tree to be made or
become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the
effective date hereof, or any amendments hereto. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted. (2011 Code § 20-29)
8-6-8: VARIANCES:
Any variance may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose
of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be granted. (2011 Code
§ 20-30)
8-6-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where there exists a conflict as prescribed in this chapter and any other
regulation applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to
the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or other matter, the more
stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (2011 Code § 20-
31)
8-6-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter,
or any legal order or regulation made pursuant hereto, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (2011 Code § 20-32)
CHAPTER 7
RAILROADS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Improvements To And Maintenance Of Public Ways
8-7-2: Trains Obstructing Crossings
8-7-3: Climbing On Moving Train
8-7-4: Loitering On Railroad Premises
8-7-5: Violation, Penalties And Costs
8-7-1: IMPROVEMENTS TO AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   When the tracks of any railroad company cross any street that is
being or has been paved, the company shall pave as much of the street as is
occupied by its track or tracks and two feet (2') on each side, using the same
material as is to be or has been used on the street, or such other satisfactory
material as the Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, may approve.
      2.   When more than one (1) track crosses a street within a distance of
one hundred feet (100'), measuring from inside rail to inside rail, the
railroad company shall grade, gutter, drain, and curb the street area between
its tracks, and surface or pave it with the same material which the Town is to
use or has used on the street.
      3.   Railroad companies shall keep all such improvements made by them in
a good state of repair at all times. (2011 Code § 21-30)
   B.   Sidewalks:
      1.   Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their rights-
of-way, using the same materials as are used in the adjacent sidewalks insofar
as this is practicable under the circumstances.
      2.   They shall construct sidewalks on both sides of the streets when
both sides are used by pedestrians.
      3.   The company shall keep such sidewalks in good state of repair at all
times. (2011 Code § 21-31)
8-7-2: TRAINS OBSTRUCTING CROSSINGS:
It is unlawful for the directing officer or person in charge of any railroad
train or railroad car to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such
manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period
of time longer than five (5) minutes. (2011 Code § 21-32)
8-7-3: CLIMBING ON MOVING TRAIN:
It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner attach
himself to any railway train, locomotive, or railway car while such is in
motion within the Town, unless such person is acting in the line of duty. (2011
Code § 21-33)
8-7-4: LOITERING ON RAILROAD PREMISES:
It is unlawful for any person not acting within the line of duty, not having
any proper business or not being on any proper mission requiring his presence
there, to loiter within a railroad station or other railway building, upon a
railroad station platform, or anywhere upon a railroad yard or other railroad
premises. (2011 Code § 21-34)
8-7-5: VIOLATION, PENALTIES AND COSTS:
   A.   Violation; Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The penalty may not be greater than that established by
statute for the same offense. (2011 Code § 21-36; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Court Costs: The Municipal Court shall assess court costs in all
matters in which an offender is found guilty or pleads guilty or no contest to
the offense. Such costs shall be set at the maximum amount allowed by the State
legislature. (Ord. 325, 8-8-2016)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Application Of Provisions
9-1-2: Administrative Authority
9-1-3: Billing And Billing Adjustments
9-1-4: Discontinuance Of Service; Disconnect And Reconnect Fees
9-1-5: Lien Imposed
9-1-6: Violation; Penalty
9-1-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the public utilities of the Town,
being its electric distribution system, its water system, its sanitary sewer
system and its garbage and refuse disposal and collection system. (2011 Code §
19-81; amd. 2017 Code)
9-1-2: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
The Town Administrator shall have the authority to decide any questions
contained in this title, and his decision in such cases shall become final
unless appealed to the Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 19-85; amd. 2017 Code)
9-1-3: BILLING AND BILLING ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Rendition Of Bills:
      1.   The Town may mail a bill for service to the consumer at the address
at which service is taken or such other address as designated by the customer;
however, the Town reserves the right to adopt other methods for delivery of
bills.
      2.   Delivery is deemed to have taken place when, according to the Town's
records, a bill or any notice containing billing or past due information has
been properly delivered to the U.S. Postal System.
      3.   Failure to receive a bill in no way exempts a customer/consumer from
liability for payment of services. (2011 Code § 19-109)
   B.   Late Payment Charge: There is hereby created a late charge for the
delinquent payment of bills due the Town for sewer, trash, water and
electricity charges. The penalty shall be ten percent (10%) of the total
monthly sewer, trash, electricity and water bill, and the Town Clerk-Treasurer
shall assess the late charge to all bills which are not paid on or before the
tenth day from the billing date printed on the bill. The due date shall be no
sooner than ten (10) days after the bill is mailed. (2011 Code §§ 19-82, 19-
110)
   C.   Authority To Adjust Accounts: In cases of either an undercharge or an
overcharge to a utility customer's account, the Town Board of Trustees hereby
authorizes the Town Administrator and appointed Mooreland Public Works
Authority Clerk to adjust a utility customer's account to reflect an accurate
and correct account balance. (2011 Code § 1-39; amd. 2017 Code)
9-1-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; DISCONNECT AND RECONNECT FEES:
In the event any customer shall fail to pay his utility bill on or before the
twentieth day of the month in which it is due, the water service, the electric
service and the garbage service to such customer shall be discontinued
forthwith and without notice, and a fee set and established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection
in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be entered against the account
of the customer. Water service, electric service and/or garbage service to any
such discontinued account or customer shall not be reinstated or resumed until
all such sums due the Town, all indebtedness of all kinds, together with said
fee, shall have been paid in full. Reconnection after hours or on holidays
shall incur a fee set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of
the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of
the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code § 19-83; amd. 2017 Code)
9-1-5: LIEN IMPOSED:
In addition to any other remedy provided herein for the enforcement of
collection of any utility rate or charge made under the provisions of this
title, all rates provided in this title shall be a lien against the premises to
which said utility service may be supplied, and the owners thereof and
occupants shall be severally responsible to the Town in an action waged by the
Town in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of all such rates
and charges as may be due and unpaid, together with all penalties provided
herein and costs. (2011 Code § 19-84)
9-1-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm, association, or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (2011 Code § 19-120)
CHAPTER 2
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Scope
9-2-2: Application Of Provisions; Noncompliance
9-2-3: Amendments
9-2-4: Continuity And Quality Of Service
9-2-5: Nonliability Of Town For Water Leaks; Maintenance Of Pipes And Fixtures
9-2-6: Denial Of Service
9-2-1: SCOPE:
This chapter shall govern billing and collection for the Town's utility
services. They supersede and cancel all previous terms and conditions of
service or portions thereof that pertain to the billing and collection for
utility services. (2011 Code § 19-90)
9-2-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; NONCOMPLIANCE:
   A.   This chapter and any modifications thereof and additions thereto
lawfully made are applicable to all consumers receiving utility service from
the Town, and to all existing contracts which may be entered into by the Town,
and to all rate schedules which, from time to time, may be lawfully
established.
   B.   The Town may decline to serve a consumer or prospective consumer until
such consumer has complied with the rules and regulations of the Board of
Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and any applicable Federal,
State, and Municipal or other local laws, rules and regulations.
   C.   The Town may refuse or discontinue service to any consumer for
noncompliance with this chapter where they specifically so provide. (2011 Code
§ 19-91)
9-2-3: AMENDMENTS:
The Town retains the right to amend this chapter or to make additional terms
and conditions of service as it may deem necessary. (2011 Code § 19-92)
9-2-4: CONTINUITY AND QUALITY OF SERVICE:
   A.   The Town will use reasonable diligence to supply continuous service at
the point of delivery in all systems. It shall be the responsibility of the
consumer to install and maintain protective devices which will protect the
consumer's equipment and processes during abnormal service conditions or the
failure of part or all of a service. In no event will the Town be liable for
any service interruptions, irregularities, or any other causes or abnormalities
not caused by the sole negligence of the Town. (2011 Code § 19-93)
   B.   In order to make repairs to or changes in the Town's facilities for
supplying service, the Town reserves the right, without incurring any liability
therefor, to suspend service without notice to the consumer for such periods as
may be reasonably necessary. When conditions permit, an attempt will be made to
notify consumers affected by such an interruption. Insofar as is practicable,
interruptions shall be scheduled at a time which will cause the least
reasonable inconvenience to consumers, and where feasible, consumers likely to
be seriously affected (e.g., installations affected with interest of public
health and safety) will be notified in advance.
   C.   The Town also reserves the right to discontinue service without advance
notice when a defective condition of equipment or wiring upon the premises of
the consumer results, or is likely to result, in danger to life or property, or
interference with proper service to others. Service(s) will not be resumed
until the dangerous condition has been remedied to the satisfaction of the
Town. If such condition is the result of tampering with the Town equipment, the
provisions of this chapter shall also apply. (2011 Code § 19-93; amd. 2017
Code)
9-2-5: NONLIABILITY OF TOWN FOR WATER LEAKS; MAINTENANCE OF PIPES AND FIXTURES:
The Town will not be liable for any loss, damage or injury whatsoever caused by
leakage, escape or loss of water after same has passed through the meter, nor
for defects in the customer's piping or fittings. All pipes and fixtures on the
premises side of the meter shall be kept in good repair and free from leaks at
the expense of the customer/consumer and not of the Town. (2011 Code § 19-94)
9-2-6: DENIAL OF SERVICE:
The Town reserves the right to refuse to provide service to a consumer at any
premises until all delinquent bills for prior or current utility service
incurred with the Town are paid. The Town shall not be required to provide
service to a consumer who uses an alias, trade name, or business name of a
relative or another person as a device to escape payment of an unpaid
obligation for prior service. (2011 Code § 19-95)
ARTICLE A. APPLICATIONS AND DEPOSITS FOR SERVICES
SECTION:
9-2A-1: Application For Services; Fees
9-2A-2: Special Contract
9-2A-3: Separate Applications Required
9-2A-4: Nontransferability Of Service
9-2A-5: Responsibility For Changes In Service
9-2A-6: Service Deposits
9-2A-7: Termination Of Service
9-2A-8: Occupancy Without Application Or Deposit
9-2A-1: APPLICATION FOR SERVICES; FEES:
   A.   Application Requirements: Each customer/consumer desiring electricity,
water, sewer and/or sanitation service from the Town shall make written
application to the Town Clerk-Treasurer located at 214 S. Main Street in the
Town of Mooreland. The account will be placed in the name of the person who
signs the application for service, and that applicant shall be considered the
party responsible for the account. This application shall contain the true name
of the applicant, date of birth, service and mailing addresses (if different),
telephone number, social security number, employer, next of kin not residing at
the same address, and such other information as the Town may deem necessary in
order to ensure the effective billing and collection of each account applied
for. Identification proving that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years
of age must be presented when the application is filed, including a legible,
valid copy of the existing lease in the case of a renter/tenant applying for
service. Refusal to provide any requested information or providing false
information may result in denial or termination of service. (2011 Code §§ 4-14,
19-96)
   B.   Deposit And Connection Fees: The necessary deposit shall be made at the
time of application. The Town will have the premises inspected and, if in
conformance with this chapter and service and applicable provisions of this
Code, the application shall be approved and the necessary connections and
installations shall be made. A connection fee will be collected at the time
deposits are made for services with the Town. Said fee will be as set and
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public
Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   C.   Tap Fees: In addition to connection fees, a tap fee will be collected
at the time deposits are made for services with the Town. Said fees shall be as
set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland
Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board
of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer. (2011 Code §§ 4-14, 19-96; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Recordkeeping: All applications, deposits, and fees required in this
section shall be deposited with and made of record in the Office of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code §§ 4-14, 19-96)
9-2A-2: SPECIAL CONTRACT:
The Town may require a contract over an extended period of time when a
consumer's requirements for power or energy are unusually large or necessitate
considerable special or reserve equipment; and in such cases, may require
payment by the consumer of such charges and amounts in addition to the
prevailing rate schedule as may be necessary to justify the investment of the
Town. Arrangements for contracts will be made between the customer and the
appropriate utility director. (2011 Code § 19-97)
9-2A-3: SEPARATE APPLICATIONS REQUIRED:
A single application for service cannot be made to apply to different locations
nor to cover more than one (1) point of delivery at the same location to be
used by the same consumer, unless the Town determines that the physical
characteristics of the facility served requires more than one (1) point of
delivery according to good engineering and operating practices. Such
determination shall be made by the appropriate utility director. (2011 Code §
19-98)
9-2A-4: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF SERVICE:
An application and contract for service is not transferable from one (1)
consumer to any other consumer. Service can be connected for the same consumer
moving from one (1) address to another by the completion of a new application
and by a new deposit. Such application must be completed in the Office of the
Town Clerk- Treasurer. Service will not be connected if, on the date for which
the connection is requested, there exists or will exist any past due balance on
the account after the existing deposit amount has been applied. (2011 Code §
19-99)
9-2A-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CHANGES IN SERVICE:
It is the responsibility of the customer/consumer to notify the Town of any
changes in occupancy that will substantively affect the billing and/or service
of the customer/consumer. Changes may be requested in person, in writing or by
telephone. Any request for service requiring installation must be accompanied
by a signed application and a new deposit, the amount of which will be
determined according to subsection 9-2A-6C of this article. The Town will not
be held responsible for any error or omission in account changes if said
changes are not made in person. (2011 Code § 19-100)
9-2A-6: SERVICE DEPOSITS:
   A.   Required: Every potential customer/consumer making application for
utility service with the Town shall make a deposit. There shall be a deposit
made for every application for service and for each separate premises, except
as may be otherwise specified in this chapter.
   B.   Management And Use Of Deposits: Utility deposits shall be held by the
Town Clerk-Treasurer. In the event any customer/consumer should desire to
discontinue service or becomes no longer active, the Town Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby authorized to credit the customer's/consumer's account in the amount of
the deposit made. However, if the meter or meters located on the premises are
damaged in any way except by ordinary wear, as ascertained by the appropriate
utility director, the whole of the deposit, or as much thereof as is necessary
to pay the amount due the Town, shall be deducted from the deposit. (2011 Code
§ 19-101)
   C.   Deposits Established:
      1.   Residential Deposits: For purpose of guaranteeing payment of the
monthly utility bill, a residential deposit in accordance with the following
schedule shall be made at the time application is made with the Town Clerk-
Treasurer:
         a.   Water and sewer: Twenty dollars ($20.00).
         b.   Electric:
            (1)   Good credit - letter of credit from previous utility supplier
or good credit with the Town: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
            (2)   Minimum credit - no letter of credit from previous utility
supplier or occasional slowness in payment: One hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00).
            (3)   Maximum credit - judgments, bankruptcy, charge offs, etc., or
refusal to obtain a credit report from previous utility supplier: Two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (2011 Code § 19-102)
      2.   Commercial Deposits: For purpose of guaranteeing payment of the
monthly utility bill, a commercial deposit in accordance with the rate schedule
set and established by the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works
Authority, approved and adopted by the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for
inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, shall be made at the time
application is made with the Town Clerk-Treasurer. The commercial electric
deposit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (2011 Code § 19-103)
   D.   Exemptions: Federal, State and local governmental agencies shall be
exempt from making deposits with the Town. Public schools shall also be
classified as exempt from making deposits. (2011 Code § 19-105)
   E.   Unclaimed Deposits: If, after termination of all services on an
account, deposit amounts remain as a credit balance after all debits, credits
and interest have applied or if any other credit balance remains, after one (1)
year, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall send written notice to the customer at the
last known address for the customer, stating that the deposit or credit balance
shall become the property of the Town and be deposited by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer into the general fund, unless it is claimed by the customer within
ninety (90) days of the date that the notice is mailed by the Town. (2011 Code
§ 19-106)
9-2A-7: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   When a customer elects to terminate service, the customer shall
promptly notify the Town in person, by telephone or in writing as to the
proposed effective date and hour of liability for payments for subsequent
services at that service address. The Town may disconnect service at any time
after eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on the day for which discontinuation is
requested. If service has been disconnected in accordance with the customer's
previously stated request, but the customer subsequently requests the service
to be temporarily reconnected for any reason, an additional service call charge
set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland
Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board
of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer must be paid in cash and a new disconnect date must be rescheduled
prior the reconnection of services. (2011 Code §§ 19-107; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   The Town will read the appropriate meter on the date for which
termination of service is requested and may, at its option, disconnect the
service. A final bill will be prepared as a result of the final reading. The
deposit will be applied to the final bill. The Town will not be held
responsible for any error or omission in termination of service if such request
is not made in person. (2011 Code § 19-107)
9-2A-8: OCCUPANCY WITHOUT APPLICATION OR DEPOSIT:
If the Town leaves the service connected to vacant premises, it does not
constitute consent by the Town for any new occupant of such premises to use the
service without making proper application for said service. Occupants using
service without deposit and/or application shall be liable to the Town for the
deposit amount, as well as payment for all services received, which will be
billed at the prevailing rates for all services available to the premises. Said
occupant will be required to show a lease or document specifying when occupancy
began and will be billed back to the reading nearest to the date of the last
tenant moving out. Failure to make application and/or deposit will result in
immediate termination of service. (2011 Code § 19-108)
ARTICLE B. CREDIT AND COLLECTION POLICIES
SECTION:
9-2B-1: Discontinuance Of Services
9-2B-2: Termination Of Service
9-2B-3: Dishonored Checks
9-2B-4: Payment Extensions
9-2B-5: Summary Of Policies After Posted Notice
9-2B-6: Summary Of Collection Policies
9-2B-1: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICES:
   A.   Charges for utility services shall be due and payable monthly according
to dates to be determined by the Town. Each monthly bill shall have printed
thereon the due date. In addition to the assessment of any late payment charge,
if a monthly bill is not paid by the due date indicated thereon, the account
shall be subject to disconnection for nonpayment. Utility service shall be
discontinued for any customer/consumer who owes any past due amount for utility
services or any charges for utility services, including late payment charges.
(2011 Code § 19-111; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   The Town may discontinue utility service to a customer/consumer for the
reasons set forth below. Disconnect may take place at any time during normal
working hours on the day designated for disconnect. Notification of impending
discontinuation of service shall be given at the premises, either by letter,
"door knocker" or such other notification as the Town deems necessary and
appropriate. Failure to accept or acknowledge notification shall not be cause
for delay of the disconnection.
      1.   Nonpayment of a bill, or any portion of a bill, including any bill
for service rendered by the Town to the consumer at any premises for any
utility service.
      2.   Refusal by the consumer to provide the Town reasonable access to its
equipment upon the consumer's premises in accordance with this chapter.
      3.   Violation of any rule or regulation of the Town or noncompliance
with any applicable Federal, State, Municipal or other local laws, rules or
regulations.
      4.   Failure of the consumer to make application and place a deposit for
service.
      5.   Failure of the consumer to make application for utility service in
the true name of the consumer for the purpose of avoiding payment of an unpaid
obligation for utility service provided.
      6.   Returned checks.
      7.   Failure of the consumer, upon request, to provide the Town with a
deposit; provided, in no event shall service be discontinued for failure to
post a deposit earlier than twenty (20) days after demand has been made for
such deposit.
   C.   The Town may discontinue utility service without advance notice to a
consumer for any of the reasons set forth below, but notice will be posted at
the premises at the time of discontinuance of service, indicating the reason
for the disconnection:
      1.   Existence of a dangerous or defective condition of wiring or
equipment on the consumer's premises.
      2.   Fraudulent use of electricity or water.
      3.   Tampering with the Town's regulating and measuring equipment or
other property.
      4.   Expiration of the temporary utility service agreement.
      5.   Failure to comply with the terms of an extension agreement. (2011
Code § 19-111)
9-2B-2: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
   A.   At least five (5) days' notice shall be given to a customer that
utility service will be terminated. Said notice shall be a separate final
notice and shall state the balance due, the date service will be terminated,
inform the customer of the proposed termination and his right to a hearing
before a Utility Service Committee, which will be made up of a member of the
Town Board of Trustees, appointed by the Town Board of Trustees and the Town
Administrator and/or the Town Clerk-Treasurer. Said notice shall be sent prior
to the actual cutoff date and provide that the customer may contact the Town
offices requesting a hearing. The hearing is the right of the customer, and a
meeting will be held only if the customer requests said hearing.
   B.   A deferred payment plan is hereby adopted by the Town Board of Trustees
and is only available for those customers with documentation from a treating
physician stating that no utility service to said customer's residence may
result in life threatening or endangering circumstances to one (1) or more
occupants of the residence.
   C.   Upon termination of service, a notice of termination shall be left at
each residence where service is terminated. Said notice of termination shall
state that service has been terminated, balance due, including all additional
charges, procedure for arranging a deferred payment plan, the customer meets
the criteria for a deferred payment plan as previously stated in this section,
and procedure for reconnection. (2011 Code § 19-112A)
9-2B-3: DISHONORED CHECKS:
   A.   In the event any customer should offer payment for any monthly bill, or
portion thereof, by means of a check which is not honored on account of
insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, or because the check is drawn on a
closed account or on a nonexistent account, or otherwise dishonored, a check
service charge in the amount set and established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the
Office of the Town Clerk- Treasurer shall be charged and collected as a service
charge for proper handling and administration. (2011 Code § 9-113; amd. 2017
Code)
   B.   Failure to replace the dishonored check with cash or certified/
cashier's check before three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the next working day after
notification by posting of note on the door of the address from which the check
has been returned will result in immediate disconnection of utility service.
   C.   In the event that two (2) such dishonored checks are made to the Town
for utility service within any last preceding twelve (12) month period, payment
of each monthly bill by such customer/consumer for the next twelve (12) month
period of ensuing service shall be made and accepted only when tendered by
certified or cashier's check or cash. (2011 Code § 19-113)
9-2B-4: PAYMENT EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Two (2) extensions per calendar year may be granted upon the request of
the consumer; provided, that the utility payment extension agreement is
completed and approved by the Town Clerk- Treasurer or Town Administrator prior
to notification at the residence that services will be cut off. All extensions
will be extended to the last working day of the month the bill is currently
due.
   B.   Failure to comply with any extension agreement will result in
disconnection of service without further notice, and no additional extension
will be granted for one (1) year from the date of the broken agreement. (2011
Code § 19-114)
9-2B-5: SUMMARY OF POLICIES AFTER POSTED NOTICE:
   A.   Business And Residential Cutoff:
      1.   Weather does not affect cutoff.
      2.   Payments of all past due amounts made before one o'clock (1:00) P.M.
of the day indicated for cutoff will stop cutoff.
      3.   Bad checks are to be picked up with cash by three o'clock (3:00)
P.M. the first business day after contact is made.
      4.   Once service has been disconnected, payment of the entire balance on
the account is required, together with the appropriate service call charge,
before service will be resumed. (2011 Code § 19-115)
      5.   When service is reconnected during normal working hours, a service
call charge set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the
Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town
Clerk- Treasurer will be made. A charge set and established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection
in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer will be made for reconnections made
after normal working hours. (2011 Code § 19-115; amd. 2017 Code)
      6.   Cutoff and standby employees will be instructed to inform the
consumer of immediate need to make contact with Town Hall to delay
disconnection procedures. Disconnection will proceed if the employee can
determine such contact has not been made.
   B.   Extension For Payment: Any extension of time for payment must be
approved by the Town Clerk-Treasurer or Town Administrator. (2011 Code § 19-
115)
9-2B-6: SUMMARY OF COLLECTION POLICIES:
In the event any customer should fail to make payment on any monthly billing so
that said bill is over fifty (50) days in arrears, the Town's Utility
Superintendent shall notify the customer/consumer at the address shown on the
Town records that the customer shall, within five (5) working days, contact the
Town Clerk-Treasurer to make satisfaction of said bill under the terms and
conditions of section
9-2B-5 of this article. Should the customer/consumer fail to comply with
section
9-2B-5 of this article, the Town's Utility Superintendent shall be directed at
his earliest opportunity to refer said customer's bill for legal collection
procedures. (2011 Code § 19-116)
ARTICLE C. FRAUDULENT USE OF SERVICES
SECTION:
9-2C-1: Definition
9-2C-2: Fraudulent Use Of Services
9-2C-3: Tampering With Utility Equipment Or Property
9-2C-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this article, the term "fraudulent use of service" shall
include any unauthorized use of the Town's electric, sewer, water and garbage
services and facilities by the consumer. (2011 Code § 19-117; amd. 2017 Code)
9-2C-2: FRAUDULENT USE OF SERVICES:
In the event fraudulent use of a service or evidence of attempted fraudulent
use of a service is discovered, or where the Town's regulating or measuring
equipment or other property has been tampered with, service(s) may be
disconnected by the Town without advance notice to the consumer. Service to the
consumer will not be resumed until the consumer shall have paid all bills
including:
   A.   The charge for the estimated amount of service fraudulently consumed.
   B.   The cost of replacement or repair of any damaged meter or associated
equipment. (2011 Code § 19-117)
   C.   A reconnection charge set and established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the
Office of the Town Clerk- Treasurer. (2011 Code § 19-117; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   If service has been restored by other than Town personnel after having
been disconnected initially for one (1) of the reasons stated herein, the
consumer shall, in addition to the charges enumerated above, pay a charge set
and established by the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works
Authority and approved and adopted by the Town Board of Trustees, and posted
for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   E.   If it has been shown to the satisfaction of the Town that the consumer
or applicant for service had no connection with or knowledge of such fraudulent
use of service(s) or such tampering, service may be resumed after the condition
causing or permitting the fraudulent usage has been corrected and such consumer
or applicant for service has paid for any unmetered service received. (2011
Code § 19-117)
9-2C-3: TAMPERING WITH UTILITY EQUIPMENT OR PROPERTY:
No regulating or measuring equipment or other property or equipment owned by
the Town, wherever situated, whether upon the consumer's premises or elsewhere,
shall be tampered with or interfered with for the purpose of adjustment,
fraudulent adjustment or otherwise. In the event equipment has been tampered
with, the Town will follow the same procedures as for fraudulent use of
services as outlined in section
9-2C-2 of this article. (2011 Code § 19-118)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRIC SERVICE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Rates And Deposits
9-3-3: Cost Adjustments
9-3-4: Meters
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DEPARTMENT: The Electric Light Department of the Town of Mooreland, and any act
in this chapter required to be done by the Town of Mooreland, hereinafter
called the "Town", shall be done on its behalf by an authorized employee of the
Electric Light Department.
PERSON: Natural persons of either sex, any association, copartnership, express
trust, or corporation, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent, or
employee; the singular person shall be held and construed to include the
plural, and the masculine pronoun to include the feminine. (2011 Code § 19-1)
9-3-2: RATES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Rates: The Town shall charge rates for electricity set and established
by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority
and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and
posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code §
19-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Deposits: For electric service to be established for any customer, a
security deposit shall be required in the following amounts: (2017 Code)
      1.   Owner: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
      2.   Renter: One hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00). (Ord. 310, 8-11-
2014)
9-3-3: COST ADJUSTMENTS:
Fuel costs dictate the price at which electricity may be obtained by the Town.
When said fuel costs increase, it makes necessary an increase in the rates for
electricity which must be charged to citizens receiving electricity through the
Town. As stated in subs
9-3-2A of this chapter, the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works
Authority may adopt power cost adjustments as dictated by fuel cost increases.
When such occurs, the rates and schedules shall be amended and posted pursuant
to subs
9-3-2A of this chapter. The current adjustment shall be as adopted by ordinance
250 as if set out in full herein. (2011 Code § 19-3)
9-3-4: METERS:
   A.   Property Of Town: All meters put in by the Town shall be and remain the
property of the Town and will not be removed unless the use of the electricity
on the premises is to be entirely stopped or the service connections
discontinued. (2011 Code § 19-4)
   B.   Lost, Damaged Meter: In all cases where meters are lost, injured, or
broken by carelessness or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises,
they shall be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of Town agent(s)
and the cost charged against the owner or occupant. (2011 Code § 19-4; amd.
2017 Code)
   C.   Inaccurate Meter; Testing:
      1.   In the event the meter may be getting out of order or failing to
register properly, the consumer shall be charged on an estimate made by the
Town Clerk-Treasurer and/or the Town Administrator on the average monthly
consumption during the last three (3) months that the same was in good order,
or for what he may consider to be the most reliable data at his command. (2011
Code § 19-4)
      2.   If a parallel meter is required for the testing of the accuracy of a
meter, at the consumer's request, a fee set and established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection
in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be assessed. The fee will be
waived if it is determined that there is a problem with the current meter.
   D.   Inaccessible Meter: If access to any occupant's meter is denied for
whatever reason in order to obtain the monthly reading resulting in the Town
having to call the occupant for the reading, the occupant will be charged a fee
set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland
Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board
of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, which will be included on the occupant's monthly statement. (2011
Code § 19-4; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
WATER SERVICE
SECTION:
9-4-1: System A Public Utility
9-4-2: Superintendent
9-4-3: Tapping Charges
9-4-4: Connection To System
9-4-5: Meters
9-4-6: Service To More Than One Premises By A Single Connection
9-4-7: Rates And Deposits
9-4-8: Conservation Measures
9-4-9: Interference With, Obstruction Of, Damage To System
9-4-10: Entry Powers For Inspections
9-4-1: SYSTEM A PUBLIC UTILITY:
The water and water distribution system of the Town is hereby declared to be a
public utility and a proper source of revenue for Municipal purposes. (2011
Code § 19-10)
9-4-2: SUPERINTENDENT:
The word "Superintendent", wherever used in this chapter, shall be held to mean
the Superintendent or foreman of the Town Water Department. When any act is
required to be done by him, the same may be done on behalf of the
Superintendent by any authorized officer or employee of the Water Department.
All such superintendents and employees shall be at all times under the direct
supervision and subject to the orders and control of the Mayor and Board of
Trustees. (2011 Code § 19-12)
9-4-3: TAPPING CHARGES:
   A.   The Town shall charge rates for the tapping of water lines by the Town,
including the installation of a meter, meter box, fittings, and service line to
the property line, but generally not to exceed forty feet (40') thereof
according to the schedules determined by the Town Board. (2011 Code § 19-11)
   B.   Said rates and schedules shall be set and established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection
in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code § 19-11; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Such charges shall be paid to the Town Clerk-Treasurer prior to the
installation of such equipment and/or service. (2011 Code § 19-11)
9-4-4: CONNECTION TO SYSTEM:
   A.   Connection Required:
      1.   Each occupied residence and each occupied business or commercial
building in the Town shall connect to the Town's water system within sixty (60)
days after the effective date hereof; provided, however, that such service
shall be brought within at least one hundred fifty feet (150') of the residence
or business property line. (2011 Code § 19-22)
      2.   Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any provision of
this subsection A shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code, and each day that any violation of any provision of this
subsection is allowed to exist shall be and constitute a separate offense.
(2011 Code § 19-22; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Owner Or Occupant Request For Service: Whenever the owner or occupant
of any premises connecting with the Town water supply system shall desire to
use the water, he shall notify the Superintendent and request that the water be
turned on to the premises. The owner shall leave his portion of the service
exposed in the trench until water is turned on by the Superintendent, when the
owner shall immediately properly cover the pipe. (2011 Code § 19-13)
9-4-5: METERS:
   A.   Property Of Town: All meters put in by the Town shall be and remain the
property of the Town and will not be removed unless the use of the water on the
premises is to be entirely stopped or the service connections discontinued.
   B.   Lost, Damaged Meter: In all cases where meters are lost, injured, or
broken by carelessness or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises,
they shall be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of the
Superintendent and the cost charged against the owner or occupant.
   C.   Inaccurate Meter; Testing:
      1.   In the event the meter may be getting out of order or failing to
register properly, the consumer shall be charged on an estimate made by the
Superintendent on the average monthly consumption during the last three (3)
months that the same was in good order, or for what he may consider to be the
most reliable data at his command. (2011 Code § 19-15)
      2.   Where accuracy of record of the water meter is questioned, it shall
be removed at the customer's request, and shall, in his presence, be tested in
the shops of the Water Department by means of the apparatus there provided, and
a report thereon duly made. Both parties to the test must accept the finding so
made. If the test discloses an error against the consumer of more than three
percent (3%) in the meter's registry, the excess of the consumption on the
three (3) previous readings shall be credited to the customer's account, and
the Water Department shall bear the entire expense of the test and the deposit
set out in subs
9-4-7B of this chapter shall be returned. On the other hand, where no such
error is found, the person who has requested the test shall pay the actual cost
for such test including costs incurred by the Town due to wages of employees
involved.
      3.   No meter shall be removed or in any way be disturbed, or seal
broken, except in the presence of and under the direction of the
Superintendent. (2011 Code § 19-16)
   D.   Inaccessible Meter: If access to any occupant's meter is denied for
whatever reason in order to obtain the monthly reading resulting in the Town
having to call the occupant for the reading, the occupant will be charged a fee
set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland
Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board
of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, which will be included on the occupant's monthly statement. (2011
Code § 19-15; amd. 2017 Code)
9-4-6: SERVICE TO MORE THAN ONE PREMISES BY A SINGLE CONNECTION:
When several houses, buildings, or premises are supplied or are to be supplied
with water through one (1) service connection with the Town main, the
Superintendent may, in his discretion, either decline to furnish water until
separate services are provided or the service metered, or in case any one (1)
of the owners or occupants becomes delinquent or violates any of the provisions
of this chapter, the Superintendent may shut off the original or main service
until all delinquent and unpaid charges and other charges are paid, and the
premises supplied by the main service shall be held responsible for all
delinquent and unpaid charges against any one (1) or all of the separate owners
or users. No change of ownership or occupation shall affect the application of
this section. (2011 Code § 19-19)
9-4-7: RATES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Rates:
      1.   Established: The water rates charged to consumers of water from the
water system of the Town are set and established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the
Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (Ord. 329, 3-13-2017; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Annual Fee Adjustment: Commencing July 1, 2017, and continuing each
subsequent July 1, the Board of Trustees shall review the fees charged and
shall recommend adjustment of the fees to the Town Board based upon the
percentage change in the consumer price index, all urban consumers, south
region, all items, during the twelve (12) month period ending in April
preceding the July in question. Any recommended change shall be rounded up to
the nearest nickel. (Ord. 329, 3-13-2017)
   B.   Deposits:
      1.   For water service to be established for any customer, a security
deposit shall be required in the following amounts:
         a.   Property owners: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
         b.   Property renters: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      2.   Deposits shall be refunded to customers upon full and final payment
of accounts due and may be applied to the balance of accounts if the customer
exceeds time requirements for said final payment. (Ord. 311, 8-11-2014)
9-4-8: CONSERVATION MEASURES:
The use of water for sprinkling or irrigating lawns, gardens, flowerbeds,
plants, trees, shrubs, parking strips, or hosing windows, woodwork, porches,
steps, or walks may be prohibited by the Water Superintendent, Mayor or Town
Board of Trustees during such periods as may be deemed necessary to conserve
the supply of water; and shall become effective upon notice thereof being given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, or by other
methods as determined by the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 19-14; amd.
2017 Code)
9-4-9: INTERFERENCE WITH, OBSTRUCTION OF, DAMAGE TO SYSTEM:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except one duly authorized by the
Superintendent or a member of the Fire Department, or by a person authorized by
the Mayor, to open, operate, close, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe
or hose to, or connect with any fire hydrant, stop valve, or stopcock belonging
to the Town. (2011 Code § 19-17)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire
hydrant or place around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, or dirt, or
wilfully or negligently injure the same. (2011 Code § 19-18)
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the
Superintendent, to disturb, interfere with or damage any water main, water
pipe, machinery, tools, buildings, improvements, lawns, grass plots, flowers,
vines, bushes, or trees belonging to, connected with, or under the control of
the water system of the Town. (2011 Code § 19-21)
9-4-10: ENTRY POWERS FOR INSPECTIONS:
Any officer, inspector, foreman, or authorized employee of the department shall
have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with Town
water for the purpose of making any inspection of the water supply upon said
premises. In case any authorized employee is refused admittance to any premises
or, being admitted, shall be hindered or prevented in making such examination,
the Superintendent may cause the water to be turned off from said premises.
(2011 Code § 19-20)
CHAPTER 5
SEWER SERVICE
SECTION:
9-5-1: System A Public Utility
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Use Of Public Sewers Required; Tapping Charges
9-5-4: Private Sewage Disposal Systems
9-5-5: Building Sewers And Connections
9-5-6: Use Of The Sanitary Sewer System
9-5-6-1: Discharges Into System
9-5-6-2: Interceptors
9-5-6-3: Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalization
9-5-6-4: Control Manhole
9-5-6-5: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
9-5-6-6: Special Agreements
9-5-7: User Charges; Industrial Users
9-5-8: Users Outside Town Limits
9-5-9: Tampering With, Damaging System
9-5-10: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
9-5-11: Violations; Penalties
9-5-1: SYSTEM A PUBLIC UTILITY:
The sanitary sewerage system of the Town is hereby declared to be a public
utility and a proper source of revenue for the upkeep and maintenance of the
system and for other purposes. (2011 Code § 19-31)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are to be used and
interpreted as defined in this section:
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
CUSTOMER: The owner of the property served by a water connection, or the
tenant, lessee, renter, establishment, institution, or occupant of such
property, or the person in or against whose name the water connection for such
property is listed on the books and records of the Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma,
and who is responsible to the Town for the payment of bills incurred for water
furnished to the property, and for use by such property of the sanitary sewage
system of the Town, either or both.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: The liquid wastes: a) from the noncommercial preparation,
cooking, and handling of food; or b) containing human excrement and similar
matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities and institutions.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
ICR (INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGE): Recovery by the Town from the industrial
users of the treatment works of the Federal grant amount allocable to the
treatment of sewage from such users, pursuant to section 204(b) of Public Law
92-500 and the applicable rules and regulations.
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE: The liquid waste resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business including cooling water that is discharged to
the sanitary sewerage system.
INDUSTRIAL USER:
   A.   Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
      1. Division A, agriculture, forestry, and fishing.
      2. Division B, mining.
      3. Division D, manufacturing.
      4. Division E, transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services.
      5. Division I, services.
   B.   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that
it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
   C.   Any industrial user who discharges one thousand forty two (1,042)
gallons per hour (GP) (25,000 gallons per day) or less of domestic wastewater
or whose combined process and domestic wastewater is equivalent to one thousand
forty two (1,042) GP or less of domestic water is exempted from the industrial
cost recovery charge, provided his discharge does not contain pollutants which
interfere, or are incompatible with, or contaminate or reduce the utility of
the sludge from the Municipal wastewater treatment plant.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface water or groundwater.
NORMAL STRENGTH SEWAGE: Sewage discharged by a user into the sanitary sewers
and in which the average concentrations of total suspended solids (SS) is not
more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) and biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) is not more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
ph: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR: That person designated by the Town Board to inspect work
and compliance with this Code, ordinances and laws governing the installation
and operation of sewer, water and gas plumbing.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by the Public Authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE: The "domestic wastewater" as defined in this section.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface
water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM: All sanitary sewer trunk lines, main lines, submain
lines, lateral lines, lift stations and sewage treatment plants, and all sewer
lines connected to the Town's sewer lines or treatment plants, whether owned by
the Town or not.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residents, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present and includes the
domestic wastewater and industrial sewage in any combination.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER SERVICE RATE: The price per unit (mg/l, 1,000 gallons, pounds, etc.) of
waste discharged into the sanitary sewerage system of the Town of Mooreland,
Oklahoma.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste, which concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Read STORM SEWER): A sewer which carries stormwater,
surface water and drainage, but excludes sewerage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOWN AGENT: The Town agent of sewage works and/or of water pollution control of
the Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma, or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
USER: A "customer", as defined in this section, whose property also discharges
sewage into the sanitary sewerage system of the Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma, in
any quantity.
USER CHARGE: The monthly charge fixed for the user based upon the volume and
strength of sewage determined to be discharged by the user into the sanitary
sewerage system of the Town.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (2011 Code § 19-34; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-3: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; TAPPING CHARGES:
   A.   Discharge Of Objectionable Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person
to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(2011 Code § 19-35)
   B.   Treatment Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any
sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (2011 Code § 19-36)
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (2011 Code § 19-37)
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owner of all houses, buildings
or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-
of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary or combined sewer of the Town is hereby required, at his expense, to
install suitable toilet facilities thereon, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so;
provided, that said public sewer is within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line. (2011 Code § 19-38; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   Tapping Charges:
      1.   The Town shall charge rates for the tapping of and the tying into
the sanitary sewer system in the Town and all that portion of the Town
hereinafter brought within the corporate limits of the Town according to the
schedule set and established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the
Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.
      2.   The amount of such charges, rates, and schedules, and the amount of
line to be furnished, normally not to exceed forty feet (40') of four inch (4")
service line to the property line, shall be set and established by resolution
of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved
and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for
inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
      3.   Such charges established by subsection E2 of this section shall be
paid to the Clerk-Treasurer prior to installation of such equipment and/or
service. (2011 Code § 19-32; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-4: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is
not available under the provisions of subs
9-5-3D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. (2011
Code § 19-39)
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the County
Health Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Health Department which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the
Health Department. (2011 Code § 19-40)
      2.   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the County
Health Department. Representatives shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. (2011 Code § 19-41)
   C.   Specifications: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department
of Public Health of the State of Oklahoma. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (2011 Code § 19-42)
   D.   Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
Town. (2011 Code § 19-44)
   E.   Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required: At such time as a
public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private disposal
system, as provided in subs
9-5-3D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. (2011 Code § 19-43)
   F.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the Health Officer. (2011 Code § 19-45)
9-5-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the plumbing
inspector. (2011 Code § 19-47)
      2.   Classes Of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits: a) for residential and commercial service; and b) for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Town. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the plumbing inspector.
(2011 Code § 19-48)
      3.   Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee set and
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public
Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer
for a residential, commercial or industrial building sewer permit shall be paid
to the Town at the time the application is filed. (2011 Code § 19-48; amd. 2017
Code)
   B.   Separate Building Sewers Required; Exception: A separate and
independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except, where
one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no
private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
(1) building sewer. (2011 Code § 19-50)
   C.   Use Of Existing Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
tests by the plumbing inspector, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(2011 Code § 19-51)
   D.   Installation And Construction Requirements And Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the Town. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. (2011 Code § 19-52)
      2.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged. (2011 Code § 19-53)
      3.   All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the plumbing
inspector before installation. (2011 Code § 19-55)
      4.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town. (2011 Code
§ 19-57)
   E.   Discharge Of Stormwater Or Surface Waters Prohibited: No person shall
make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer. (2011 Code § 19-54)
   F.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the plumbing inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the plumbing inspector or his representative. (2011 Code § 19-
56)
   G.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incident to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(2011 Code § 19-49)
9-5-6: USE OF THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
9-5-6-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Waters:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(2011 Code § 19-48)
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Town agent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Town agent, to
a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. (2011 Code § 19-59; amd. 2017
Code)
   B.   Prohibited And Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
         a.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or
facility, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of sewage treatment plant effluent.
         c.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or causing the
pH of the sewage plant influent to rise above 9.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to processes,
structures, equipment and/or personnel of the sewage works.
         d.   Solid, viscous or liquid substances in quantities or of such size
as to cause or be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes; cinders; sand; mud; straw; shavings; metal; glass; rags;
feathers; tar; plastics; wood; unground garbage; whole blood; paunch manure;
hair and fleshing; entrails; paper products such as dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; slops; chemical
residues; or bulk solids.
         e.   Any strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not.
         f.   Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in section
9-5-2 of this chapter.
         g.   Any substance that may pass through the treatment plant without
being effectively treated or otherwise reduced to acceptable concentrations by
normal treatment methods such that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge
to the receiving waters.
         h.   Any waste containing rheum, strontium, or tellurium.
         i.   Any waters or wastes containing substances in excess of the
limits established in subsection B2 of this section or that have been diluted
solely for the purpose of meeting any concentration limits listed or implied in
this subsection.
      2.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes in concentrations,
quantities or rates in excess of those listed except as hereinafter provided:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C), or any substance which causes the
temperature of the total sewage plant influent to increase at a rate of ten
degrees Fahrenheit (10°F) or more per hour or a combined total increase of
plant influent temperature to one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F).
         b.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) (0 and 65°C). (2011 Code § 19-65)
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage shredder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and
approval of the Town agent.
         d.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits to be established by the Town agent on a
case by case basis in compliance with and after consultation with the
appropriate regulatory agencies.
         e.   Any substance with a BOD or suspended solids concentration in
excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l); except, that upon
receipt of a written application and establishment of appropriate charges, the
Town agent may, if the sewage works has sufficient unused or uncommitted
capacity, authorize the discharge of wastes containing BOD and/or suspended
solids concentrations in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/
l) each. (2011 Code § 19-65; amd. 2017 Code)
         f.   Any waters or wastes with total dissolved solids concentrations
greater than three thousand milligrams per liter (3,000 mg/l), plus the
dissolved solids in the Town water supply.
         g.   Any waters or wastes containing excessive discoloration or
causing excess discoloration of the effluent including, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
         h.   Any waters, wastes or other substances containing one (1) or more
of the following constituents in excess of the concentrations listed:
 Average For 30 Consecutive Days (mg/l) Maximum For Any 1 Day (mg/l)
                    Average For 30 Consecutive Maximum For Any 1 Day (mg/l)
                    Days (mg/l)
Antimony            0.01
Arsenic             0.1
Boron               1.0
Cadmium             0.5                        1.0
Chromium-hexavalent 1.0
Chromium-total      5.0
Copper              1.0
Cyanide             1.0
Fluoride            1.5
Lead                0.4                        0.8
Mercury             0.002
Nickel              1.8                        3.6
Phenols             0.1
Silver              0.3                        1.0
Vanadium            10.0
Zinc                5.0
 
      3.   Limitation on elements or compounds not listed will be established
and/or limitations for elements or compounds listed will be lowered if
necessary to ensure that the effluent of the wastewater treatment plant is in
full compliance with legal requirements of County, State or Federal regulatory
agencies. (2011 Code § 19-65)
   C.   Review And Approval Required:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which contain the substances enumerated in
subsection B2 of this section, and which, in the judgment of the Town agent,
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Town agent may: (2011 Code § 19-66; amd. 2017 Code)
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of section
9-5-6-6 of this chapter. (2011 Code § 19-66)
      2.   If the Town agent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Town agent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (2011 Code § 19-66; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-6-2: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Town agent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Town agent and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (2011 Code § 19-67; amd.
2017 Code)
9-5-6-3: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense. (2011 Code § 19-68)
9-5-6-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
When required by the Town agent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town agent.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (2011 Code §
19-69; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-6-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this section
9-5-6 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided in section
9-5-6-4 of this chapter, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole.
In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried
out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained and determined from periodic grab samples.) (2011 Code §
19-70; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-6-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section
9-5-6 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Town and any industrial concern whereby industrial wastes, except
those that would be hazardous or would cause an upset of the treatment process
or that would interfere with the operation and maintenance of the collection
and/or treatment facilities, of unusual strength or character may be accepted
by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial
concern in accordance with section
9-5-7 of this chapter. (2011 Code § 19-71)
9-5-7: USER CHARGES; INDUSTRIAL USERS:
   A.   User Charge: For the purpose of providing funds for the operation and
maintenance of the sanitary sewage system and for other purposes as allowed by
applicable law, there is hereby fixed and established a system of user charges
to be levied against each respective user thereof. The base level charges are
based on the costs of operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewerage
system, including replacement, as well as the volume, strength and delivery
flow rate of the sewage. The costs of treating the extraneous flows shall be
included in the operation and maintenance costs. The Town shall review the user
charges annually and revise them as necessary to reflect actual sanitary sewage
operation and maintenance costs among the users on January 1 of each calendar
year. The base level charge is comprised of a charge to service each account,
plus a volume charge for the normal strength sewage, plus a surcharge for
pollutants above normal strength. The Town shall maintain such records as are
necessary to document the adequacy and proportionality of the user charges. The
records shall be maintained as long as required by all applicable rules and
regulations. (Ord. 309, 8-11-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
      1.   Monthly Charge:
         a.   Established: The monthly volume of sewage discharge by each user
shall be assumed to be equal to the amount of water metered to the user, but in
cases where the volume cannot be reasonably determined to be so metered, the
amount of sewage shall be determined as provided in subsection F of this
section. The sewer rates shall be set and established by resolution of the
Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection
in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and shall apply equally to
residential and commercial users without maximum levels of charges to be
assessed. (Ord. 328, 3-13-2017; amd. 2017 Code)
         b.   Annual Fee Adjustment: Commencing July 1, 2017, and continuing
each subsequent July 1, the Board of Trustees shall review the fees charged and
shall recommend adjustment of the fees to the Town Board based upon the
percentage change in the consumer price index, all urban consumers, south
region, all items, during the twelve (12) month period ending in April
preceding the July in question. Any recommended change shall be rounded up to
the nearest nickel. (Ord. 328, 3-13-2017)
      2.   Surcharge System: A surcharge system meeting EPA requirements will
be developed if industries with above normal strength wastes and/or wastes
containing other pollutants that may increase the cost of operation and
maintenance desire to use the sewage facilities. There will be no "above normal
strength" charge nor will there be any reduction in the base level charge when
C is equal to or less than three hundred (300).
      3.   Sewage Analyses: The sewage shall be analyzed as discussed in
subsection B of this section, except the sewage from individual residences and
establishments known to discharge only domestic wastewater is assumed to be
normal strength and will not ordinarily be analyzed. The analysis will be
carried out in accordance with generally recognized methods. (2011 Code § 19-
60)
      4.   Computation Of Charge: The monthly "user charge", as defined in
section
9-5-2 of this chapter and referenced in this section starting with the second
billing following the effective date hereof, shall be computed according to the
formula and rates set and established by the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland
Public Works Authority, approved and adopted by the Town Board of Trustees by
resolution, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer. (2011 Code 19-60; amd. 2017 Code)
      5.   Use Of Sewer System But Not Water System: Except as herein otherwise
expressly provided, each person, firm, corporation, association, institution,
or establishment from whose property or premises sewage is discharged into the
sanitary sewage system of the Town, but who is not a water customer of the Town
and to pay a monthly user charge based upon the quantity of water thus metered
and the strength of sewage discharged, to be computed in like manner as
provided in this subsection.
      6.   Use Of Water System And Secondary Water System: Each user of the
sanitary sewerage system of the Town who is a water customer of the Town, but
who also obtains, uses or consumes water from any source other than from the
Town, is hereby required to meter, at such source, the quantity used, with an
appropriate meter to be approved by the Town, and to pay the monthly user
charge based upon the total quantity of water metered and the strength of
sewage discharged, to be computed in like manner as provided in this
subsection.
   B.   Industrial Cost Recovery (ICR): To be developed and adopted as required
by EPA prior to permitting use by a potentially affected industry.
   C.   Classification Of Industrial Users:
      1.   Minor Users: "Minor users" are those whose industrial discharge
meets all of the following criteria:
         a.   Flow: The maximum hourly rate of discharge, as defined in
subsection A2 of this section, is one thousand forty two (1,042) gallons or
less.
         b.   BOD And SS: Typical BOD and/or SS concentrations of the discharge
from similar industries do not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the values shown
for normal strength sewage in subs
9-5-6-1A2 of this chapter. The user will be classified as an intermediate or
major user if either value is exceeded more than ten percent (10%) of the time.
      2.   Intermediate Users: "Intermediate users" are those whose industrial
discharge exceeds the criteria for a minor user but does not exceed any of the
following criteria:
         a.   Flow: The maximum hourly rate of discharge, as previously
defined, does not exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons.
         b.   BOD And SS: The BOD and/or SS concentrations in the discharge do
not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the values shown for normal strength
sewage in subs
9-5-6-1A2 of this chapter more than ten percent (10%) of the time.
      3.   Major Users: "Major users" are those whose industrial waste
discharge does not meet the flow, BOD or SS criteria listed for minor or
intermediate users. (2011 Code § 19-60)
   D.   Monitoring; Samples:
      1.   The BOD and SS concentrations in the discharge of minor users will
normally be determined from standard values for various industries established
by the Town agent. However, the Town agent will collect samples and may monitor
discharge rates on a random basis.
      2.   The intermediate users are required to cause a sample to be
collected and analyzed at least one (1) time per month.
      3.   The sample shall be made up of individual portions collected,
composited and analyzed so as to permit determination of the maximum hourly
discharge rates as previously defined. The analysis shall be determined and
certified by an independent testing laboratory employed by the user and
approved by the Town agent.
      4.   A report shall be prepared and submitted to the Town agent within
fifteen (15) working days after the sample is collected. The report shall be
signed and shall contain a statement assuring that the sample was collected and
composited in such a manner as to be representative of the maximum hourly
discharge rate. It shall include: (2011 Code § 19-60; amd. 2017 Code)
         a.   The starting and ending time of the sampling period; and
         b.   The hourly rate of flow observed during the sampling period; and
         c.   The concentrations of BOD and SS; and
         d.   The total pounds of BOD and SS discharged during the sampling
periods; and
         e.   The concentrations of other pollutants listed on the user's
current industrial discharge permit.
      5.   All costs associated with collection, compositing, analysis and
reporting of these samples shall be borne by the user.
      6.   The sampling point(s) shall be located, installed and maintained by
the user so that any authorized representative of the Town may readily and
safely obtain samples of the discharge during all hours when discharge occurs.
The Town can be expected to collect a grab sample one (1) or more times per
year from intermediate users and two (2) or more times per year from major
users. The Town may or may not give prior notice of its intent to collect a
sample(s). (2011 Code § 19-60)
   E.   Discharge Permits:
      1.   A user discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewerage
system prior to the effective date hereof may continue without penalty so long
as he does not increase the quantity of the discharge without the prior
permission of the Town agent, and has discharged the industrial waste at least
three (3) months prior to the effective date hereof, and applies for and is
granted a permit to discharge no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after
the effective date hereof. (2011 Code § 19-60; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Upon application on forms provided by the Town, a permit to
discharge may be granted to users; provided, that the user:
         a.   Submits an application within forty five (45) days after the
effective date hereof; and (2011 Code § 19-60)
         b.   Secures approval by the Town agent of plans and specifications
for pretreatment facilities when required; and (2011 Code § 19-60; amd. 2017
Code)
         c.   Has complied with all requirements including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Payment of charges; and
            (2)   Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities when
required; and
            (3)   Sampling and analyses to determine quantity and quality.
      3.   A person applying for a new discharge shall:
         a.   Meet all conditions of subsection A of this section except
subsection A1 of this section; and
         b.   Submit an application for discharge sixty (60) days or more prior
to the planned initiation of such discharge; and
         c.   Secure a permit to discharge prior to discharging any wastes; and
         d.   Demonstrate compliance with applicable State and Federal
Statutes, rules and regulations. (2011 Code § 19-60)
      4.   Permits issued under this subsection E are issued subject to
conditions listed thereon and all other applicable local, State and Federal
Statutes, rules and regulations. The permits are subject to revocation for
noncompliance. The permit conditions are subject to modification by the Town
agent if such modification is or becomes necessary to protect the sanitary
sewerage system or its proper functioning, or if such modification becomes
necessary as a result of requirements imposed by the State or Federal
government. (2011 Code § 19-60; amd. 2017 Code)
   F.   Right To Have Charges Reviewed: Any person, firm, corporation,
association, institution, or establishment from whose property or premises
sewage is discharged into the sanitary sewerage system of the Town, where the
charges, as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section, do
not reasonably reflect the amount of sewage and concentration of BOD and/or
suspended solids discharged by the applicant into the sanitary sewerage system,
may apply in writing to the Town Board to make a survey of the special facts
and conditions shown to exist by such application. After considering such
application and survey, the Town Board shall determine the amount of sewage and
concentration of BOD and suspended solids discharged by the applicant into the
sanitary sewer system under the special facts and conditions shown to exist so
that the charges to the applicant will be just, fair and equitable. (2011 Code
§ 19-61)
   G.   Disconnection Of Service: The Town may terminate water and wastewater
disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:
      1.   Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes
are released to the sewer, causing rapid deterioration of these structures or
interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater.
      2.   A governmental agency informs the Town that the effluent from the
wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to
a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to
the Municipal system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment
that is not provided as normal domestic treatment. (2011 Code § 11-2)
      3.   The customer:
         a.   Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit
issued by the Town agent. (2011 Code § 11-2; amd. 2017 Code)
         b.   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system.
         c.   Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services
when due.
         d.   Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to the public sewer.
(2011 Code § 11-2)
9-5-8: USERS OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS:
Each user of the sanitary sewerage system of the Town whose property or
premises may be located outside the corporate limits of the Town shall pay as a
sewer service charge a sum as set and established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the
Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer. The Town does not obligate itself to
furnish sanitary sewer service to any persons whomsoever, but will furnish such
service as is reasonable within its financial ability to do so. (2011 Code §
19-61; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-9: TAMPERING WITH, DAMAGING SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
section shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly
conduct. (2011 Code § 19-72)
9-5-10: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   1. The plumbing inspector and other duly authorized employees of the
Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
plumbing inspector or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
      2.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in subsection A1 of this section, the plumbing inspector or duly authorized
employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions.
   B.   The plumbing inspector and other duly authorized employees of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (2011 Code § 19-73)
9-5-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided in subsection A of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day on which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Liability For Costs: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the Town by reason of such violation. (2011 Code § 19-74)
CHAPTER 6
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
9-6-1: Definitions
9-6-2: Accumulations, Deposits Prohibited
9-6-3: Right To Contract For Collection And Disposal
9-6-4: Preparation Of Garbage And Refuse, Receptacle Specifications And Use Of
Receptacles
9-6-4-1: Dumpster Rentals
9-6-5: Rates; Billing And Delinquent Payments
9-6-6: Sale Or Removal Of Garbage And Refuse By Business Owners Permitted
9-6-7: Violation; Penalty
9-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are deemed to have
the definitions in this section unless a contrary meaning is clearly evident:
BUSINESS SECTION: The business section of the Town of Mooreland shall refer to
the fire limits of the Town.
GARBAGE: All refuse or animal and vegetable matter or food products from
kitchens, pantries, and dining rooms of hotels, residences, restaurants,
boarding houses, apartment houses, and meat markets.
RECEPTACLES: Waterproof cans with close fitting covers not exceeding thirty
(30) gallons in capacity or sanitary refuse boxes approved by the State
Department of Health.
TRASH: Ashes, cinders, papers, rags, tin cans, bottles, and other substances
which may accumulate. (2011 Code § 11-1)
9-6-2: ACCUMULATIONS, DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Accumulation:
      1.   It is hereby declared unlawful in the Town for any person, firm or
corporation to permit trash or other refuse to scatter from the property owned,
leased or occupied by such person, firm or corporation onto the streets and
alleys of the Town or onto the properties of others.
      2.   It is hereby declared unlawful in the Town for any person, firm or
corporation to permit trash or other refuse to accumulate, pile up and become
unsightly on the property owned, leased, or occupied by such person, firm or
corporation. (2011 Code § 11-26)
   B.   Deposits: No garbage or trash shall be thrown or dropped upon any
street, avenue, or alley. (2011 Code § 11-27)
9-6-3: RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
The Town shall have the right to enter into contract and agreement with the
County for the acquisition, management and operation of landfill facilities for
disposal of solid waste and other refuse, to collect, remove, and dispose of,
and to provide for the collection, removal and disposal of, all garbage and
trash within the limits of the Town, either by contract with some suitable
person for the removal of such garbage or by removing the same by Town
employees at the discretion of the Town. (2011 Code § 11-22)
9-6-4: PREPARATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE, RECEPTACLE SPECIFICATIONS AND USE OF
RECEPTACLES:
Garbage and trash hauling services, when provided by the Town, shall be
provided only under the following rules and regulations: (2011 Code § 11-25)
   A.   Preparation Of Garbage And Refuse; Prohibited Materials:
      1.   All garbage and refuse containing animal or vegetable matter and
also commonly known as "household kitchen trash" shall be bagged and placed in
a Town approved receptacle.
      2.   No grass shall be placed in any receptacle unless grass cuttings are
first bagged. (2011 Code § 11-27)
      3.   a. Building materials, trees, brush and scrap iron or steel are not
hauled by the Town. The hauling of such items is the responsibility of the
owner thereof. (2011 Code § 11-25)
         b.   Tree limbs, bricks, stones, mortar, shingles, lumber, iron, and
steel products, used furniture and household appliances shall not be placed in
any Town receptacle. (2011 Code § 11-27)
   B.   Receptacle Specifications: Metal, plastic and/or fiberglass containers
with handles, not to exceed thirty (30) gallons nor more than fifty (50) pounds
when fully loaded, must be provided for trash and garbage by those who desire
the service. A sufficient number of containers must be provided for one week's
accumulation. Watertight lids must be in place on all containers.
   C.   Location Of Containers For Pick Up:
      1.   In all areas of the Town where there are open unobstructed alleys or
easements wide enough and improved enough for collection vehicles to travel
with ease, garbage and trash containers will be placed on the alley or easement
property line for pick up; except, that they may be placed in a platted alley
if they do not interfere with traffic through the alley.
      2.   In areas where alleys or easements, as described herein, do not
exist, collection will be made from the street. It is the responsibility of
those wanting trash service to place containers on the curb in front of the
residence or in a location easily accessible and clearly visible to the
collectors (not more than 10 feet from the curb) on those days when pick up is
scheduled. The residents will be responsible to remove their trash containers
from the curb after trash pick up so as not to create an unsightly nuisance for
the Town.
   D.   Pick Up Schedule: All garbage and trash collections shall be made by
the Town at stipulated times as prescribed by the rules of the Mayor or his
designee.
   E.   Maintenance Of Receptacles; Noncompliance With Provisions:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the owner of garbage cans to keep them clean
at any and all times and to maintain them in a sanitary condition, as well as
the grounds around the same.
      2.   Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this
section or that may be ragged or sharp edged or any other defect liable to
hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly
replaced upon notice.
      3.   The Town shall have the authority to refuse collection services for
failure to comply with this chapter. (2011 Code § 11-25)
   F.   Use Of Another's Trash Container: It shall be unlawful for any person
to use another person's trash container, whether the container is furnished by
the Town or by the individual, without permission of such other person. (Ord.
338, 6-11-2018)
9-6-4-1: DUMPSTER RENTALS:
   A.   Rental Requirements: Citizens of the Town can rent a dumpster from the
Town for a maximum of three (3) days with one dump for a fee set and
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public
Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
The dumpster will be delivered on Friday and will be picked up and dumped on
Tuesday. (2011 Code § 11-23; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Prohibited Materials: The following items cannot be put into the
dumpster: any type of appliances, pipe, cable, wire, wire rope (includes
barbwire), tree limbs not longer than four feet (4'), tires, car batteries,
ashes, rocks, dirt, cement, building materials of any kind, dead carcasses,
cans of paint, paint thinner or acids of any kind. (2011 Code § 11-23)
   C.   Overfill Costs: The dumpster can only be filled to the top. If the
dumpster is overfilled or too heavy to be dumped, it will not be emptied, and
there will be a penalty and weekly fee, until the renter has emptied the
overflow and the dumpster can be removed, as set and established by resolution
of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved
and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for
inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (2011 Code § 11-23; amd.
2017 Code)
9-6-5: RATES; BILLING AND DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
   A.   Rates Established:
      1.   The trash and/or garbage rates in the Town are as set and
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public
Works Authority and approved and adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees, and posted for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 330, 3-13-2017; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Commencing July 1, 2017, and continuing each subsequent July 1, the
Board of Trustees shall review the fees charged and shall recommend adjustment
of the fees to the Town Board based upon the percentage change in the Consumer
Price Index, All Urban Consumers, South Region, All Items, during the twelve
(12) month period ending in April preceding the July in question. Any
recommended change shall be rounded up to the nearest nickel. (Ord. 330, 3-13-
2017)
   B.   Bills For Service; Delinquencies:
      1.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to
collect the fees for garbage and refuse collection and disposal from the owners
and/or occupants of the various premises within the corporate limits of the
Town, on a monthly basis, payable between the first and tenth of each month.
(2011 Code § 11-23; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   The fees for the removal of garbage and/or trash shall be billed to
each owner or occupant liable therefor with the water bill where said owner or
occupant is a water user unless such user is a commercial business and receives
trash services other than from the Town. (2011 Code § 11-23)
      3.   A delinquency charge of ten percent (10%) shall be added to any bill
for the removal of garbage or trash which has not been paid within ten (10)
days from the due date stated on the bill. (2011 Code § 11-24)
      4.   Fees for water service will not be accepted without payment of the
fees for removal of trash and/or garbage, and failure to pay the said charge
for the removal of trash or garbage, when due, shall be cause for
discontinuance of either water service or garbage and trash collection, or
both. (2011 Code § 11-23)
9-6-6: SALE OR REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE BY BUSINESS OWNERS PERMITTED:
This chapter does not prevent owners or occupants in the business section from
selling or removing garbage of value from hotels, restaurants, and boarding
houses. In that event, garbage shall be removed in covered metal containers and
handled in such manner so as that in the removal thereof, no such garbage shall
be spilled or dropped onto any streets, avenues, alleys or sidewalks. The
containers for garbage shall be approved by the Town. (2011 Code § 11-28)
9-6-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from
continuing such violations. Each day a violation is allowed to exist is a
separate offense. (2011 Code § 11-30)
CHAPTER 2
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF UTILITY SERVICES
ARTICLE C. FRAUDULENT USE OF SERVICES
SECTION:
9-2C-1: Definition
9-2C-2: Fraudulent Use Of Services
9-2C-3: Tampering With Utility Equipment Or Property
9-2C-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this article, the term "fraudulent use of service" shall
include any unauthorized use of the Town's electric, sewer, water and garbage
services and facilities by the consumer. (2011 Code § 19-117; amd. 2017 Code)
9-2C-2: FRAUDULENT USE OF SERVICES:
In the event fraudulent use of a service or evidence of attempted fraudulent
use of a service is discovered, or where the Town's regulating or measuring
equipment or other property has been tampered with, service(s) may be
disconnected by the Town without advance notice to the consumer. Service to the
consumer will not be resumed until the consumer shall have paid all bills
including:
   A.   The charge for the estimated amount of service fraudulently consumed.
   B.   The cost of replacement or repair of any damaged meter or associated
equipment. (2011 Code § 19-117)
   C.   A reconnection charge set and established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works Authority and approved and adopted by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, and posted for inspection in the
Office of the Town Clerk- Treasurer. (2011 Code § 19-117; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   If service has been restored by other than Town personnel after having
been disconnected initially for one (1) of the reasons stated herein, the
consumer shall, in addition to the charges enumerated above, pay a charge set
and established by the Board of Trustees of the Mooreland Public Works
Authority and approved and adopted by the Town Board of Trustees, and posted
for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   E.   If it has been shown to the satisfaction of the Town that the consumer
or applicant for service had no connection with or knowledge of such fraudulent
use of service(s) or such tampering, service may be resumed after the condition
causing or permitting the fraudulent usage has been corrected and such consumer
or applicant for service has paid for any unmetered service received. (2011
Code § 19-117)
9-2C-3: TAMPERING WITH UTILITY EQUIPMENT OR PROPERTY:
No regulating or measuring equipment or other property or equipment owned by
the Town, wherever situated, whether upon the consumer's premises or elsewhere,
shall be tampered with or interfered with for the purpose of adjustment,
fraudulent adjustment or otherwise. In the event equipment has been tampered
with, the Town will follow the same procedures as for fraudulent use of
services as outlined in section
9-2C-2 of this article. (2011 Code § 19-118)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS; PENALTY
SECTION:
10-1-1: Building Official
10-1-2: Appeals
10-1-3: Violation; Penalty
10-1-4: Injunctions; Relief In Courts
10-1-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The Town building official shall be appointed by the Town Board of Trustees and
shall have the powers and duties prescribed for the building official by the
Town Building Codes; provided, that his powers and duties may by exercised by
his authorized representative under his supervision and control. The term
"building inspector", "plumbing inspector" and "gas inspector", wherever used
in this Code and the ordinances of the Town, also each refer to and mean the
building official, unless a separate electrical inspector, plumbing inspector,
or gas inspector is appointed by the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code § 4-4)
10-1-2: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved of any officer, department, board or agency of the Town
affected by any decision or interpretation of the building official in
connection with the interpretation of any of the provisions of this title may
appeal to the Town Board of Adjustment, which shall be the Town Trustees;
provided, that: (2011 Code § 4-7)
   A.   Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the date of
decision by filing with the building official and the Town Clerk-Treasurer a
written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and by paying a filing
fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees at the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer at the time the notice is
filed. (2011 Code § 4-7; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, upon receipt of the notice of appeal, shall
transmit to the Board of Adjustment the papers and information constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   C.   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a time for hearing of appeal. It
shall give written notice to the parties in interest at least five (5) days
before the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the date, the
hour and the place for the hearing. The Board of Adjustment will also post
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in two (2) public places
within the Town. Upon the hearing, parties in interest may appear in person or
by agent or attorneys. (2011 Code § 4-7)
10-1-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in any business, trade or
vocation for which a license, permit or certificate of registration is required
by this title, without having a valid license, permit or certificate of
registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this
title or by any Code adopted by this title, or who shall otherwise violate any
provision of this title or of any Code adopted by this title, or who shall
violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided in
this title, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code § 4-33; amd. 2017 Code)
10-1-4: INJUNCTIONS; RELIEF IN COURTS:
   A.   The Town Attorney, upon discovery of any violations of the provisions
of this title, may immediately seek injunctive relief against those persons
violating provisions of this title, and bring civil action against such persons
for damages and expenses resulting from any violations of provisions of this
title. (2011 Code § 4-31)
   B.   No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this title shall interfere with
the right of the Town also to apply to the proper courts of the State for a
mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate action against such person, firm
or corporation. (2011 Code § 4-34)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Code Adopted
10-2-2: Permit Requirements
10-2-3: Fire Limits
10-2-4: Building Contractors
10-2-1: CODE ADOPTED:
That certain document, one (1) copy of which shall be on file in the Town Hall,
being marked and designated as the 2015 International Building Code and the
2015 International Residential Code, including appendix chapters, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the Town of Mooreland, for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided, and each made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any. The Town Clerk- Treasurer
shall keep a copy of the subject Building Code on hand, available for sale and
inspection by the public at all times. (2017 Code)
10-2-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   No building or other structure shall be built, enlarged, altered or
moved, as required in the Building Code, nor any mobile home located, relocated
or constructed, without a building permit issued by the Town building official.
      2.   Whenever a building or structure is to be moved from without the
Town to a location within the Town or from one (1) location within the Town to
another location within the Town, a building permit is required. (2011 Code §
4-6)
   B.   Application For Permit: A person desiring a building permit shall
submit an application therefor to the Town building official. The applicant
shall submit with the application such reasonable information as the building
official may require to enable him to determine whether granting the permit
would be in accordance with the requirements of this title and the ordinances
of the Town.
   C.   Issuance Of Permit; Fees: If the application is in accordance with the
requirements of this title and the ordinances and laws of the Town, the
building official shall issue the permit upon the payment by the applicant of
the building permit fee to the Town Clerk-Treasurer as follows:
      1.   The fees for building permits or renewals shall be as provided in
the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011
Code § 4-6; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   On work that is started before a permit is acquired, the fee shall
be doubled.
      3.   All buildings being constructed by public bodies such as the State,
counties, school districts, municipalities, and tax exempt organizations shall
be exempt from the payment of fees for building permits. Such bodies shall
comply with all other regulations governing the construction of any building in
the Town.
      4.   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall remit five dollars ($5.00) for each
building permit or renewal to the Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to
Senate Bill 1182.
   D.   Scope Of Permit: A building permit covers the initial plumbing and
electrical installations to be made in connection with the building.
   E.   Posting Permit: The number of the building permit shall be posted
conspicuously on the premises concerned so that it can easily be read from the
street. (2011 Code § 4-6)
10-2-3: FIRE LIMITS:
The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits of the
Town: (2011 Code § 4-5; amd. 2017 Code)
West one-half (W1/2) of Blocks Two (2) and Four (4) and the East One-half (E1/
2) of Blocks one (1) and three (3), Townsite of Mooreland, Oklahoma, according
to the recorded plat thereof.
(2011 Code § 4-5)
10-2-4: BUILDING CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Certificate:
      1.   Certificate Required; Exceptions:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, improve,
enlarge, repair, move, demolish, or alter any premises, building or other
structure within the Town limits without first obtaining a contractor's
certificate from the Town. Prior to issuance of any building permits, pursuant
to section
10-2-2 of this chapter, the applicant for the permit shall have a valid
contractor's certificate.
         b.   (1) A contractor's certificate is not required of persons who
have a valid certificate for other specialized trades required by this Code and
provided the work performed is within the authority granted therein.
            (2)   Owners of the property are not required to obtain a
contractor certificate when performing work on their own property, provided
work is performed by the owner. Nothing herein shall relieve any person from
obtaining other licenses, permits or certificates required by this Code.
      2.   Application For Certificate: Any person who is required by this
section to possess a contractor's certificate shall make an application to the
Town on application forms provided by the Town for that purpose. (2011 Code §
4-2)
      3.   Fee For Certificate: Before such certificate is issued, a fee as
provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees shall be paid to the Town Clerk-Treasurer for a contractor's
registration certificate. (2011 Code § 4-2; amd. 2017 Code)
      4.   Nontransferability Of Certificate: A contractor's certificate issued
by the Town is not transferable, and violation of this subsection A4 is cause
for revocation in addition to other penalties in this Code.
      5.   Expiration Of Certificate: Each certificate issued shall expire on
June 30 of each year.
      6.   Renewals: The annual renewal application, appropriate documentation
and fees must be received by the Town on or before July 1 and shall be
considered surrendered if the certificate is not renewed within fifteen (15)
days. After July 15, the applicant must proceed in the manner required for a
new or initial applicant.
      7.   Prohibited Uses Of Certificate: The lending of any contractor's
certificate and/or the person to whom the certificate is issued obtaining other
permits thereunder for any other person shall be deemed cause for revocation.
      8.   Revocation Or Suspension Of Certificate:
         a.   Revocation Of Certificate: The Town Board of Trustees may revoke
the contractor's certificate for just cause. (2011 Code § 4-2)
         b.   Suspension Of Certificate: The Town Administrator may suspend
such certificate if, in his opinion, the certificate holder violates any
provision of this Code. In such case, the Town Administrator shall give notice
of the suspension to the contractor. The contractor whose certificate has been
suspended shall have the right to appear before the Town Board of Adjustment as
provided in section
10-1-2 of this title. (2011 Code § 4-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Insurance Requirements:
      1.   Workers' Compensation Insurance:
         a.   Each building contractor who is defined in the Workers'
Compensation Act, 85A Oklahoma Statutes section 1 et seq. (the "Act") as an
employer of employees as defined in the Act and not exempt, which contractor is
registered under this section, shall be required to document to the Town and to
keep in force during the life of its registration, a workers' compensation
insurance policy to protect the contractor's employees against occupational
hazards and diseases as regulated and defined in the Act.
         b.   A certificate of insurance for workers' compensation, with the
Town named as a certificate holder, from an insurance company duly licensed to
do business in the State of Oklahoma or proof of exemption or own risk status
shall be submitted with the application for registration to the Town. Persons
who are self- employed and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers'
Compensation Act are not required to submit a certificate of insurance.
However, in lieu of the certificate of insurance requirement, the applicant
must execute an affidavit certifying he is wholly self-employed and does not
fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act with proof of
exemption.
         c.   The contractor shall be required to notify the Town within ten
(10) working days upon termination of an insurance policy. This will cause the
Town to invalidate the certificate.
      2.   Liability Insurance: Each contractor shall procure and maintain a
general liability policy of insurance within limits per occurrence of not less
than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). A certificate of insurance
shall be provided at the time application is made for a contractor's
certificate. The contractor shall notify the Town within ten (10) days of
termination of the policy. The Town shall be named a certificate holder.
Failure to maintain general liability insurance in the specified limit shall
cause the contractor's certificate to be deemed revoked. (2011 Code § 4-2)
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section
is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
provided in this title. (2011 Code § 4-2; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Plumbing Code
10-3-2: Permit Requirements
10-3-3: Inspections
10-3-4: Contractor Registration Requirements
10-3-1: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Adoption Of Code: The 2015 edition of a certain document, one (1) copy
of which is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk- Treasurer and copies
available, marked and designated as the 2015 International Plumbing Code as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the Town for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of such publication are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this section. (2017 Code)
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections of the Code adopted in
subsection A of this section are hereby revised as follows:
Section 101.1 (page 1, second line), insert the Town of Mooreland.
Section 106.6.2 (page 5), the fee schedule shall be the fees as specified by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees.
(2011 Code § 4-11; amd. 2017 Code)
10-3-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No plumbing work shall be undertaken without a permit from the plumbing
inspector. The application for such work shall be as provided in section
10-2-2 of this title. (2011 Code § 4-13; amd. 2017 Code)
10-3-3: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspection of plumbing work must conform to the guidelines set forth in
the Plumbing Code adopted in section
10-3-1 of this chapter.
   B.   The fee for inspection by the Town plumbing inspector shall be as
provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees. (2011 Code § 4-13; amd. 2017 Code)
10-3-4: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Definitions: The phrases and words "journeyman plumber", "plumber's
apprentice", "plumbing contractor", and "plumbing", when used in the
ordinances, regulations and other official acts and communications of the Town,
shall have the meanings respectively prescribed to them by 59 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1003 of the State Plumbing License Law, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
   B.   Registration Required; Exceptions:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade, or
occupation of a plumbing contractor (otherwise known as master plumber) in the
Town unless he is registered with the Town and has a current and valid
certificate of a registration issued by the Town.
      2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require an individual
to be registered before doing plumbing work on his own personal residence or
require registration for a licensed journeyman or apprentice under the
supervision of a licensed contractor.
   C.   State License Required: All persons, firms, partnerships, contractors
or individuals who hereafter make application for registration under this
section must show proof of an Oklahoma license as a master plumber, journeyman
plumber or plumbing contractor as provided in 59 Oklahoma Statutes section 1001
et seq.
   D.   Required Fees; Term Of Registration:
      1.   All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or individuals
engaged or hereafter engaging in the business of installing any plumbing on any
premises or to extend the plumbing on any premises in or on any building within
the corporate limits of the Town shall pay to the Town Clerk-Treasurer the sum
as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of
Trustees as a registration fee for the purpose of regulating the business,
payable in advance, to be deposited in the General Fund of the Town. In
addition, said licensed contractor shall pay an additional sum as provided in
the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees for each
licensed journeyman or apprentice under the supervision of the licensed
contractor.
      2.   The registration shall entitle the holder to install any plumbing on
any premises within the corporate limits of the Town for a period of one (1)
year.
      3.   No registration shall extend beyond June 30 of any year, and all
persons, firms, or corporations paying fees herein fixed at any time after July
1 shall be required to pay the full amount as required above.
   E.   Revocation Of Registration: The Town Board of Trustees, upon at least
ten (10) days' notice and adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may revoke
the Town registration of any plumbing contractor or journeyman plumber for
violating any provisions of this chapter or the ordinances or regulations of
the Town relating to the installation of plumbing or for any other cause
specified in the State Plumbing License Law 1 . (2011 Code § 4-12; amd. 2017
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS § 1001 et seq.
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Code Adopted
10-4-2: Definition
10-4-3: Permit Requirements
10-4-4: Installation Requirements
10-4-5: Underground Service
10-4-6: Electrical Contractors
10-4-7: Authority To Make Special Rulings
10-4-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2014 edition of a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the
Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and copies available, marked and designated
as the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Town
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such
publication are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this section. (2017 Code)
10-4-2: DEFINITION:
The term "electrical equipment", as used in this chapter, refers to electrical
conductors, metallic raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures, appliances,
apparatus, and any electrical material of any nature, kind or description, to
be installed within or on any building or structure. (2011 Code § 4-16)
10-4-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to install any
electrical wiring, fixtures, or apparatus in or on any building or structure in
the corporate limits of the Town or make extensions to any existing electrical
installations without first securing a permit from the Town electrical
inspector.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for electrical permits shall be
made to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and the applicant shall provide such plans,
specifications, and other data as may be reasonably required. (2011 Code § 4-
20)
   C.   Permit Fee: The fee for an electrical permit on all contracts or jobs
of installation shall be as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution
of the Town Board of Trustees for electrical inspection. (2011 Code § 4-21;
amd. 2017 Code)
10-4-4: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this title, with the Statutes of the State and any orders,
rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific standards are
prescribed by this title or by the Statutes of the State of Oklahoma or by any
orders, rules or regulations issued by authority thereof, conformity with the
regulations set forth in the Code adopted in section
10-4-1 of this chapter, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with
approved standards for safety to persons or to property. (2011 Code § 4-17;
amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this title, the Statutes of the State and any orders, rules
and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons or to property. Unless by this title, by a
Statute of the State or any orders, rules or regulations issued by authority
thereof, a specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for
installation and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved
standards for safety to persons or to property. (2011 Code § 4-18; amd. 2017
Code)
10-4-5: UNDERGROUND SERVICE:
The fee for burying electrical service is as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. The customer shall supply
the pipe and shall dig the ditch per the Code adopted in section
10-4-1 of this chapter. An inspection shall be done by the Town inspector prior
to the ditch being covered. The Town shall hook up both ends of the wire for
service. (2011 Code §§ 4-21.1, 19.5; amd. 2017 Code)
10-4-6: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Registration Requirements:
      1.   State License Required: All persons, firms, partnerships,
contractors, or individuals who hereafter make application for registration
under this section must show proof of an Oklahoma license as an electrical
contractor as provided in 59 Oklahoma Statutes section 1680 et seq. (2011 Code
§ 4-22)
      2.   Registration Fees: All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or
individuals, engaged or hereafter engaging in the business of installing
electrical fixtures, wiring or apparatus in or on any building within the
corporate limits of the Town (except central power stations, power houses and
substations belonging to the electric company) as a licensed contractor shall
pay to the Town Clerk-Treasurer the sum as provided in the fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees, as a minimum registration fee for
the purpose of regulating the business, payable in advance, to be deposited in
the General Fund of the Town. In addition, said licensed contractor shall pay
an additional sum as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees for each licensed journeyman or apprentice under the
supervision of the licensed contractor. (2011 Code § 4-22; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Bond Requirements: Every person receiving a certificate as an
electrical contractor shall file with the Town Clerk-Treasurer a bond in the
sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), executed with a surety company
authorized to do business in the State. The bond shall be conditioned that the
principal will install all electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances, and
equipment in accordance with the Town relating to electrical installations and
in a workmanlike manner; that the principal shall, without further cost to the
person for whom the work was done, remedy any defective or faulty work caused
by poor workmanship or inferior or nonstandard material; and that the Town may
be fully indemnified and held harmless from any and all costs, expenses or
damage resulting from the performance of his work as an electrical contractor
or apprentice electrician, as the case may be.
      4.   Term Of Registration: The registration shall entitle the holder to
install electrical conductors, fixtures or apparatus within the corporate
limits of the Town for a period of one (1) year. No registration shall extend
beyond June 30 of any year, and all persons, firms, or corporations paying fees
herein, fixed at any time after July 1, shall be required to pay the full
amount as set out herein. (2011 Code § 4-22)
      5.   Exemptions:
         a.   Nothing in this subsection A shall be construed to require an
individual to be registered before doing electrical work on his own personal
residence.
         b.   For installing of bell, telephone or signal systems not using
over twelve (12) volts, no registration or bond will be required. The
installations of same must comply with all other requirements of this chapter
and the ordinances of the Town. (2011 Code § 4-22; amd. 2017 Code)
      6.   Revocation Of Certificate: After adequate opportunity for a hearing,
the Town Board may revoke the certificate of an electrical contractor, an
apprentice electrician, or a journeyman electrician. (2011 Code § 4-22)
   B.   Defective Work And Materials:
      1.   Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of
electrical contracting for the installation of wiring and apparatus for
electric light, heat or power in the Town who fails to correct promptly any
defects in any work done by him contrary to this chapter, after having been
notified by the electrical inspector, shall not be issued any further permits
until such have been corrected; and in any case, in which any person shall
continue to or persistently violate this chapter in regard to electrical work,
or the orders of the electrical inspector in relation to same, the registration
and permit of such person shall be suspended or revoked. (2011 Code § 4-23;
amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   This chapter shall not be constructed to relieve or lessen the
responsibility of any person, partnership or corporation owning or operating or
installing electric wire, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for
the damage to property or persons injured by any defect therein. Nor shall the
Town or any agent thereof be deemed to assume such liability by reasons of the
inspection authorized herein or the certificate of inspection issued by the
electrical inspector. (2011 Code § 4-24; amd. 2017 Code)
10-4-7: AUTHORITY TO MAKE SPECIAL RULINGS:
The Town Board of Trustees, by motion or resolution, shall have the authority
to make special rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the safeguarding of
life and property and the improvement of electrical installations. In all
cases, persons engaged in the installing of electrical equipment and holding an
electrical license must be notified by letter of these decisions. (2011 Code §
4-19)
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Code Adopted
10-5-2: Mechanical Contractors
10-5-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2015 edition of a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the
Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and copies available, marked and designated
as the 2015 International Mechanical Code as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Town for
the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such publication
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section. (2017 Code)
10-5-2: MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Registration Requirements:
      1.   State License Required: All persons, firms, partnerships,
contractors or individuals who hereafter make application for registration
under this section must show proof of an Oklahoma license as a mechanical
contractor as provided in 59 Oklahoma Statutes section 1850.1 et seq. (2011
Code § 4-29)
      2.   Registration Fees: All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or
individuals engaged or hereafter engaging in the business of installation,
maintenance, repair or renovation, in whole or in part, of any heating system,
cooling system, mechanical refrigeration system or ventilation system or any
equipment or material including process piping used in the installation,
maintenance, repair, or renovation of such systems on any premises in or on any
building within the corporate limits of the Town shall pay to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer the sum as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees as a registration fee for each licensed contractor for
the purpose of regulating the business, payable in advance, to be deposited in
the General Fund of the Town. In addition, said licensed contractor shall pay
an additional sum as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Town Board of Trustees for each licensed journeyman and apprentice under the
supervision of a licensed contractor. (2011 Code § 4-29; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Term Of Registration: The registration shall entitle the holder to
install or extend any heating system, cooling system, mechanical refrigeration
system or ventilation system or any equipment or material including process
piping used in the installation, maintenance, repair, or renovation of such
systems on any premises within the corporate limits of the Town for a period of
one (1) year. No registration shall extend beyond June 30 of any year, and all
persons, firms or corporations paying fees herein fixed at any time after July
1 shall be required to pay the full amount as set out herein. (2011 Code § 4-
29)
      4.   Exemptions: Nothing in this subsection A shall be construed to
require an individual to be registered before doing mechanical work on his own
personal residence. (2011 Code § 4-29; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Apprentices: Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
employment of apprentices to perform any of the work herein defined, provided
said apprentice performs said work under the direct supervision of a licensed
mechanical contractor or journeyman. No license, examination or fees shall be
required of such apprentices. A mechanical contractor is allowed three (3)
apprentices to each journeyman on each job. (2011 Code § 4-30)
CHAPTER 6
GAS CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Fuel Gas Code And Regulations
10-6-1-1: Fuel Gas Code
10-6-1-2: Licensing Requirements
10-6-1-3: Inspection Fee
10-6-2: Liquefied Petroleum Gas
10-6-1: FUEL GAS CODE AND REGULATIONS:
10-6-1-1: FUEL GAS CODE:
   A.   Adoption Of Code: The 2015 edition of a certain document, one (1) copy
of which is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk- Treasurer and copies
available, marked and designated as the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the
Fuel Gas Code of the Town for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of such publication are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this section. (2017 Code)
   B.   Amendments To Code: The following sections of the Code adopted in
subsection A of this section are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: Town of Mooreland.
Section 106.5.2. The fee schedule shall be those fees further specified by
resolution of the Town Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 302, 8-13-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
10-6-1-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to engage in the business of installing gas piping and/or
appliances without first obtaining a license from the Town. The license may be
obtained by persons holding a plumbing contractor's license issued by the State
of Oklahoma. (Ord. 302, 8-13-2012)
   B.   License Fee: Before receiving a license, the applicant shall pay an
annual fee as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town
Board of Trustees. The fee shall be paid to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and the
license shall not be valid unless it has attached thereto or written thereon a
receipt of statement showing that the fee has been paid. (Ord. 302, 8-13-2012;
amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Bond Requirements: Every person receiving a license to install gas
piping and/or appliances shall file with the Town Clerk- Treasurer a bond in
the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) executed with a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma and conditioned that the
principal will install all gas piping and/or appliances in accordance with the
law and the ordinances and other regulations of the Town and the State of
Oklahoma relating to gas piping installations and that the principal shall,
without further cost to the person for which the work is done, remedy any
defective or faulty work caused by poor workmanship or inferior or substandard
materials. The bond must be approved by the Board of Trustees. No license shall
be issued to any person until the bond is filed and approved, and any such
license issued shall be valid only while said bond is in effect. (Ord. 302, 8-
13-2012)
10-6-1-3: INSPECTION FEE:
The fee for inspection by the Town gas inspector shall be as provided in the
fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees for each gas
inspection. (Ord. 302, 8-13-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
10-6-2: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS:
   A.   Regulations Adopted: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to manufacture, fabricate, assemble, install or repair any system, container,
apparatus, or appliance to be used for the transportation, storage, dispensing,
or utilization of liquefied petroleum gas, or to transport, handle, or store
such gas, unless such person has complied with and complies with all provisions
of this Code and the law and ordinances of the Town relating thereto, and has
any license or permit which may be required by state law. The pamphlet, Storage
and Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gases, as contained in Pamphlet No. 58
issued by the National Fire Protection Association, the latest edition thereof,
adopted by the Oklahoma Liquefied Petroleum Gas Board, shall have full force
and effect within the Town. (2011 Code §§ 4-26, 8-34; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Storage Prohibitions: Liquefied petroleum gas cannot be stored within
the municipal limits of the Town of Mooreland, except upon application to the
fire chief, who, upon hearing determines that the proposed storage will not
constitute a hazard to the public or property and thereupon issues a permit
authorizing the storage.
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any violation of the rules and regulations in this
section shall be deemed a violation of the ordinances of the Town and shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2011 Code §§ 4-26, 8-34; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 351, 5-10-
2021)
CHAPTER 7
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Code Adopted
10-7-2: Definitions
10-7-3: Storage Of Flammable Liquids And Explosives
10-7-4: Permits For New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies
10-7-5: Authority To Modify Regulations
10-7-6: Enforcement Of Code
10-7-7: Appeals
10-7-1: CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Code Adopted: The current edition of a certain document, one (1) copy
of which is on file in the office of the Town clerk and copies available,
marked and designated as the 2018 International Fire Code as published by the
International Code Board, Inc., and including all amendments adopted by the
Oklahoma Uniform Building Commission is hereby adopted as the fire code of the
Town for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such
publication are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the 2018 Fire Code are hereby
revised:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert: “Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma”.
      2.   As Amended by Permanent Rule of the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code
Commission effective September 14, 2021. (2011 Code §§ 4-1, 8-21; amd. 2017
Code; Ord. 369, 10-2-2025)
10-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Whenever the word "Municipality" is used in the Fire Code hereby
adopted, it shall be held to mean the Town.
   B.   Whenever the word "corporation counsel" is used in the Fire Code hereby
adopted, it shall mean the Town Attorney. (2011 Code § 8-23)
10-7-3: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Flammable Liquids: The limits referred to in the Fire Code adopted in
this chapter in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks
is prohibited shall be the Town limits. The limits referred to in the Fire Code
adopted in this chapter in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are
prohibited, are hereby established as the Town limits. Provided, that this
subsection shall not prohibit any such installations in existence on the
effective date hereof. (2011 Code § 8-24; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Explosives And Blasting Agents: The limits referred to in section
5601.1.1 of the International Fire Code adopted by this chapter in which the
storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents is prohibited are the
boundaries of the Town. (2011 Code § 8-26; amd. 2017 Code)
10-7-4: PERMITS FOR NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES:
The Chief of the Fire Department and two (2) persons appointed by the Board of
Trustees shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or
occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in
the Fire Code adopted herein. The Chief of the Fire Department shall post such
list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons. (2011 Code § 8-29)
10-7-5: AUTHORITY TO MODIFY REGULATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Code hereby adopted in his own discretion or upon application
in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the letter of the Code;
provided, that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured
and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications, when
granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief thereon shall be entered upon
the records of the Fire Department, and for applications requesting change, a
signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (2011 Code § 8-27)
10-7-6: ENFORCEMENT OF CODE:
The Code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in
the Fire Department of the Town, which shall be operated under the supervision
of the Chief of the Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be
Ex Officio Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau. (2011 Code § 8-22)
10-7-7: APPEALS:
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Board of Trustees within
thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (2011 Code § 8-28)
CHAPTER 8
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
10-8-1: Code Adopted
10-8-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2015 edition of a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the
Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and copies available, marked and designated
as the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Town for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed by the
Town. (2017 Code)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; AUTHORITY; INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
SECTION:
11-1-1: Statute Authority; Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Synopsis
11-1-4: Interpretation, Application And Compliance
11-1-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; SHORT TITLE:
This title, in pursuance of the authority granted by the legislature of the
State of Oklahoma in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 43-101 et seq., shall be
known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF MOORELAND and may be cited as
such. (2011 Code app. § 24; amd. 2017 Code)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The regulations contained in this title are necessary to:
   A.   Encourage the most appropriate uses of land;
   B.   Maintain and stabilize the value of property;
   C.   Reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public
health;
   D.   Decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards;
   E.   Prevent undue concentration of population; and
   F.   Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to
plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public
utilities, and other facilities. (2011 Code app. § 25)
11-1-3: SYNOPSIS:
This title classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures
within the corporate limits of the Town as hereinafter set forth, by dividing
the Town into zones and regulating therein the use of the land and the use and
size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of the land
by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings, and
the density of population. (2011 Code app. § 26)
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION, APPLICATION AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall
be held to be necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. (2011 Code app. § 25)
   B.   In case any portion of this title shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the remainder of this title shall not thereby be invalid, but
shall remain in full force and effect. (2011 Code app. § 95)
   C.   Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no
building, structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved,
altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be
used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with
the regulations contained in this title. (2011 Code app. § 27)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction And Definitions
11-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are to be used and
interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. Words in the singular number include the plural and
words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural
construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory
and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the dominant use of the building or premises.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the
principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith.
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: Any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden,
plastic, or stone sign, or other sign, device or structure of any character
whatsoever, including a statue placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the
ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, or structure.
The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting,
printing, tacking, mailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening,
affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising
structure shall be determined as the area of the largest cross section of such
structure. Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted by public
officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or materials
being offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose
of this title.
ALLEY: A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of dwelling, multiple-family.
AUTOMOBILE: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and
highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not limited to,
the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters and motorcycles.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height
measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (1/
2) its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling, other than a hotel, where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided
for three (3) or more but not exceeding twenty (20) persons on a weekly or
monthly basis.
BUILDING: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for persons,
animals or chattels. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each
portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and
lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest
point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of a mansard roof, or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or
more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common parentage,
for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when
received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this
definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or
approved under the laws of this State, custody of children fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree to the custodial person, or places of worship or other religious or
public institutions caring for children within the institutional building while
their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes
or other activities of places of worship.
COVERAGE: The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the
area covered by all overhanging roofs.
DISTRICT: Any section or sections of the Town of Mooreland for which the
regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and
coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind
of building therein.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used as living
quarters for one (1) or more families, but not including trailer homes. (See
definition of trailer home, mobile home or house trailer.)
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by three
(3) or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of hotels or
motels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one (1)
family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2)
families living independently of each other.
FAMILY: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group of not to exceed five (5) persons not all related by blood or marriage,
occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for
group use.
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for one (1) family erected above a private
garage.
GARAGE, PARKING: Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of four
(4) or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is
incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities
are not provided.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for
storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their
guests of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
GASOLINE SERVICE OR FILLING STATION: Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, or other
automobile accessories and incidental services, including facilities for
lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but
not including painting, major repair or automatic automobile washing or the
sale of butane or propane fuels.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a
dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which
is conducted entirely within the main or accessory building; provided, that no
trading in merchandise is carried on, and in connection with which there is no
display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one (1) nonilluminated
nameplate not more than two (2) square feet in area attached to the main or
accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is
customary for purely domestic or household purposes. A salon or barbershop,
tearoom or restaurant, rest home or clinic, doctor's or dentist's office,
childcare center, tourist home, or cabinet, metal or auto repair shop shall not
be deemed a home occupation.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one (1) ownership containing six
(6) or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as
the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged, with or
without meals, for compensation, but not including a trailer court or camp,
sanitarium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed
under restraint.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which are kept three (3) or more dogs more than
six (6) months of age.
LOT: Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one (1) main
building, or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings and uses,
including such open spaces as are required by this title and other laws or
ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street.
LOT AREA: The total area measured on a horizontal plane included within lot
lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their
full lengths on a street; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection
of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street,
excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
MEDICAL FACILITIES:
Convalescent Home, Rest Home Or Nursing Home: A health facility where persons
are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for
compensation.
Dental Clinic Or Medical Clinic: A facility for the examination and treatment
of ill and afflicted human outpatients; provided, that patients are not kept
overnight except under emergency conditions.
Dental Office Or Doctor's Office: See definition of medical facilities: dental
clinic or medical clinic.
Hospital: An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an
integral part of the facilities.
Public Health Center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for
providing public health services, including related facilities such as
laboratories, clinics, and administrative offices operated in connection
therewith.
Sanitarium: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical
treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic
agents.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION: See definition at section
4-3-1 of this Code.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY: See definition at section
4-3-1 of this Code.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSOR: See definition at section
4-3-1 of this Code.
NONCONFORMING USE: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three (3) or more but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. A building which has
accommodations for more than twenty (20) persons shall be defined as a "hotel"
under the terms of this title.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY OR DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: Any attended or unattended
place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the
purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing
apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical
appliance which is operated primarily by the customer.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of
roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living
quarters shall be counted as a full story.
STREET: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the
ground.
TOURIST COURT: An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to
be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient persons or
families and intended primarily for automobile transients.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in not more than four
(4) rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TRAILER COURT OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership
which has been designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for
occupancy by one or more trailer houses or mobile homes.
TRAILER, HAULING: A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is
designed for hauling animals, produce, goods, or commodities, including boats.
TRAILER HOME, MOBILE HOME OR HOUSE TRAILER: A portable or mobile living unit
used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis.
TRAILER HOME OR MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a trailer court
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
TRAILER, TRAVEL OR CAMPING: A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary
human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not
constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this title that the
building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main
building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the
side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and
extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the
main building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the side
lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and
interior lots, the rear yard shall, in all cases, be at the opposite end of the
lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of
the main building. (2011 Code app. § 28; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 342, 8-13-2018)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Enforcement Official
11-3-2: Building Permit Requirements
11-3-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
11-3-4: Amendments
11-3-5: Violation; Penalty
11-3-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
This title shall be enforced by a building official, acting at the direction of
the Chair of the Board of Trustees. (2011 Code app. § 90)
11-3-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be a violation of this title for any person to change or permit the
change in the use of land or buildings or structures or to erect, alter, move
or improve any building or structure until a building permit has been obtained
under the following conditions: (2011 Code app. § 90; amd. 2017 Code)
   A.   Permit Required: No building or structure shall be built, enlarged,
altered or moved without a permit from the building official.
   B.   Application For Permit: The applicant for a building permit may be
required to furnish the following information: (2011 Code app. § 90)
      1.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot
of all existing buildings and structures, and the exact size and location on
the lot of the structures or buildings proposed to be repaired, altered,
erected or moved, together with a statement of the materials to be used, and
the size, arrangement, and number of parking stalls, movement of vehicles and
ingress and egress drives for all off street parking and loading facilities.
(2011 Code app. § 90; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and
proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and
housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each
existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate.
      3.   Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed
to determine compliance with this title.
      4.   A survey prepared by an engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma
of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be
located. (2011 Code app. § 90)
11-3-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A certificate of occupancy is required for all businesses. (2017 Code)
11-3-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, on its own
motion or on petition, amend the regulations and districts herein established.
(2011 Code app. § 92)
   B.   Petition To Amend; Notices:
      1.   Every petition for amendment shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for investigation and reported to the Board of Trustees. At least
fifteen (15) days' notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town to advise of the date, time and place of the public
hearing to be held on such proposed amendment before the Board of Trustees.
(2011 Code app. § 92; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   In addition, notice of a public hearing on any proposed zoning
change shall be given twenty (20) days prior to the hearing by mailing written
notice by the Secretary of the Planning Commission or by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer to all owners of the property within a three hundred foot (300')
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. The notice shall
contain:
         a.   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the Town;
         b.   Present zoning and classification of the property and the
classification sought by the applicant; and
         c.   Date, time and place of the public hearing.
      3.   In addition to written requirements, notice may also be given by
posting notice of such hearing on the affected property at least twenty (20)
days before the date of the hearing. (2011 Code app. § 92)
      4.   In cases of proposed zoning reclassifications, the Town Board of
Trustees may require additional notice of the public hearing by posting a sign
on the property affected by the proposed zoning reclassification. The sign and
the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible
and legible from the public street or streets toward which it faces. The notice
shall contain: (2011 Code app. § 92; amd. 2017 Code)
         a.   The date, time and place of the public hearing;
         b.   By whom the public hearing will be conducted;
         c.   The desired zoning classification;
         d.   The proposed use of the property; and
         e.   Other information as deemed necessary to provide adequate and
timely public notice. (2011 Code app. § 92)
   C.   Protests: In case of a protest against such proposed amendment, at
least three (3) days before the date of the public hearing, a petition must be
filed by owners of twenty percent (20%) or more, either by the area of the lots
included in such proposed change or by the owners of fifty percent (50%) or
more of the area of the lots within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the
exterior boundary of the territory included in such proposed change. Such
amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-
fifths (3/5) of all the members of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code app.
§ 92; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Fees: Fees for filing petitions to change the zoning or property and to
amend the district boundaries are hereby fixed and established according to the
fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. (2011 Code
app. § 96; amd. 2017 Code)
11-3-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of this title shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this title shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (2011 Code app. § 91; amd. 2017
Code)
ARTICLE A. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS
SECTION:
11-3A-1: Board Created
11-3A-2: Composition And Terms Of Office
11-3A-3: Organization And Voting
11-3A-4: Powers
11-3A-5: Appeals
11-3A-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created within the Town a Board of Adjustment with the powers
and duties as hereinafter set forth. (2011 Code app. § 82)
11-3A-2: COMPOSITION AND TERMS OF OFFICE:
The Board of Adjustment shall be composed of the five (5) members of the Board
of Trustees. All appointments shall be for a term of three (3) years. The Board
of Adjustment shall elect a Chair from its membership to serve for a term of
two (2) years. (2011 Code app. §§ 83, 85; amd. 2017 Code)
11-3A-3: ORGANIZATION AND VOTING:
   A.   Rules: The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of this title.
   B.   Meetings: Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call
of the Chair and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine.
The Chair, or in his absence, the Acting Chair, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the
public. (2011 Code app. § 86)
   C.   Minutes: The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office
of the Board of Adjustment and shall be public record.
   D.   Voting: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such
ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance. (2011 Code app. § 86;
amd. 2017 Code)
11-3A-4: POWERS:
   A.   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
      1.   Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the interpretation or enforcement of this title.
      2.   Variations: Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific parcel of property at the time of the original adoption
of this title, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific parcel of
property, which condition is not generally prevalent in the area, the strict
application of this title would result in the peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of
such property, the board is hereby empowered to authorize, upon an appeal
relating to such property, a variation from such strict application so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardship, but may establish such requirements
relative to such property as would carry out the purpose and intent of this
title.
      3.   Exceptions:
         a.   Upon appeal, the board is hereby empowered to permit the
following exceptions:
            (1)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line
of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record. (2011 Code
app. § 88)
            (2)   To interpret the provisions of this title where the street
layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map
fixing the several districts, which map is made a part of this title. (2011
Code app. § 88; amd. 2017 Code)
            (3)   To grant exceptions to the off street parking requirements
set forth in chapter 9 of this title when it is determined that the size and
shape of the lot to be built on is such that there could not be compliance with
off street parking provisions, and that the proposed use will not create undue
traffic congestion in the adjacent streets.
            (4)   To review the uses listed in chapters 6, 7 and 8 of this
title as "uses permitted on review". These are so classified because they more
intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses
permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses may make it
desirable that they be permitted to locate therein.
            (5)   To grant a nonassignable limited permit if the Board of
Adjustment finds one (1) or more of the following to exist:
               (A)   The proposed use is not injurious to the present use of
the land and does not prevent enjoyment of existing uses.
               (B)   The proposed use will not impede normal and orderly
development and will not impede improvements of surrounding property.
               (C)   The proposed use does not create a nuisance such as odor,
fumes, dust, noise, etc. (2011 Code app. § 88)
         b.   The exception permit shall list any appropriate restrictions
imposed on the proposed use. A violation of any restriction is grounds for
immediate withdrawal of the permitted use. The fee for the zone exception
permit is as provided in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Town
Board of Trustees. (2011 Code app. § 88; amd. 2017 Code)
      4.   Uses Permitted On Review: The following procedure is established to
relate properly the uses permitted on review with the other land uses located
in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under
the following procedures:
         a.   An application shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment for
review. Said application shall show the location and intended use of the site,
the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within two hundred
feet (200'), and any other material pertinent to the request which the Board of
Adjustment may require.
         b.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold one (1) or more public
hearings thereon.
         c.   The Board of Adjustment, within forty five (45) days of the date
of application, shall study the effect of such proposed building or use upon
the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities and
other matters pertaining to the general welfare, and authorize or deny the
issuance of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested.
   B.   In exercising the powers set out in subsection A of this section, the
Board of Adjustment, in conformance with the provisions of this title, may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all
appeals from rulings made under this title, the Board of Adjustment, in making
its findings on any specific case, shall determine the effect of the proposed
change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the
congestion in the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other
hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and
upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and
general welfare of the people of the Town. Every ruling made upon any appeal to
the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the
testimony received at the hearing afforded by the Board of Adjustment, and
shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. (2011 Code app. §
88)
11-3A-5: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals To Board Of Adjustment:
      1.   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town affected
by any decision of the building official. Such appeal shall be taken within
thirty (30) days from the date of the decision by filing with the building
official and with the Town Clerk-Treasurer a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof, and by paying a filing fee as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees at the Office of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer at the time the notice is filed. The building official shall
forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment the papers constituting the
record of the matter, together with a copy of the ruling or order from which
the action appealed from was taken.
      2.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the building official certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay, in his opinion, would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
of Adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the building
official and on due cause shown. (2011 Code app. § 87; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal, giving public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon
hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. (2011 Code
app. § 87)
   B.   Appeals From Board Of Adjustment:
      1.   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of
the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or
severally, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
Town to the District Court by filing notice of appeal with the Town Clerk-
Treasurer and with the Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days from the filing
of the decision of the Board of Adjustment, which notice shall specify the
grounds of such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided,
the Board of Adjustment shall forthwith transmit to the Court Clerk of the
County the original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record
in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board of
Adjustment. (2011 Code app. § 89)
      2.   An appeal to the District Court from the Board of Adjustment stays
all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Chair of
the Board of Adjustment certifies to the Court Clerk, after notice of appeal
shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay, in his opinion, would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the District Court upon application of notice to the
building official, and upon notice to the Chair of the Board of Adjustment, and
upon due cause being shown. The Court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or modify the decision brought up for review. (2011 Code app. § 89; amd. 2017
Code)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
11-4-1: Districts Established
11-4-2: Zoning Map
11-4-3: Zoning Of Additions, Annexations And Vacated Public Property
11-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this title, the following districts are hereby established
for the Town:
Residential districts:
 R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District
 R-2 General Residential District
Commercial districts:
 C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
 C-2 General Commercial District
Industrial districts:
 I-1 Restricted Manufacturing and Warehousing District
 I-2 General Industrial District
 
(2011 Code app. § 29; amd. 2017 Code)
11-4-2: ZONING MAP:
The Town is hereby divided into districts as shown on the Zoning Map, which is
filed in the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer at the Town Hall. The
boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the district map of the Town,
which map is made a part of this title. (2011 Code app. § 30; amd. 2017 Code)
11-4-3: ZONING OF ADDITIONS, ANNEXATIONS AND VACATED PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Additions And Annexations:
      1.   All new additions and annexations of land to the Town shall be in an
R-1 Residential District, unless otherwise classified by the Board of Trustees,
for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year from the effective date of the
ordinance annexing said addition.
      2.   Within this one (1) year period of time, the Planning Commission
shall study and make recommendations concerning the use of land within said
annexation required to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and, upon receipt of such recommendations of the Board of
Trustees, shall, after public hearings as required by law, establish the
district classification of said annexation; provided, however, that this shall
not be construed as preventing the Board of Trustees from holding public
hearings prior to annexation and establishing the district classification at
the time of said annexation. (2011 Code app. § 93)
   B.   Vacated Public Property: Whenever any street, alley or other public
easement is vacated, it shall have the same district classification as the land
to which the vacated portion accrues. (2011 Code app. § 94)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-5-1: More Restrictive Provisions Apply
11-5-2: No Dwelling On Nonresidential Use Lot
11-5-3: Housing Projects On Two Acres Or More Of Unsubdivided Land
11-5-4: Accessory Buildings And Fences
11-5-5: Mobile Homes
11-5-6: Mobile Home And Travel Trailer Parks
11-5-7: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Uses
11-5-8: Animals
11-5-9: Exemptions From Provisions
11-5-1: MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY:
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one (1) district
permits the use of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to
the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district,
unless otherwise specified. (2011 Code app. § 59)
11-5-2: NO DWELLING ON NONRESIDENTIAL USE LOT:
It is intended that this title be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit
to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be
used for nonresidential purposes. (2011 Code app. § 60)
11-5-3: HOUSING PROJECTS ON TWO ACRES OR MORE OF UNSUBDIVIDED LAND:
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two (2) or more
buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two (2) acres not
subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so
subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it
impractical to apply the requirements of this title to the individual buildings
in such housing project, the application of such requirements to such housing
project may be changed by the Board of Adjustment in a manner that will be in
harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a density of land
use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this
title in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no
case shall a use or building height or density of population be permitted which
is less restrictive than the requirement of the district in which the housing
project is to be located. (2011 Code app. § 63; amd. 2017 Code)
11-5-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND FENCES:
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory
buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which said
building or fence is accessory. (2011 Code app. § 65)
11-5-5: MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Location: A mobile home shall be parked or stored only in a trailer
court which is in conformity with the ordinances of the Town or as authorized
by the proper zoning exception permit approved by the board.
   B.   Construction Requirements: All mobile homes must be a structure defined
by and constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq.
Mobile homes qualifying as a dwelling, single-family shall be compared to site
built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or
residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that
the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding
material, roof material and general aesthetic appearance to: 1) site built or
other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under
this title; or 2) existing development; or 3) proposed development in the same
zoning district or area. In addition to any zoning exception permit or
otherwise, prior to the setting of any mobile home, the owner thereof shall
apply for a permit, with a plot plan attached, with the Town building official.
   C.   Skirting:
      1.   Required: Skirting for any size mobile home or manufactured home
used as a permanent living facility or office use is required and is required
prior to electrical service and tiedown approval by the Town building official.
(2011 Code app. § 64)
      2.   Materials:
         a.   Regardless of any zoning exception permit or otherwise, all
mobile homes must have a skirting (the area beneath each such structure)
enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, made from brick,
concrete, block, rock, vinyl, aluminum siding or other materials commonly used
for the exterior of homes and which have been approved by the Town building
official. Said materials must be rated and approved by the International
Building Code or other professional rating system for exterior home
application. Specifically, such materials cannot be plastic, plywood, lattice,
hay, straw, cardboard, any materials commonly used for fencing, or any
combustible material. Wood in contact with earth or within six inches (6") of
earth shall be pressure treated (or wood of natural resistance to decay). This
includes bottom boards and/or skirting material. Wood must be rated for
prolonged exposure to the weather (exterior grade). (2011 Code app. § 64; amd.
2017 Code)
         b.   The skirting must be approved material used on mobile homes and
manufactured homes to connect the bottom of a mobile home or manufactured home
to the ground and completely enclose the underside of the mobile home or
manufactured home.
         c.   Any other materials not listed above require prior approval by
the Town building official.
      3.   Venting: Skirting shall have ventilation and an access door, as per
Building Code requirements. The access door/crawl space access must be at least
twenty four inches by twenty four inches (24" x 24"). Underfloor vents are to
be installed in the skirting with at least one (1) square foot of vent for
every one hundred fifty (150) square feet of underfloor area. Vents cannot be
closable since gas appliances may require combustion air from under the house.
   D.   Miscellaneous Requirements:
      1.   At each exterior door, there must be a landing that is a minimum of
six feet by eight feet (6' x 8').
      2.   In the event minimum installation standards have not been adopted by
the State of Oklahoma, the structure should be installed according to the
manufacturer's installation instructions when available.
      3.   The house must be set in concrete footings.
      4.   There must be a finished floor to be not more than twenty eight
inches (28") above finished grade.
      5.   There must be an established driveway consisting of rock, masonry,
or asphalt, and such must be at least three and one-half inches (31/2") thick
and in an enclosed area.
      6.   All carports and storage buildings shall be constructed of materials
that are made for outside weather and approved in advance by the Town building
official. (2011 Code app. § 64)
11-5-6: MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
Travel trailer parks and mobile home parks shall be constructed in accordance
with Town requirements when and if adopted. (2011 Code app. § 68; amd. 2017
Code)
11-5-7: LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS USES:
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of
liquified petroleum gases shall be in accordance with this Code, the ordinances
of the Town and the regulations of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administration
of the State of Oklahoma. (2011 Code app. § 67; amd. 2017 Code)
11-5-8: ANIMALS:
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with this Code and the
ordinances of the Town. (2011 Code app. § 66; amd. 2017 Code)
11-5-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions, or
qualifications and supplements, as the case may be, the specific district
regulations set forth in chapters 6, 7 and 8 of this title:
   A.   An open space or lot area required for an existing building or
structure shall not be counted as open space for any other building or
structure.
   B.   Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project into
any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet (2'). Open, uncovered
porches or open fire escapes may project into a front or rear yard a distance
not to exceed five feet (5'). Fences, walls, and hedges in residential
districts may be erected in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard;
provided, that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building
line shall exceed three feet (3') in height, and no other wall or fence shall
exceed seven feet (7') in height.
   C.   Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than fifty feet (50'),
the depth of the front yard shall be measured starting at a point twenty five
feet (25') from the centerline of the street easement.
   D.   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least
one (1) street, at least fifty feet (50') in width, for a distance of not less
than thirty five feet (35'). A street shall form the direct and primary means
of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall
form only a secondary means of ingress and egress.
   E.   No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are prescribed for commercial and
industrial uses. It is the intent of this title that lots of sufficient size be
used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and
unloading space required for operation of the enterprise.
   F.   On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall,
fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sightlines at
elevations between two feet six inches (2'6") and six feet (6') above any
portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle
formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior
side lot lines a distance of twenty five feet (25') along the front and side
lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on
the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
   G.   An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall
not be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the street easement line.
   H.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory
building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used.
(2011 Code app. § 61)
   I.   In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as
a story. A story in a sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of four
feet (4') above the floor does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of
the story immediately below it and which does not contain an independent
apartment, shall be counted as a half story.
   J.   1. Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other
projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit.
(2011 Code app. § 62)
      2.   Places of worship, schools, hospitals, sanitariums, and other public
and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitation of the district if
the minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards
required in the district are increased one foot (1') for each two feet (2') by
which the height of such public or semi-public building exceeds the prescribed
height limit. (2011 Code app. § 62; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Description
11-6A-2: Uses Permitted
11-6A-3: Uses Permitted On Review
11-6A-4: Site And Structure Requirements
11-6A-1: DESCRIPTION:
The R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District is the most restrictive residential
district. The principal use of land is for single- family dwellings and related
recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide
an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are
intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses which are
not appropriate to residential environment. Stability of property values,
attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate
light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through
consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses.
(2011 Code app. § 31)
11-6A-2: USES PERMITTED:
Property and buildings in an R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in
area, attached to the main building or located behind the front building line
on the same lot with a building used as a place of worship.
Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building, including one (1)
private garage; or accessory buildings which are a part of a main building,
including one (1) private garage.
Detached one-family dwelling.
Home occupation.
Library.
Parking lot required to serve the uses permitted in this district.
Places of worship, but not including missions or revival tents or arbors.
Public park or playground.
Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in public schools and having no rooms regularly used for
housing and sleeping.
Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to the
erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be removed
when construction work is completed.
Transportation and utility easements, alleys, and rights-of- way. (2011 Code
app. § 32; amd. 2017 Code)
11-6A-3: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-3A-4A4 of this title:
Golf course or country club.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith. (2011 Code app. § 33)
11-6A-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Building Setbacks; Yard Requirements: All buildings shall be set back
from street right-of-way and lot lines to comply with the following yard
requirements:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
         b.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25'), and no building varies more than six feet (6') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than fifty feet
(50').
         c.   When a yard has double frontage, there shall be compliance with
the front yard requirements on both streets.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side
yard on each side of the main building of not less than five feet (5') for
dwellings of one (1) story, and of not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings
of more than one (1) story, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9A through H of this title.
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached one-
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
buildings are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front lot line.
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard set back from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard of a
corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an
interior lot. (2011 Code app. § 35)
         d.   Places of worship and main accessory buildings thereto, other
than dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a
distance of not less than twenty five feet (25'). (2011 Code app. § 35; amd.
2017 Code)
      3.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not
less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
   B.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of fifty
feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for
a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
   C.   Lot Area:
      1.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a
lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. (2011 Code app. §
35)
      2.   For places of worship and main and accessory buildings other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking
areas required in chapter 9 of this title; provided, however, that the lot area
for a place of worship shall not be less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet. (2011 Code app. § 35; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area on interior lots and thirty percent
(30%) of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard. (2011 Code app. § 34)
   E.   Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height except as provided in subsections
11-5-9I and J of this title. (2011 Code app. § 35)
ARTICLE B. R-2 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-6B-1: Description
11-6B-2: Uses Permitted
11-6B-3: Uses Permitted On Review
11-6B-4: Site And Structure Requirements
11-6B-1: DESCRIPTION:
The R-2 General Residential District is a residential district to provide for
medium and high population density. The principal use of land may range from
single-family to multiple-family and garden apartment uses. Certain uses which
are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with
commercial uses are permitted. The recreational, religious, and educational
facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential
area are permitted. Stability of property values, attractiveness, order and
efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space
for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper
functional relationship of each use permitted in the district. (2011 Code app.
§ 36)
11-6B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Any use permitted in an R-1 Residential District.
Garage apartment, when located on a separate lot or on the same lot with
another dwelling use.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Rooming or boarding house.
Two-family dwellings.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when
located on the same lot. (2011 Code app. § 37)
11-6B-3: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-3A-4A4 of this title:
Any use permitted on review in an R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District.
An off street parking lot associated with a C Commercial use as required under
the provisions of chapter 9 of this title.
Childcare center.
Home salon located in a dwelling, provided such salon is conducted within the
main dwelling, and is operated only by the inhabitants thereof and does not
exceed two (2) operators. The use shall be conducted in such a way that it is
clearly incidental to the dwelling use and shall not change the character
thereof. No sign shall be permitted except one (1) nonilluminated nameplate,
not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, attached to the main building.
Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature.
Medical facility.
Private clubs and lodges, excepting those, the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
Trailer home or mobile home park. (2011 Code app. § 38; amd. 2017 Code)
11-6B-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Building Setbacks; Yard Requirements:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
         b.   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one (1) side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25') from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected
closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the
existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of
greater depth than fifty feet (50').
         c.   When a yard has double frontage, there shall be compliance with
the front yard requirements on both sides.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side
yard on each side of the main dwelling of not less than five feet (5') for
dwellings of one (1) story, and not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings of
more than one (1) story, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9A through H of this title.
         b.   For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that unattached one-
story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to be set back more than
three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory
buildings are located more than ninety feet (90') behind the front property
line.
         c.   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be
the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
         d.   Mobile home parks shall be planned in such a manner that no
trailer or related building shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any
side lot line. (2011 Code app. § 40)
         e.   Places of worship and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings and trailers, shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
twenty five feet (25'). (2011 Code app. § 40; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be
a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the
depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use
may be located in the rear yard of a main building.
         b.   Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another
dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet (10') to the rear lot
line.
   B.   Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') at
the front building line for single-family dwellings and ten feet (10')
additional width at the front building line for each family, more than one (1),
occupying a dwelling. However, a lot width at the front building line shall not
be required to exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'). A lot shall abut on a
street not less than thirty five feet (35').
   C.   Lot Area:
      1.   There shall be a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet for a single-family dwelling, not less than eight thousand (8,000)
square feet for a two-family dwelling, and an additional area of not less than
two thousand (2,000) square feet for each family, more than two (2), occupying
a dwelling.
      2.   There shall be a lot area of not less than eight thousand (8,000)
square feet where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-
family dwelling. When a garage apartment is located in the rear yard of a two-
family or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall be not less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet more than is required for the two-family or
multiple-family dwelling. (2011 Code app. § 40)
      3.   For places of worship and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking
area required in chapter 9 of this title; provided, however, that the lot area
for a place of worship shall not be less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet. (2011 Code app. § 40; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover
more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (2011 Code app. § 39)
   E.   Building Height: No buildings shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9I and J of this title. (2011 Code app. § 40)
CHAPTER 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7A-1: Description
11-7A-2: Uses Permitted; Conditions
11-7A-3: Site And Structure Requirements
11-7A-1: DESCRIPTION:
The C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District is for the conduct of retail trade and
personal service enterprises to meet the regular needs and for the convenience
of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may
be an integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential,
religious, recreational and educational uses, more restrictive requirements for
light, air, open space and off street parking are made than are provided in
other commercial districts. (2011 Code app. § 41)
11-7A-2: USES PERMITTED; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses Enumerated: Property and buildings in a C-1 Neighborhood
Shopping District shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in an R-2 Residential District.
Any use permitted on review in an R-2 Residential District.
Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the store and premises or to
products sold on the property.
Retail stores and shops which supply the regular and customary needs of the
residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their convenience, as
follows:
Antique shop.
Appliance store.
Artist materials, supply studio.
Arts school, gallery or museum.
Auto court or tourist court.
Automobile parking lot.
Automobile service station.
Baby shop.
Bakery goods store.
Barbershop.
Book or stationery store.
Camera shop.
Candy store.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning, pressing, laundry.
Collection agency.
Curio or gift shop.
Dairy products or ice cream store.
Delicatessen.
Dress shop.
Drugstore or fountain.
Dry goods store.
Florist shop, greenhouse, nursery.
Furniture store.
General business office.
Grocery store or supermarket.
Hardware store.
Jewelry or notion store.
Lodge hall.
Meat market.
Medical facility.
Messenger or telegraph service.
Musical instrument sales.
Office business.
Optometrist sales and service.
Pharmacy.
Photographer studio.
Radio and television sales and service.
Restaurant.
Salon.
Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
Sewing machine sales, instruction.
Shoe repair shop.
Sporting goods sales.
Tailor shop.
Toy store.
Variety store.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. (2011
Code app. § 42; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Conditions:
      1.   A building used for any of the uses enumerated in subsection A of
this section may not have more than forty percent (40%) of its floor area
devoted to purposes incidental to the primary use.
      2.   No material or goods offered for sale or stored in connection with
said enumerated uses shall be displayed or stored outside of a building. (2011
Code app. § 42)
11-7A-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Requirements:
      1.   Dwellings: The area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as
the requirements of the R-2 General Residential District.
      2.   Other Uses: The following requirements shall apply to all other uses
permitted in the C-1 District:
         a.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-
of-way line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25')
in depth.
         b.   Side Yards: On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district,
there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). There shall be a
side yard setback from an intersecting street of not less than twenty feet
(20').
         c.   Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear
yard, or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30'). (2011 Code
app. § 43)
   B.   Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9I and J of this title. (2011 Code app. § 44)
   C.   Ornamental Fencing Or Screening: Ornamental fencing or screening is
required to block the view from residential properties to commercial properties
and vice versa, even if the residential property is established on commercially
zoned properties. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE B. C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7B-1: Description
11-7B-2: Uses Permitted
11-7B-3: Uses Permitted With Conditions
11-7B-4: Site And Structure Requirements
11-7B-1: DESCRIPTION:
The C-2 General Commercial District is intended for the conduct of personal and
business services and the general retail business of the community. Persons
living in the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct
and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger
vehicles and those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and
delivery of retail goods. (2011 Code app. § 45)
11-7B-2: USES PERMITTED:
Any use permitted in a C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District.
Advertising signs or structures.
Ambulance service, office or garage.
Amusement enterprises.
Auto court or tourist court.
Automobile retail gasoline service station.
Bait sales.
Bakery.
Bathhouse.
Boat sales and service.
Bus terminal.
Cleaning plant.
Clothing or apparel store.
Commercial school or hall.
Dance hall.
Department store.
Drive-in theater or restaurant.
Electric transmission station.
Feed and seed store.
Frozen food locker.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Golf course, miniature or practice range.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and services.
Hospital for small animals.
Ice storage locker plant or storage house for food.
Interior decorating store.
Kennel.
Key shop.
Laboratories, testing and experimental.
Laundry.
Leather goods shop.
Liquor store.
Medical marijuana dispensaries.
Museums.
Music, radio or television shop.
New automobile sales and services, new machinery sales and service, and public
garages, provided no gasoline is stored aboveground; used automobile and
machinery repairing if conducted in conjunction with a retail agency and wholly
within a completely enclosed building, but not including automobile or
machinery wrecking establishments or junkyards.
Nightclub.
Novelty shop.
Nursery or garden supply store.
Pawnshop.
Pet shop.
Printing plant.
Recreation center.
Research laboratories.
Roller skating rink.
Sign painting shop.
Stock and bond broker.
Storage warehouse.
Tavern.
Theater.
Travel trailer park.
Used automobile sales.
Wholesale distributing center.
Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of
the above uses; provided, that there shall be no manufacture, processing, or
compounding of products other than such as are customarily incidental and
essential to retail establishments.
Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional or business service which does not produce more noise, odor, dust,
vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above. (2011 Code app. § 46;
amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 342, 8-13-2018)
11-7B-3: USES PERMITTED WITH CONDITIONS:
   A.   The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 General Commercial
District; provided, that they comply with the additional provisions of this
section:
Farm implement and machinery, new and used, sales.
Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative wrought iron work
and play equipment sales.
Mobile home and travel trailer sales.
Monument sales.
Prefabricated house sales.
Trailers for hauling, rental and sales.
   B.   The uses enumerated in subsection A of this section shall comply with
the following provisions:
      1.   All yards unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as
trafficways shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good
condition the year round.
      2.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed twenty five
feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      3.   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of
reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent
land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing or
intermittent type.
   C.   The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 General Commercial
District:
      1.   Medical Marijuana Processor; and
      2.   Medical Marijuana Cultivators. (2011 Code app. § 47; amd. 2017 Code;
Ord. 348, 2-8-2021)
11-7B-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Requirements:
      1.   Dwellings: The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as
the requirements of the R-2 General Residential District.
      2.   Other Uses: The following requirements shall apply to all other uses
permitted in the C-2 District:
         a.   Front And Side Yards: There are no specific front or side yard
requirements for uses other than dwellings.
         b.   Rear Yard: There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear
yard, or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') in width.
         c.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 9 of
this title. (2011 Code app. § 48)
   B.   Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9I and J of this title. (2011 Code app. § 49)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. I-1 RESTRICTED MANUFACTURING AND WAREHOUSING DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-8A-1: Description
11-8A-2: Uses Permitted; Conditions
11-8A-3: Site And Structure Requirements
11-8A-1: DESCRIPTION:
The I-1 Restricted Manufacturing and Warehousing District is intended primarily
for manufacturing and assembly plants and warehousing that are conducted so the
noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation is completely confined within an
enclosed building. These industries may require direct access to rail, air or
street transportation facilities; however, the size and volume of the raw
materials and finished products involved should not produce the volume of
freight generated by the uses of both the I-1 and I-2 Districts. Buildings in
this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped
yards. (2011 Code § app. § 50; amd. 2017 Code)
11-8A-2: USES PERMITTED; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses Enumerated: Property and buildings in an I-1 District
shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use, except a residential use, permitted in a C-2 General Commercial
District. No dwelling uses except sleeping facilities for caretakers and night
watchmen employed on the premises shall be permitted.
Any of the following uses:
Book bindery.
Bottling works.
Candy manufacturing.
Electrical equipment assembly.
Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture.
Engraving plant.
Food products processing and packing.
Furniture manufacturing.
Instrument and meter manufacturing.
Jewelry and watch manufacturing.
Laundry and cleaning establishment.
Leather goods fabrication.
Optical goods manufacturing.
Paper products manufacturing.
Shoe manufacturing.
Sporting goods manufacturing.
Wholesale or warehousing enterprises.
   B.   Conditions:
      1.   All of the uses permitted under subsection A of this section shall
have their primary operations conducted entirely within enclosed buildings, and
shall not emit any dust or smoke, or noxious odor or fumes outside of the
building housing the operation, or produce a noise level at the property line
that is greater than the average noise level occurring on the adjacent street.
      2.   Any article or material stored temporarily outside of an enclosed
building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be so screened by
ornamental walls and fences or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from
adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing at
ground level. (2011 Code app. § 51)
11-8A-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Building Setbacks; Yard Requirements: All buildings shall be set back
from the street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following
yard requirements:
      1.   Front Yard: All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-
way line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in
depth.
      2.   Side Yards: No building shall be located closer than twenty five
feet (25') to a side lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to the rear lot line.
   B.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings and off street parking and
loading facilities shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the lot
area.
   C.   Landscaping Requirements: All yard areas required under this section
and other yards and open spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped
and maintained in a neat condition. (2011 Code app. § 52)
   D.   Building Height: No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9I and J of this title. (2011 Code app. § 53)
ARTICLE B. I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-8B-1: Description
11-8B-2: Uses Permitted; Conditions
11-8B-3: Uses Permitted On Review
11-8B-4: Site And Structure Requirements
11-8B-1: DESCRIPTION:
The C-2 General Industrial District is intended primarily for the conduct of
manufacturing, assembling and fabrication. These uses do not depend primarily
on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but usually require good
accessibility to major rail, air or street transportation facilities. (2011
Code app. § 54)
11-8B-2: USES PERMITTED; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses Enumerated: The property and buildings in an I-2 General
Industrial District shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the I-1 Industrial District. No dwelling use, except
sleeping facilities required by caretakers or night watchmen employed on the
premises, shall be permitted in an I-2 Industrial District.
Blacksmith shop.
Building material sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of rock, sand,
gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not
including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant.
Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant or rental of equipment commonly
used by contractors.
Farm produce, grain and feed storage including grain elevators.
Freight or trucking yard or terminal.
Oil field equipment storage yard.
Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station.
Town and country equipment service yard.
The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building:
Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios
and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils,
condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like.
Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body
and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or recapping
and battery manufacturing.
Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odor.
Machine shop.
Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising
structures, light sheet metal equipment, cornices, eaves and the like.
Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise
from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas,
cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper,
plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stone, shell, textiles, tobacco,
wood, yarn, and paint not employing a boiling process.
Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products
as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes,
pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products.
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal
stamps.
The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products,
using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or
gas.
Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of
the above uses.
   B.   Performance Standards: The uses permitted under this section shall be
conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes or dust will be emitted
beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. (2011 Code
app. § 55)
11-8B-3: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
The following uses may be permitted on review by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-3A-4A4 of this title:
Any use not otherwise authorized by this title.
Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture.
Commercial feed pens for livestock.
Disposal plants of all types including trash and garbage; sewage treatment
including lagoons and compost plants.
Natural gas production and distribution.
Packing house.
Petroleum production and refining.
Sale barn.
Salvage yards for automobiles, building materials, scrap metal, junk or any
other kind of salvage; provided, however, that all salvage operations shall be
so screened by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen planting that they cannot
be seen by a person standing at ground level at any place immediately adjacent
to the lot on which the salvage operation is located.
Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane, or other petroleum
products. (2011 Code app. § 56)
11-8B-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Yards:
      1.   Front And Side Yards: There are not specific front or side yard
requirements for uses in this district; provided, however, that a building
shall set back a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25') from the side
lot line that adjoins a residential district.
      2.   Rear Yard: Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there
shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof,
of not less than thirty feet (30') in width or of adequate area and width to
provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is the greater. In all
other cases, no rear yard is required; provided, however, that a building shall
set back a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot
line that adjoins a residential district. (2011 Code app. § 57; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Off Street Parking And Loading Area: Buildings shall be provided with a
yard area adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in
chapter 9 of this title. (2011 Code app. § 57)
   C.   Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in subsections
11-5-9I and J of this title. (2011 Code app. § 58)
CHAPTER 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
11-9-1: Intent And Application Of Provisions
11-9-2: Spaces Part Of Open Space Requirements
11-9-3: Off Street Parking Regulations
11-9-4: Number Of Parking And Loading Spaces
11-9-1: INTENT AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
It is the intent of this chapter that adequate parking and loading facilities
be provided off the street easement for each use of land within the Town.
Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. This
chapter shall apply to all uses in all districts. (2011 Code app. § 69)
11-9-2: SPACES PART OF OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Off street parking or loading spaces shall be a part of the required
open space associated with the permitted use and shall not be required or
encroached upon in any manner. (2011 Code app § 70)
   B.   The area required for off street parking shall be in addition to the
yard areas herein required: except, that the front yard required in a C-
1 Neighborhood Shopping District or an I-1 Restricted Manufacturing and
Warehousing District may be used for uncovered parking area; and further
provided, that the front yard required in a residential district may be used
for the uncovered parking area for six (6) or less vehicles associated with a
residential use when the area is surfaced with a sealed surface pavement
adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust with continued use, and may
be used for uncovered parking area for more than six (6) vehicles in accordance
with the provisions of subs
11-9-3D of this chapter. (2011 Code app. § 70; amd. 2017 Code)
11-9-3: OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Location: Off street parking lots shall be located within two hundred
feet (200'), exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and
shall have direct access to a street or alley. (2011 Code app. § 71)
   B.   Size Of Space: The size of a parking space for one (1) vehicle shall
consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than nine feet by
twenty feet (9' x 20'), plus adequate area for ingress and egress. (2011 Code
app. § 73)
   C.   Joint Use Of Spaces: Whenever two (2) or more uses are located together
in a common building, shopping center or other integrated building complex,
there may be compliance with the parking requirements by providing a permanent
common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains
the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces
provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. (2011
Code app. § 72)
   D.   Parking For More Than Six Vehicles: Whenever off street parking lots
for more than six (6) vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to a
residential district, the following provisions shall apply:
      1.   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established fifteen feet (15') back of the property line of interior and corner
lots wherever the parking lot is located in a residential district or
immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all other cases, no
setback shall be required.
      2.   All yards shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained
in good condition the year round.
      3.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall
not exceed twenty five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      4.   Whenever lighting is provided, the intensity of light and
arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential
district uses.
      5.   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used
to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lots.
Only nonintermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted. (2011 Code
app. § 75)
11-9-4: NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts in
accordance with the following schedule:
Type Of Use Space Required
Type Of Use                             Space Required
Boarding or rooming house or hotel      1 parking space for each 2 guests
                                        provided overnight accommodations
                                        1 parking space for each 150 square
Commercial establishments not otherwise feet of floor space used for retail
classified                              trade in the building and including all
                                        areas used by the public
Community center, theater, auditorium,  1 parking space for each 4 seats, based
church sanctuary                        on maximum seating capacity
Convention hall, lodge, club, library,  1 parking space for each 50 square feet
museum, place of amusement or           of floor area used for assembly or
recreation                              recreation in the building
Dwelling, multiple-family               Not less than 11/2 times the number of
                                       units in the dwelling
Dwelling, single-family or duplex       1 parking space for each separate
                                        dwelling unit within the structure
                                        1 space for each 4 patient beds,
                                        exclusive of bassinets, plus 1 space
Hospital                                for each staff or visiting doctor, plus
                                        1 space for each 3 employees including
                                        nurses, plus adequate area for the
                                        parking of emergency vehicles
                                        Adequate area to park all employee and
                                        customer vehicles at all times and
Industrial establishments               adequate space for loading, unloading
                                        and storing all vehicles used
                                        incidental to or as a part of the
                                        primary operation of the establishment
Medical or dental clinic or office      6 spaces per doctor, plus 1 space for
                                        each 2 employees
                                        1 parking space for each 300 square
                                        feet of gross floor area in the
Office building                         building, exclusive of the area used
                                        for storage, utilities and building
                                        service
                                        1 space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1
Sanitarium, convalescent or nursing     space for each staff or visiting
home                                    doctor, plus 1 space for each 2
                                        employees including nurses
 
For all uses not covered in the above table, the Planning Commission shall make
a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and
the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off street parking
requirements for the permitted use. (2011 Code app. § 74)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
11-10-1: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
11-10-2: Nonconforming Use Of Land
11-10-1: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Continuance And Maintenance: A nonconforming building or structure
existing at the effective date hereof may be continued, maintained and
repaired, except as otherwise provided in this section. (2011 Code app. § 76)
   B.   Additions Or Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure shall
not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless said building or structure,
including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that if
a building or structure is nonconforming as to use, but nonconforming as to
yards or height or off street parking space, said building or structure may be
enlarged or added to; provided, that the enlargement or addition complies with
the yard and height and off street parking space requirements of the district
in which said building or structure is located.
   C.   Moving Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures: No nonconforming building
or structure shall be moved, in whole or in part, to another location on the
lot unless every portion of said building or structure is made to conform to
all of the regulations of the district is which it is located. (2011 Code app.
§ 77)
   D.   Alteration Of Existing Advertising Structures: Any advertising sign,
billboard, commercial advertising structure or statuary which is lawfully
existing and maintained at the effective date hereof but which does not conform
with the provisions hereof shall not be structurally altered, and all such
nonconforming advertising signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures
and statuary, and their supporting members, shall be completely removed from
the premises not later than two (2) years from the effective date hereof. (2011
Code app. § 78; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use of a conforming
building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion
of such conforming building or structure or changed except to a conforming use.
If such a nonconforming use or a portion thereof is discontinued or changed to
a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure or portion thereof
shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such
building or structure is located.
   F.   Change Of Use: The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be
changed to a use of the same or a more restricted district classification, but
where the use of a nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a
more restricted district classification, it thereafter shall not be changed to
a use of a less restricted district classification; provided, however, that a
building or structure that is nonconforming as to use at the effective date
hereof, or at any time thereafter, shall not be changed to a wholesale or
retail liquor store unless such change in use conforms to the provisions of the
district in which it is located.
   G.   Vacant Buildings Or Structures:
      1.   A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may
be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or
intended if occupied within a period of one (1) year after the effective date
hereof, but otherwise, it shall be used in conformity with the regulations of
the district in which it is located. (2011 Code app. § 80)
      2.   A building or structure or portion thereof which is nonconforming as
to use and which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a
continuous period on one (1) year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a
use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located. (2011 Code app. § 78)
11-10-2: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent
buildings or structures is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
existing at the effective date hereof, may be continued for a period of not
more than three (3) years therefrom; provided, that: (2011 Code app. § 81; amd.
2017 Code)
   A.   Said nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded, nor shall it
occupy more area than was in use on the effective date hereof.
   B.   If said nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a
period of six (6) months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change in
use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which said
land is located. (2011 Code app. § 81)
CHAPTER 11
FIGURES
SECTION:
11-11-1: Figure 1, Design Standards Of Urban Streets
11-11-1: FIGURE 1, DESIGN STANDARDS OF URBAN STREETS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/dfc13aec508914c938dd0601adc10d5101c491f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1075.gif]
 
(2011 Code app. pg. 302)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Subdivision Described; Purpose
12-1-2: Statute Authority
12-1-3: Application Of Provisions
12-1-4: Severability
12-1-5: Definitions
12-1-6: General Procedures
12-1-1: SUBDIVISION DESCRIBED; PURPOSE:
The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development.
The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential, commercial,
and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public
purposes will determine, to a large degree, the conditions of health, safety,
economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality of these
conditions is of public interest. This title establishes provisions for
adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities
and other needs to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy,
attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and
protection of its human and natural resources. (2011 Code app. § 1)
12-1-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted by ordinance passed by the Town Board under the authority
granted by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 41-101 – 41-115. (2011 Code app. § 2;
amd. 2017 Code)
12-1-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This title shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision:
   A.   The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites, or
parcels, any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than ten (10)
acres in area; or
   B.   The division of land previously subdivided or platted into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels of less than ten (10) acres in area; or
   C.   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
   D.   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of
land regardless of the area involved. (2011 Code app. § 3)
12-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of this title shall be
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
holding shall not affect any other section, clause, paragraph, provision or
portion of this title. (2011 Code app. § 21)
12-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ALLEY: A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public
walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, or a combination
thereof.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE: A line or lines designating the area outside of
which buildings may not be erected.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or
persons of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
GENERAL PLAN: A Comprehensive Development Plan for the Town of Mooreland which
has been officially adopted to provide long range development policies for the
area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes,
among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and
community facilities.
LOT: A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or
more streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two (2) nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more
streets.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: A double frontage lot which is to be developed with the
rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of ingress and
egress provided on a minor street.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Mooreland Planning Commission.
PLAT, FINAL: A map of land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets
and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character
and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
STREET: Any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of
access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A minor street which collects traffic from other minor
streets and serves as the most direct route to a major street or a community
facility.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one (1) end open to vehicular traffic
and having one (1) closed end terminated by a turnaround.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE: A minor street auxiliary to and located on the
side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas
and for control of access.
STREET, MAJOR: An arterial street which is designated on the Major Street Plan.
STREET, MINOR: A street whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent
properties and which is designed so that its use by arterial traffic will be
discouraged.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting
as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts, sites, or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way
or easement.
TOWN: The Town of Mooreland, Oklahoma.
TOWN BOARD: The Mooreland Town Board. (2011 Code app. § 4)
12-1-6: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Plat Approval: For all cases of subdividing within the scope of this
title, a plat of the land in question shall be drawn and submitted to the
Planning Commission and Town Board for their approval or disapproval, as
provided in this title.
   B.   Official Recording: No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall
be filed in the Office of the County Clerk until it shall have been approved by
the Planning Commission and by the Town Board as set forth in this title. All
final plats shall be filed within two (2) years of the date of approval by the
Planning Commission, and no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded.
Failure to record the plat within two (2) years of the date of Planning
Commission or Town Board approval, whichever is the later, shall void all
approvals thereto.
   C.   Agenda: Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be
placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission only after fulfilling the
appropriate requirements of this title. However, a plat not meeting all of the
requirements may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a
written request for specific exceptions and explains the reasons therefor.
(2011 Code app § 5)
   D.   Filing Fee: To defray partially the costs of notification and
administration procedures, there shall be paid to the Town Clerk- Treasurer, at
the time of submission of the preliminary plat, a fee as provided in the fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. Where only a
portion of an approved preliminary plat is submitted for final approval, a
final plat of the remaining area may be submitted at any time within five (5)
years of the date of preliminary approval without payment of an additional
filing fee by the subdivider, if the area conforms substantially with the
approved preliminary plat. (2011 Code app § 5; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   Exemptions: Plats containing four (4) lots or fewer may be exempted
from the provisions of all or part of the procedural provisions contained in
this chapter and chapter 5 of this title upon written approval of the Planning
Commission, but such exemption shall not change or diminish the requirements
relating to design or to improvements or the other provisions of this title.
(2011 Code app. § 5)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-2-1: Variances
12-2-2: Amendments
12-2-3: Violations; Penalty
12-2-1: VARIANCES:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements of this title would result in substantial
hardship or inequity, the Planning Commission may vary or modify, except as
otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of procedure or
improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his property in a reasonable
manner, but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the Town
are protected and the general intent and spirit of this title preserved. Such
modifications may be granted upon written request of the subdivider stating the
reason(s) for each modification and may be waived by a three- fourths (3/4)
vote of the regular membership of the Planning Commission. (2011 Code app. §
19)
12-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
The Town Board may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and
regulations for the administration of this title to the end that the public be
informed and that approval of plats be expedited. This title may be enlarged or
amended by the Town Board after public hearing, due notice of which shall be
given as required by law. (2011 Code app. § 20)
12-2-3: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement
or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which does not
comply with all of the provisions of this title. A violation of this title
shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (2011 Code app. § 23; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-3-1: Quality Of Design
12-3-2: Streets
12-3-3: Alleys
12-3-4: Easements
12-3-5: Public Areas And Open Spaces
12-3-6: Blocks
12-3-7: Lots
12-3-8: Building Lines
12-3-1: QUALITY OF DESIGN:
The quality of design of the urban area is dependent on the quality of design
of the individual subdivisions that compose it. Good community design requires
the coordination of the efforts of each subdivider and developer of land within
the urban area. Therefore, the design of each subdivision shall be prepared in
accordance with the principles established by the General Plan for land use,
circulation, community facilities and public utility services and in accordance
with the subdivision design standards set out in this chapter. (2011 Code app.
§ 6)
12-3-2: STREETS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets
shall conform to all of the elements of the General Plan and shall be designed
in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Major streets shall be planned to conform with the Major Street Plan.
   B.   Whenever a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
street, the Planning Commission may require service streets, reverse frontage
with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear
property line, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
arterial and local traffic.
   C.   Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by arterial traffic
will be discouraged.
   D.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right- of-way or
highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances also
shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separation structures.
   E.   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except
where their control is placed in the Town under conditions approved by the
Planning Commission.
   F.   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or
intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan or a proposed
future street system for the unsubdivided portion may be required of the
subdivider.
   G.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be arranged to permit the logical location
and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivisions with provisions
for adequate utility easements.
   H.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') should be avoided.
   I.   Street right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with the Major Street
Plan and, where not designated therein, shall not be less than the following:
 
Major streets  100 feet
Minor streets:  
 Collector    50 feet
 Minor        50 feet
 Cul-de-sac   50 feet
 
   J.   The improved surface width of all streets shall be adequate to serve
the existing and future estimated traffic load for the facility. Lane widths
for all streets shall be as follows:
      1.   All major streets shall have lanes for traffic movement of not less
than eleven feet (11') nor more than twelve feet (12') in width, and lanes for
parallel parking or emergency stopping of not less than ten feet (10') in
width.
      2.   All minor streets shall have lanes for traffic movement of not less
than nine feet (9') nor more than twelve feet (12') in width, and lanes for
parallel parking or emergency stopping of not less than ten feet (10') in
width.
   K.   A cul-de-sac should not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length,
measured from the entrance to the center of the turnaround and, if more than
one hundred fifty feet (150') in length, shall be provided with a turnaround
radius of not less than fifty feet (50') at the property line and not less than
forty feet (40') at the curb line. There shall be provided in the center of the
turnaround an unpaved island, improved with grass and landscaping that will not
interfere with sight distance, which has a radius of not less than twelve feet
(12') nor more than sixteen feet (16').
   L.   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this title; and provided, that the Planning Commission finds it
will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street
easement when the adjoining property is subdivided; the other half of the
street shall be platted within such tract.
   M.   The arrangements of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in
the subdividing of adjacent properties. The Planning Commission may require the
dedication of street rights-of-way to facilitate the development of adjoining
properties.
   N.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Commission. (2011 Code app. § 6)
12-3-3: ALLEYS:
   A.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts;
except, that the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off street
loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
   B.   Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be less than
twenty feet (20') in width.
   C.   Alleys are not required for residential areas but, when provided, shall
not be less than twenty feet (20') in width.
   D.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided
but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   E.   Dead end alleys should be avoided but, if necessary, shall be provided
with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by the
Planning Commission. (2011 Code app. § 6)
12-3-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than ten feet (10')
wide shall be provided along each rear lot line, and along side lot lines where
necessary, for use by public and private utilities. The Planning Commission may
require aerial easements and easements of greater width for the extension of
main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where it is deemed
necessary.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel or
stream which drains one hundred sixty (160) acres or more of land, there shall
be provided a right-of-way for drainage and public parks and public utility
purposes adequate to contain all of the runoff from a 50-year maximum flood.
The right-of-way shall include all of the land within the subdivision that has
an elevation below the 50-year maximum flood elevation. (2011 Code app. § 6)
12-3-5: PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACES:
Public parks, playgrounds, school sites and other public areas and open spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth
in the General Plan and in the ordinances relating thereto. (2011 Code app. §
6)
12-3-6: BLOCKS:
   A.   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard for the following:
      1.   Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitation and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than one thousand eight
hundred feet (1,800'), measured along the centerline of the block. When a block
exceeds six hundred feet (600') in length, the Planning Commission may require
a dedicated easement not less than twenty feet (20') in width and a paved
crosswalk not less than four feet (4') in width to provide pedestrian access
across the block.
   C.   Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width to
allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for
business and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended use,
with due allowance for off street parking and loading facilities. (2011 Code
app. § 6)
12-3-7: LOTS:
   A.   Residential lots shall be not less than fifty feet (50') in width at
the front building line and shall abut a street a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35'); except, that a corner lot shall be not less than sixty
feet (60') in width at the front building line.
   B.   Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   C.   The depth of residential lots should be not less than one hundred
twenty feet (120').
   D.   The area of residential lots should be not less than six thousand
(6,000) square feet.
   E.   In residential subdivisions where septic tanks or individual sewer
disposal devices are to be installed, the area of the lot shall be not less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, and the width of the lot at the
front building line shall be not less than one hundred feet (100').
   F.   Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial and industrial
use but, when provided, should be of appropriate size and arrangement to
provide for adequate off street parking and loading facilities based on the
intended use.
   G.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where they are needed to provide for the separation of development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen easement of at least twenty feet (20') shall be provided along
the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or other use where
screening is required. There shall be no right of access across a planting
screen easement. (2011 Code app. § 6)
12-3-8: BUILDING LINES:
Building lines shall be provided for all residential subdivisions as follows:
   A.   A front building line shall be located not less than twenty five feet
(25') back of the street right-of-way line.
   B.   A side yard building line on the side of a corner lot abutting the
street shall be located not less than fifteen feet (15') back of the street
right-of-way when such lot is back to back with another corner lot, and not
less than twenty feet (20') back of the street right-of-way line in every other
case.
   C.   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet
(10') back of a crosswalk right-of-way line on the side of a lot abutting a
midblock crosswalk.
   D.   Restriction requiring buildings to be located within the building lines
shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate recorded
instrument. (2011 Code app. § 6)
CHAPTER 4
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Compliance With General Fire Plan
12-4-2: Plans Required
12-4-3: Bond In Lieu Of Completion Of Improvements
12-4-4: Markers
12-4-5: Streets
12-4-6: Sidewalks
12-4-7: Sanitary Sewers
12-4-8: Storm Sewers And Drainage
12-4-9: Provisions For Sewer And Water Systems And Other Facilities
12-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL FIRE PLAN:
All improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with all of the
elements of the General Fire Plan and shall meet the minimum standards
established by the ordinances and regulations relating thereto. (2011 Code app.
§ 7)
12-4-2: PLANS REQUIRED:
Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by the Engineering
Department of the Town or by a qualified engineer, registered in the State of
Oklahoma. Two (2) sets of prints of the proposed plans and specifications for
all improvements shall be filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer at the time of
submission of the final plat. One (1) set of as built plans and specifications,
certified and signed by an engineer registered in the State of Oklahoma, shall
be filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer prior to the acceptance by the Town
Board of any improvements installed by the subdivider. (2011 Code app. § 8)
12-4-3: BOND IN LIEU OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
In lieu of completion of the improvements herein required, the Town Board may
require the subdivider to file a surety bond with the Town Clerk-Treasurer to
insure the actual construction of such improvements according to the plans and
specifications approved by the Planning Commission within a period of time not
to exceed two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat. Such bond
shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of
the improvements, as determined by the Planning Commission, and with surety and
conditions satisfactory to the Town Board. In any case, where the Town Board
does not require a bond for the improvements required herein, no building shall
be permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed
construction will produce runoff or require utility services that affect other
areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision unless a bond, in the
amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost, is posted for the
portion of the drainage or utility improvements that will protect the affected
area. (2011 Code app. § 9)
12-4-4: MARKERS:
Each lot and block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than
one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and not less than eighteen inches (18") long
at least one inch (1") below the finished grade; and each subdivision corner
shall be marked with a permanent concrete marker capped with a noncorrosive
metal plate, set not less than one inch (1") below the finished grade. (2011
Code app. § 10)
12-4-5: STREETS:
The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes shall lay out, grade and otherwise
improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly
serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the Town and in
accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new street with
an existing State or Federal highway shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Oklahoma State Highway Department, but in no case shall
the standard be less than the applicable specifications of the Town.
   B.   Whenever a subdivision contains a major street that requires a street
facility that is more costly than is required to serve the future occupants of
the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of
the cost of the major street that would equal the cost of an improvement
required to serve only the subdivision, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
   C.   All driveways which connect with public streets shall be constructed in
accordance with "Standard Design of Driveway Entrances for Oklahoma Highways",
the latest edition thereof, as prepared by the Oklahoma State Highway
Department. (2011 Code app. § 11)
12-4-6: SIDEWALKS:
A plan for a system of sidewalks and walkways may be prepared that will provide
lots within a residential or commercial subdivision, or portion thereof, with a
direct sidewalk connection with all of the community facilities and commercial
enterprises located within or adjacent to the subdivision, and in a manner that
will provide convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the neighborhood or
area in which the subdivision is located. The Planning Commission may require
the construction of sidewalks to connect with existing or future proposed
sidewalks in areas adjacent to the subdivision where such sidewalks are needed
for pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks and walkways should be constructed in the
subdivision in accordance with a sidewalk system plan approved by the Planning
Commission, and in accordance with specifications governing sidewalk and
walkway construction. (2011 Code app. § 12)
12-4-7: SANITARY SEWERS:
   A.   The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a sanitary sewer
is accessible as provided in subs
9-5-3D of this Code as determined by the Planning Commission. Sanitary sewers
shall be installed in accordance with the specifications governing sanitary
sewer construction.
   B.   Whenever a sanitary sewer is not accessible as provided in subs
9-5-3D of this Code, septic tanks or other unit disposal systems may be used in
accordance with the following provisions: (2011 Code app. § 14; amd. 2017 Code)
      1.   A lot for residential use on which a unit disposal system is located
shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
      2.   No portion of any unit disposal system shall be located closer than
twenty feet (20') to the lot line of the lot on which the system is located.
      3.   All unit disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of the
State and County Health Departments.
   C.   When a subdivision contains five (5) acres or more, the Planning
Commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers and a disposal
system that is adequate to serve all of the lots within the subdivision. (2011
Code app. § 14)
12-4-8: STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE:
Storm sewers and drainage shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications contained in the ordinances and regulations relating thereto.
(2011 Code app. § 15)
12-4-9: PROVISIONS FOR SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS AND OTHER FACILITIES:
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems, or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of
the area, or that are of common use or benefit which are not or cannot be
satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made
which is acceptable to the agency having jurisdiction over the location and
maintenance of such facilities for the proper and continuous operation,
maintenance and supervision of such facilities. (2011 Code app. § 16)
CHAPTER 5
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
12-5-1: Preliminary Plat
12-5-2: Final Plat
12-5-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Submission: The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for
submission to the Planning Commission. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat
shall be submitted to the Office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer not less than
seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
   B.   Certification Of Design: The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a
statement signed by the registered engineer preparing the plat certifying that
he has, to the best of his ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with
the General Plan, with which he is completely familiar, and in accordance with
this title, except where an exception is requested in writing and the reasons
for which are clearly stated.
   C.   Contents: The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred
feet to one inch (1" = 100') and shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
      1.   The scale, north point and date.
      2.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      3.   The names and addresses of the owner on record, the subdivider and
of the registered engineer preparing the plat.
      4.   A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section
lines, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area of
which the proposed subdivision is a part.
      5.   The names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of the
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of Town limits, if falling within or
immediately adjoining the tract.
      6.   The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two feet
(2') referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodetic
Survey bench mark or monument.
      7.   The location of existing buildings, water, and watercourses, and the
location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision; provided, however, that actual
measured distances shall not be required.
      8.   The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest
foot, and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, easements and
setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions.
      9.   The location, approximate size and type of sanitary and storm
sewers, water mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface
and subsurface structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent
to the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout, type and proposed size
of the following structures and utilities:
         a.   Water mains.
         b.   Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals.
         c.   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures.
         d.   Street improvements.
      10.   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements
relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed
plat.
      11.   The classification of every street within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the
proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term - primary
thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, collector, or minor street - in
parenthesis, directly on each street.
   D.   Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall approve,
approve conditionally, or disapprove the plat within sixty (60) days of the
date of its submission by the applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved
or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in
writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the Planning Commission Chair and
shall be attached to one (1) copy of the plat and transmitted to the
subdivider. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the
subdivider, if no action be taken by the Planning Commission at the end of
sixty (60) days after submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been
approved. The reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall refer
specifically to those parts of the General Plan or specific regulations with
which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a plat, the
Planning Commission may require submission of a revised preliminary plat. If
the plat conforms to all of the standards, or after the applicant and Planning
Commission agree upon any revisions which shall be filed with the Planning
Commission on a revised copy, the subdivider may proceed with the laying out of
streets and roads, the preparation of utility plans and the preparation of a
final plat. (2011 Code app. § 17)
12-5-2: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Submission:
      1.   A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on tracing cloth, and three (3)
dark line prints thereof shall be submitted to the Office of the Town Clerk-
Treasurer not less than five (5) days before the Planning Commission meeting at
which it is to be considered for final approval. At the same time, there shall
be submitted two (2) sets of the proposed plans and specifications for all
improvements and the proposed restrictions in final form; provided, however,
the final plat may be approved subject to later submission of final improvement
plans and specifications.
      2.   The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission and Town Board for final approval within one (1) year of
the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final
approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be considered as having
been disapproved unless the Planning Commission agrees to an extension of time.
The final plat shall be filed in the Office of the County Clerk within two (2)
years after approval by the Town Board and Planning Commission, or if not filed
within such time, said approval shall be considered as having been voided.
   B.   Specifications: The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred
feet to the inch (1" = 100') from an accurate survey and on sheets whose
dimensions are twenty one inches by thirty three and one-half inches (21" x
331/2") between border lines. On the first sheet of every plat, there shall be
a key map showing the location of the subdivision referenced to government
survey section lines and major streets. If more than two (2) sheets are
required for the plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheets for each
area. A border of one-half inch (1/2") surrounding the sheet shall be left
blank at the top, bottom, and right hand side, and a margin of two inches (2")
at the left side for binding purposes.
   C.   Contents: The final plat shall show:
      1.   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one (1) of which the
subdivision shall be referenced.
      2.   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearing and angle dimensions in
degrees and minutes, as hereinafter specified.
      3.   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names. Material which is not
a part of the subdivision shall be shown in dashed or dotted lines.
      4.   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles.
      5.   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length and/or direction
of an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines,
the length and/or bearing shall be given.
      6.   The widths and names, where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located.
      7.   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles; except, that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted.
      8.   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to
public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the area marked
"public".
      9.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "Not a part".
      10.   The location of all building lines, setback lines, and easements
for public services or utilities, with dimensions showing their location.
      11.   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection, and
central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns.
      12.   The proper acknowledgments of owners and the consent by the
mortgagee to plat restrictions. (2011 Code app. § 18)
      13.   The following, which shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing:
(Note: Suggested form for the owner's certificate, the surveyor's certificate,
Clerk-Treasurer's certificate, Planning Commission's certificate, Town Board's
approval and mortgage release are contained on pages 28 – 31 of the appendix in
the printed copy of ordinance 96 and is incorporated herein by reference.)
(2011 Code app. § 18; amd. 2017 Code)
         a.   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed.
         b.   Engineer's certificate of survey, signed and his seal.
         c.   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public.
         d.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the Office of the County Clerk which directly affect the
land being subdivided.
         e.   Certificate of Planning Commission approval.
         f.   Certificate of Town Board acceptance of ways, easements, and
public land dedications. (2011 Code app. § 18)
         g.   Clerk-Treasurer's certificate and the certificate related to
special assessments. (2011 Code app. § 18; amd. 2017 Code)
      14.   A title which shall include:
         a.   Name of the subdivision.
         b.   Name of Town, County and State.
         c.   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, range, township. (2011 Code app. § 18)
   D.   Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall act upon the
final plat within forty five (45) days after it has been submitted for final
approval. This approval and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over
the signature of the Planning Commission Chair or Secretary member. Unless
stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider and if no action
is taken by the Planning Commission at the end of forty five (45) days after
submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. A certification by
the Town Clerk-Treasurer as to date of submission of plat for final approval
and failure of Planning Commission to act thereon within such time shall be
sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval. If the final plat is
disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of
which shall be transmitted with the tracing and prints to the applicant. The
reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically to those parts of the General
Plan or this title or ordinance or regulation with which the plat does not
comply. (2011 Code app. § 18; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   Town Board Action: Before recording the final plat, it shall be
submitted to the Town Board for approval and for acceptance of public ways and
service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This approval
of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the Chair of the Board and
attested to by the Town Clerk-Treasurer or his deputy. The disapproval of any
plat or plan by the Town Board shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed
dedication shown thereon. (2011 Code app. § 18)
   F.   Recording Plat:
      1.   The original tracing of each plat and two (2) prints thereof and a
reduced copy in the dimensions of eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(81/2" x 11") shall be presented for recording;
      2.   The original plat shall be an original drawing made with India ink
on a good grade linen tracing cloth, or with a suitable black acetate base ink
on a stable polyester base film coated upon completion with a suitable plastic
material to prevent flaking and to assure permanent legibility, or a print on a
stable polyester base film made by photographic processes from a film scribing
tested for residual hypo with an approved hypo testing solution to assure
permanency; and
      3.   Marginal lines, standard certificates and approval forms may be
printed or legibly stamped on the plat with permanent opaque black ink. (2017
Code)
TITLE 13
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
13-1-1: Statute Authority
13-1-2: Findings Of Fact
13-1-3: Purpose
13-1-4: Methods Of Accomplishing Purpose
13-1-5: Definitions
13-1-6: Application; Interpretation; Compliance
13-1-7: Floodplain Administrator
13-1-8: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
13-1-9: Development Permit
13-1-10: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
13-1-11: Variances
13-1-12: Fee Schedule
13-1-13: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
13-1-14: Violations; Penalties
13-1-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The legislature of the State of Oklahoma has in 82 Oklahoma Statutes sections
1601 through 1620.1, as amended, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt ordinances designed to minimize flood losses. (Ord.
301, 6-13-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
13-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-3: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-4: METHODS OF ACCOMPLISHING PURPOSE:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO Zone on the Town Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an
average depth of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the Town of
Mooreland subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BFE: Base flood elevation.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or one percent (1%) chance flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the Town of Mooreland Floodplain
Administrator which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in
accordance with this chapter.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in
Zones AO, AE, A, and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones AO, AE, A,
and X, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: An official map of the Town of Mooreland on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the Town of Mooreland.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by FEMA for the Town of
Mooreland which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base
flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland waters; or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within Town of Mooreland subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the
Board of Trustees of the Town of Mooreland to administer and implement laws,
ordinances and regulations relating to the management of floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations
and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source. (See definition of flood.)
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A floodway is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in section
13-1-8 of this chapter. A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on the State of Oklahoma Inventory of Historic
Places by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Oklahoma Historical
Society.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of title 44 CFR.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on the Town of Mooreland Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date hereof and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date hereof.
OWRB: The Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (For Other Than New Construction Or Substantial
Improvements Under The Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law 97-348)):
Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent construction" does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications
which have been identified by the local Code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration
would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Town of Mooreland Board of Trustees to a
person from the terms of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full
requirements, see section 60.6 of title 44 CFR.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. (Ord. 301, 6-
13-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
13-1-6: APPLICATION; INTERPRETATION; COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: This chapter shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Town.
   B.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements; (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the Town Board of Trustees; and
(Ord. 301, 6-13-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   D.   Compliance Required: No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-7: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Town Administrator Serve As: The Town Board of Trustees designates the
Town Administrator or his/her designated agent as Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations in title 44 CFR
pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 1601 through 1620.1, as amended. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011; amd.
2017 Code)
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by this chapter.
      4.   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions).
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to FEMA.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   Require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the base
flood elevation on two (2) FEMA elevation certificates, one (1) pre and one (1)
post, as well as other data as required in order to administer the provisions
of section
13-1-10 of this chapter.
      9.   When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE as
delineated on the Woodland County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the
Town.
      10.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the Town, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and
manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial
improvement requirement.
      11.   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the Board of Trustees.
      12.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-8: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Woodward County,
Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas", dated January 18, 2012, with the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are hereby adopted on January 18, 2012, by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011; amd.
2017 Code)
13-1-9: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for a development permit shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations,
existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured
homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood
hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
      2.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
   C.   Approval Or Denial Of Permit: Approval or denial of a development
permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions
of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan for
that area.
   D.   Developments In Certain Flood Hazard Areas: The Floodplain
Administrator or Board of Trustees, as applicable, may approve certain
development in Zones A, AO or AE delineated on the Woodward County FIRM which
increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot
(1'); provided, that the applicant for the development permit in that case
first complies with 44 CFR section 65.12. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-10: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor
shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard
of this subsection B1 is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer,
architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standard of this subsection B2 is satisfied.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided;
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade; and
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
anywhere within the Town within Zones A, AO and AE on the Town FIRM shall be
installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the
bottom of the I-beam elevated at or above the BFE. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to Oklahoma State
law, and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A, AO and AE on the Woodward County FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days;
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of section
13-1-9 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
      6.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A, AO and AE on the Woodward County FIRM shall comply with the
following:
         a.   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior;
         b.   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage;
         c.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use;
         d.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must
be elevated to or above the BFE;
         e.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         f.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential and constructed with flood resistant materials;
         g.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement;
         h.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
         i.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE; and
         j.   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures.
   C.   Standards For Subdivisions:
      1.   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located
in Zones A, AO and AE which is fifty one (51) or more lots or greater than five
(5) acres shall generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
      2.   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
      3.   All subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
   D.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Located within the
areas of special flood hazard established in section
13-1-8 of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one foot (1') to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. Therefore, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
one foot (1') above the base flood elevation (the depth number specified in
feet on the Town's FIRM or at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
      2.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in section
13-1-9 of this chapter are satisfied.
      3.   Require within Zone AO adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
   E.   Floodways: The following provisions shall apply to floodways:
      1.   Encroachments including, but not limited to, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development are prohibited within the
adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the Town during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      3.   The Town may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that
would result in an increase in base flood elevations; provided, that the
applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 CFR section 65.12.
(Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-11: VARIANCES:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   The Board of Trustees may grant variances for uses which do not
satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act or this
chapter, if the applicant for the variance presents adequate proof that: a)
compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable
taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the people; and
b) satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section. However, no variance
shall be granted where the effect of the variance will be to permit the
continuance of a condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards.
      2.   Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma Floodplain
Management Act or by other laws of the State.
      3.   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than
twenty (20) years. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
      4.   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the Board
of Trustees, accompanied by a filing fee as provided in the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011; amd.
2017 Code)
      5.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in this section and subs
13-1-9C of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      6.   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice, signed by the Chair of the Board of
Trustees which states that: a) the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built
lower than the base flood elevation; and b) such construction below the base
flood level increases risks to life and property.
      7.   At such time as the Board of Trustees deems the petition ready for
notification to the public, the Board of Trustees shall schedule a hearing and
direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation in Woodward County at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing.
(Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
      8.   The Board of Trustees shall conduct the hearing and make
determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section.
The Board of Trustees shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities
involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the
public at large when determining whether the variance shall be granted. (Ord.
301, 6-13-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
      9.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and
         d.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      10.   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of this chapter, the Board of Trustees may attach such conditions to the
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives stated in section
13-1-3 of this chapter.
      11.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any
variance issued by the Board of Trustees shall be sent by the Floodplain
Administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within fifteen (15) days after issuance of
the variance. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
   B.   Certain Variances Permitted; Conditions:
      1.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the State of Oklahoma Inventory of Historic
Places by the State Historic Preservation Office of the Oklahoma Historical
Society, without regard to the procedures set forth in sections
13-1-10,
13-1-12 and
13-1-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      4.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided, that:
         a.   The criteria of subsections A5, A9, B2 and B3 of this section are
met; and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-12: FEE SCHEDULE:
The fees applicable to this chapter are as provided in the fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Town Board of Trustees. (2017 Code)
13-1-13: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Town or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011)
13-1-14: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate or other certifications required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town
Board of Trustees or the Town Attorney from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 301, 6-13-2011; amd.
2017 Code)
