NEW CORDELL, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title; authority
   
10.02   Acceptance of code
   
10.03   Conflicting provisions
   
10.04   Amendments
   
10.05   Jurisdiction
   
10.06   Code alterations
   
10.07   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.08   Court proceedings
   
10.09   Severability clause
   
10.10   Construction of words
   
10.11   General definitions
   
10.12   Catchlines
   
10.13   Application of provisions
   
10.14   Nonliability of officers and employees
   
10.15   Relief by civil action
 
   
10.99   Violation; general penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE; AUTHORITY.
   Upon the adoption by the City Council, this code is declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code. This code of ordinances shall be
known and cited as the “New Cordell City Code” and is published by authority of
the City Council and 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-109 and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in §
10.04. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and title headings and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any
legal documents.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE OF CODE.
   This code, as presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without
further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state as
the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded
ordinances enumerated in §
10.07.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If the provisions of different titles, chapters, subchapters or
sections of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of
each title, chapter, subchapter or section shall prevail as to all matters and
questions growing out of the subject matter of that title, chapter, subchapter
or section.
   (B)   If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different sections of
the same chapter, the provisions of the section last enacted shall prevail
unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that section.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.04 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.05 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are extended
to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside
the corporate limits of the city, and are in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in
the future shall also apply to, and be in full effect within, the boundaries of
all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable.
   (B)   Any words in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance
provision is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to
mean and include also the outlying real property belonging to, or under the
control of, the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-5)
§ 10.06 CODE ALTERATIONS.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while
in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the City
Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.07 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by necessary
implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses
contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances
which are not repealed:
   (A)   Tax levy ordinances;
   (B)   Appropriation ordinances;
   (C)   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   (D)   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   (E)   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   (F)   Salary ordinances;
   (G)   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   (H)   Improvement ordinances;
   (I)   Bond ordinances;
   (J)   Ordinances relating to elections;
   (K)   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city; and
   (L)   All special ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 10.08 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Prior acts. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   Extend to all repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals,
either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance
making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Current pending actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The City Council declares that it would
have passed each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, divisions,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid
or ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Liberal construction. All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and City Council may be fully carried
out.
   (B)   Minimum requirements. In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (C)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is
imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be performed by an
authorized deputy or designee or by any person authorized pursuant to law or
ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.
   (D)   Gender. The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   (E)   May; shall. The word “may” is permissive; the word “shall” is
mandatory.
   (F)   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   (G)   Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   (H)   Officers and employees generally. Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words “of the City of New Cordell”.
   (I)   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   (J)   Definitions. Definitions given within a chapter or subchapter apply
only to words or phrases used in such chapter or subchapter unless otherwise
provided.
   (K)   Law. Applicable federal law and court decisions, court decisions and
provisions of the constitution and statutes of the state and ordinances of the
city and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   (L)   Ordinance. The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the
city has been changed in the content of this code to “title”, “chapter”,
“section” and/or “division” or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city’s ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
§ 10.11 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   In the construction of this code and all ordinances, the following
definitions shall be observed unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Mayor and City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The person appointed by the Mayor and designated as the
city’s building official.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   CITY. The City of New Cordell, in the County of Washita and State of
Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
   COUNCIL. The governing body of the city, the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   COUNTY. Washita County, Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   HEALTH OFFICER. Administrator of the cooperative department of the county
and the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the persons
or officers.
   LAW. Applicable federal law, provisions of the state constitution and state
statutes, the ordinances of the city and, when appropriate, any and all rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   O.S. Oklahoma Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   PERSON. Any individual, natural person, joint stock company, partnership,
voluntary association, club, firm, company, corporation, business trust,
organization or any other bodies corporate or politic or group acting as a
unit, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, partner, member, director,
officer or employee of any of them including an executor, administrator,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   STATUTES. The Oklahoma Statutes as they are now or as they may be amended to
be.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   STREET. Street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct, highway,
court, place, square, curb or any other public way in the city which is
dedicated and open to public use.
   SUBCHAPTER.
      (1)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
      (2)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   WEEK. Seven days.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
§ 10.12 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
§ 10.13 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Application of penalty. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   (B)   Acts punishable under different sections. In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense.
   (C)   Breach of provisions. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   (D)   Territorial applicability. Except as provided otherwise, this code
refers only to the commission or omission of acts within the territorial limits
of the city and to that territory outside the city over which the city has
jurisdiction, ownership or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory
provision, or any law.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)
§ 10.14 NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
§ 10.15 RELIEF BY CIVIL ACTION.
   No penalty imposed by or pursuant to §
10.99 or any other section of this code or other ordinance
of the city shall interfere with the right of the city to apply to the proper
courts of the state for a writ of mandamus, an injunction or other appropriate
relief in the case of violations of this code or other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)
§ 10.99 VIOLATION; GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation an offense. The doing of any of the acts or things
prohibited, or failing to do any of the acts or things commanded to be done, as
more fully specified and set forth by any provision of this code or any title,
chapter or subchapter hereof, or future ordinances of the city, is declared to
be an offense against the good order, public peace, morals, health, proper
government and welfare of the city and unlawful.
   (B)   Penalties established.
      (1)   Whenever in this code, in any ordinance of the city or in any rule
or regulation promulgated pursuant to this code, any act or failure to do a
required act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense
or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided herein or therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance or rule, shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500, except where another specific penalty
is established in this code. If a penalty is limited by state law, such
violations shall be punishable by not to exceed the maximum permitted by state
law or the amount declared by the city, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Each day any person is in violation of any provision of this code
and each day any such violation occurs or continues to exist shall be a
separate offense.
   (C)   Effect of license suspension or revocation. The suspension or
revocation of any license, certificate or other privilege conferred by the city
shall not be regarded as a penalty for the purposes of this code but shall be
in addition thereto.
   (D)   Penalty not to excuse offense. The imposition of one penalty for an
offense shall not excuse it or permit it to continue, nor prevent the
imposition of further penalties, should the offenses be continued or permitted
to continue.
   (E)   Aiding an offense.
      (1)   Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful or
prohibited, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting or
concealing the fact of such act or omission.
      (2)   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
Cross-reference:
   Municipal court; penalties, costs, assessments, see §
32.99
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Official city map
   
11.02   Ward boundaries
   
11.03   Serving notices
   
11.04   Inspections
§ 11.01 OFFICIAL CITY MAP.
   The map of the city showing its territorial limits, as maintained in the
office of the City Clerk, is designated as the official map of the city, and
the corporate limits as shown thereon, and as amended, are declared to be the
true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all annexations made
to the city through and including the date of July 1, 1996.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)
§ 11.02 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The wards of the city shall consist of the territory within the city
limits and containing the territory shown on the ward map of the city.
   (B)   The ward boundaries are as follows.
      (1)   Ward 1. Ward 1 consists of all that part within and beginning at a
point where the corporate limits and West 4th Street intersect, thence east to
Grant Street, thence north to 5th Street, thence east to West Street, thence
south to 4th Street, thence east to Temple Street, thence north to 9th Street,
thence east to College Street, thence north to 13th Street, thence west to
Temple Street, thence north to 14th Street, thence west and south along the
corporate limits to the point of beginning.
      (2)   Ward 2. Ward 2 consists of all of that part within and beginning at
a point where the corporate limits and North Temple Street intersect, thence
south to 13th Street, thence east to Glenn English Street, thence south to 3rd
Street, thence east to Cordell Street, thence north to 4th Street, thence east
to Magnolia Street, thence north to 5th Street, thence east to North Massingale
Drive, thence north to 8th Street, thence north on McDonald Terrace to 9th
Street, thence east to the corporate limits, thence north and west along the
corporate limits to the point of beginning.
      (3)   Ward 3. Ward 3 consists of all of that part within and beginning at
a point where the corporate limits and East 9th Street intersect, thence west
to McDonald Terrace, thence south to 8th Street, thence south on North
Massingale Drive to 5th Street, thence west to Magnolia Street, thence south to
4th Street, thence west to Cordell Street, thence south to 3rd Street, thence
west to Glenn English Street, thence south to 2nd Street, thence east to
Linwood Avenue, thence south to the corporate limits, thence east and north
along the corporate limits to the point of beginning.
      (4)   Ward 4.
         (a)   Ward 4 consists of all that part within and beginning at a point
where the corporate limits and Linwood Avenue intersect, thence north to 2nd
Street, thence west to Glenn English Street, thence north to 13th Street,
thence west to College Street, thence south to 9th Street, thence west to
Temple Street, thence south to 4th Street, thence west to West Street, thence
north to 5th Street, thence west to Grant Street, thence south to 4th Street,
thence west to the corporate limits, thence south and east along the corporate
limits to the point of beginning.
         (b)   This ward includes all of the Bonham Addition to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-2) (Ord. 2018-08, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 11.03 SERVING NOTICES.
   (A)   Method of service. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code
or applicable law, whenever a notice is required to be given pursuant to any
section of this code, such notice shall be given either by personal delivery to
the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her
last known business or residence address as the same appears in applicable city
records or other records pertaining to the matter for which such notice is
served, or by any other method of delivery approved by law. Service by mail
shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post
office or any United States mailbox.
   (B)   Proof of service. Unless otherwise specifically provided, proof of
giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of
the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years who actually
accomplished personal service in conformity with this code or other provisions
of law applicable to the subject matter concerned, or by a return receipt
signed by the recipient notified by United States mail.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-3)
§ 11.04 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Right of entry; emergency inspections.
      (1)   To enforce the provisions of this code, the Mayor or his or her
designee or any other person designated by this code or otherwise shall have a
right of entry on premises for inspection purposes in the manner and to the
extent as may be authorized by applicable law. This right of entry shall be a
condition of any permit, license, grant or utility service with or provided by
the city. For the purpose of this division (A)(1), inspection includes records
and papers on the premises or of the permittee, licensee, grantee or customer
relating to the permit, license, grant or service.
      (2)   Emergency inspections may be authorized if the Mayor or his or her
designated representative has reason to believe that a condition exists which
poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take
place in accordance with applicable law.
      (3)   Where the Mayor or other designated representative is otherwise
impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this division
(A).
   (B)   Search warrant or access warrant.
      (1)   Any officer designated by the city to inspect a premises may, upon
affidavit, apply to the judge of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant
setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this code may
exist, including one or more of the following:
         (a)   That the premises or records require inspection according to the
cycle established by the inspecting officer for periodic inspections of
records, buildings or premises of the type involved; or
         (b)   That observation of external conditions of the premises and its
public areas has resulted in the belief that violations of this code exist.
      (2)   If the judge of competent jurisdiction is satisfied as to the
matters set forth in the affidavit, he or she shall authorize the issuance of a
search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises
on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-4)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
33.   PUBLIC SAFETY; LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
      
35.   POLICIES
      
36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
37.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
   
30.01   Aldermanic form of government; elected and appointed officials
   
30.02   Mayor powers and duties
   
30.03   Council meetings
   
30.04   Compensation
§ 30.01 ALDERMANIC FORM OF GOVERNMENT; ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
   The city is governed under the statutory aldermanic form of government. All
powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this code, by
state statute and in such manner prescribed by ordinances adopted by the City
Council. The City Council shall consist of eight members, two from each ward of
the city. The Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer and City Marshal are elected at
large. The Street Commissioner is appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of
the City Council. The Council and elected officers shall have such powers and
duties as are prescribed by state law.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)
§ 30.02 MAYOR POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the
administrative branch of the government of the city. He or she shall preside at
meetings of the Council but he or she shall not be considered a member of the
Council for quorum or voting purposes; except that the Mayor may vote on
questions under consideration by the Council when the Council is equally
divided. The Mayor shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by state law
and as may be prescribed by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-2)
§ 30.03 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. The City Council shall hold its regular meeting on
the third Monday of each calendar month. If any such day falls on a day which
is not a workday for the majority of city employees, that meeting may be moved
to the next day which is a workday for the majority of city employees. Regular
meetings shall begin at 6:00 p.m. at City Hall unless, in the case of an
exigency, the Mayor or Council shall designate another place and/or time and
shall give such notice as circumstances shall reasonably allow.
   (B)   Adjourned meetings. Adjourned meetings may be reconvened at any date,
time and place designated by the Council at the time of adjournment.
   (C)   Special, emergency and other meetings. Special, emergency and other
meetings of the City Council may be held on any day, at any time and at any
place designated by the Mayor or by the City Council in the call for the
meeting; provided that all provisions of state law shall be observed.
   (D)   Rules of procedure. Except as they may conflict with the provisions of
state law, Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of any meeting
of the City Council. The Mayor (or such other person as may be serving pro
tempore as the Chair of the meeting) is designated as the parliamentarian and
shall rule on points of order of procedure. Such rulings shall govern unless
overridden by a two-thirds vote of all members of the City Council. The Chair
may, with the approval of a majority of the members present, suspend the rules
of procedure when the Council is meeting as a committee of the whole or at such
other time as the business of the body may be more expeditiously advanced by
less formal procedures. The Chair may reimpose the rules of procedure at any
time.
   (E)   Consolidation with other meetings. The Chair of any regular, special
or emergency meeting may consolidate the meeting with a contemporaneous meeting
of the governing board of any trust authority whose membership is identical to
the Mayor and City Council. The multiple meetings may be conducted as a single
meeting; provided that the consolidated agenda shall clearly indicate which
items pertain to each entity. A single set of minutes may be recorded for such
meeting; provided that the consolidated minutes shall clearly reflect which
items were taken on behalf of which entity. If consolidated minutes are
recorded, a copy shall be filed in each journal for record.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-3) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 2019-15, passed 12-
16-2019)
§ 30.04 COMPENSATION.
   Compensation of the Mayor and City Council shall be as provided by the
ordinances of the city. The Mayor and City Council may be reimbursed for
expenses actually incurred thereby in performance of their official duties,
however, no Council member may receive compensation as Council member or for
any other service rendered the city, other than as expenses.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-4)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   City Administrator
   
31.02   City Clerk
   
31.03   City Treasurer
   
31.04   City Marshal
   
31.05   City Attorney
   
31.06   Additional administrative departments, officers and agencies
   
31.07   Bonds
   
31.08   Acts by deputy or designee
   
31.09   Records and property to successor
Planning Commission
   
31.20   Commission created; appointment and terms; vacancies and removals
   
31.21   Organization and procedures
   
31.22   Compensation
   
31.23   Comprehensive plan
   
31.24   Subdivision of land
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Position created. The position of city administrator is created.
   (B)   Appointment; qualifications; suspension or removal. The Mayor and City
Council shall have the authority to appoint a city administrator, who shall
serve at their pleasure for an indefinite term. He or she shall be chosen
solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications.
The Council may suspend or remove the City Administrator at any time when such
suspension or removal has been confirmed by a majority vote of the Council.
   (C)   Duties.
      (1)   The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative assistant
to the Mayor and be under the supervision and direction of the Mayor and City
Council. He or she shall execute the laws and ordinances and administer the
government of the city, under the guidance and direction of the Mayor and City
Council.
      (2)   He or she shall:
         (a)   Appoint and, when deemed necessary for the good of the service,
lay off, suspend, demote or remove all directors or heads of administrative
departments and all other administrative officers and employees of the city by
and with the consultation of the Mayor and City Council, except as he or she or
his or her appointing authority may authorize the head of a department, an
officer or any agency to appoint, lay off, suspend, demote and remove
subordinates in such department, office or agency;
         (b)   Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all
administrative departments, agencies, officers and employees of the city in a
manner which will fully implement the personnel and administrative organization
policies approved and adopted by the Council; and examine the records and books
of the office of the City Treasurer and City Clerk;
         (c)   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the Mayor and City
Council, be responsible for the administration of the budget after adoption and
recommend to the Council any changes in the budget which he or she deems
desirable;
         (d)   Submit to the Mayor and City Council a report as of the end of
the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city for
the preceding year;
         (e)   Keep the Mayor and City Council advised of the financial
condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the
Mayor and City Council on matters of policy and other matters as may seem to
him or her desirable;
         (f)   Attend all Council meetings and have the right to speak and take
part in discussion, but not to vote; further, at these meetings, give all
department and office reports as he or she deems appropriate;
         (g)   Prepare the Council agenda items and support documentation,
arrangement of guest speakers and such other items as the Council may request;
         (h)   Have authority, whenever the interests of the city require, to
assign employees of any department, bureau, office or agency to the temporary
performances of duties in their respective positions or in another department,
bureau, office or agency; provided, however, that he or she shall recommend
changes in personnel and administrative organization policies approved and
adopted by the City Council if such temporary personnel changes extend beyond
90 days; and
         (i)   Have such other powers, duties and functions as the Mayor and
City Council may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1-1)
§ 31.02 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Office created; term. The office of City Clerk is created with all
powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by law and ordinance. The
term of office of the City Clerk shall be as established by law and ordinance.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The City Clerk shall serve as clerk for the City Council and shall:
         (a)   Keep the journal of the proceedings of the Council;
         (b)   Enroll all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council in a
book or set of books kept for that purpose;
         (c)   Have custody of documents, records and archives as may be
provided for by law or by ordinance, and have custody of the seal of the city;
         (d)   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required
by law or by ordinance; and
         (e)   Have such other powers, duties and functions related to his or
her statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
      (2)   The person who serves as City Clerk may be employed by the city to
perform duties not related to his or her position as City Clerk. The salary, if
any, for nonstatutory duties shall be provided separately by ordinance.
   (C)   Deputy Clerk.
      (1)   Position created. There is created the position of deputy city
clerk who shall be known as the “Deputy City Clerk”.
      (2)   Appointment and term. The Mayor and City Council shall have the
authority to appoint a Deputy City Clerk who shall serve at their pleasure for
an indefinite term. The Deputy City Clerk shall be chosen solely on the basis
of qualifications.
      (3)   Duties. The Deputy City Clerk shall perform and be responsible for
and shall have the power to perform all the duties and functions of the City
Clerk in the absence of the City Clerk.
      (4)   Suspension or removal. The City Council may suspend or remove the
deputy City Clerk at any time when such suspension or removal has been
confirmed by a majority vote of the Council.
      (5)   Compensation. The salary of the Deputy City Clerk shall be fixed by
motion or resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1-2) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 12-4-2006)
§ 31.03 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   Office created; term. The office of city treasurer is created with all
powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by law and ordinance. The
term of office of the City Treasurer shall be as established by law and
ordinance.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The City Treasurer shall deposit daily all funds coming into his or
her hands for the city in such depositories as the City Council may designate,
and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable laws and
ordinances. He or she shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may
be prescribed by applicable law or by ordinance.
      (2)   The person who serves as City Treasurer may be employed by the city
to perform other duties not related to his or her position as City Treasurer.
The salary, if any, for the performance of such other duties shall be provided
separately in the same manner as salaries and wages for other city employees.
   (C)   Deputy Treasurer.
      (1)   Position created. There is created the position of deputy treasurer
of the city who shall be known as the “Deputy Treasurer”.
      (2)   Appointment and term. The Mayor and City Council shall have
authority to appoint a deputy treasurer who shall serve at their pleasure for
an indefinite term. The Deputy Treasurer shall be chosen solely on the basis of
qualifications.
      (3)   Duties.
         (a)   The Deputy Treasurer shall perform and be responsible for and
shall have the power to perform all the duties and functions of the Treasurer
in the absence of the Treasurer.
         (b)   The person appointed as Deputy Treasurer may be employed by the
city to perform duties related to or not related to his or her position as
Deputy Treasurer.
      (4)   Suspension or removal. The City Council may suspend or remove the
Deputy Treasurer at any time when such suspension or removal has been confirmed
by a majority vote of the Council.
      (5)   Compensation. The salary, if any, for the performance of the duties
as Deputy Treasurer shall be provided in the same manner as salaries and wages
for other city employees.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1-3) (Ord. 2006-06, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-03, passed
2-20-2007)
§ 31.04 CITY MARSHAL.
   (A)   General provisions. The City Marshal is an officer of the city. He or
she shall have such powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
applicable law or ordinance. The City Marshal shall be under the administrative
direction of the office of the Mayor.
   (B)   City Marshal and Chief of Police. The individual who serves as City
Marshal may, upon presentation of appropriate documentation of the State
Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training (CLEET) indicating that the
individual is certified as a peace officer in the state, be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council as Chief of Police. If the Mayor does
not make such an appointment, the city will hire a Chief of Police in the same
manner as other full-time city employees. In such case, the Chief of Police
will manage the City Police Department, subject to the administrative direction
of the Mayor and City Administrator and serve separately from the City Marshal.
The Chief of Police will also be required to be CLEET certified.
   (C)   Compensation. The salary, if any, for the performance of such duties
as Chief of Police shall be provided separately in the same manner as salaries
and wages for other city employees.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1-4) (Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 2018-03, passed
5-7-2018)
§ 31.05 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney is an officer of the city. The City Attorney shall attend
Council meetings; prepare ordinances and resolutions when directed; advise the
Mayor and City Council; and with Council approval, advise other officers of the
city, represent the city in lawsuits and perform such other duties as provided
by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1-5)
§ 31.06 ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS AND AGENCIES.
   In addition to the officers enumerated in this chapter, there shall be such
other administrative departments, agencies and officers as the City Council may
establish.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-2)
§ 31.07 BONDS.
   The City Clerk, City Treasurer, Chief of Police, purchasing agents and such
officers and employees as are designated by the City Council shall, before
entering upon the discharge of their duties, execute and file with the City
Clerk surety bonds issued by a surety company authorized to operate in the
state conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. The bond of
the City Clerk shall be filed with the City Treasurer. The city shall pay the
premium on such bonds.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-3)
§ 31.08 ACTS BY DEPUTY OR DESIGNEE.
   Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or
employee, the power may be performed by an authorized deputy or designee or by
any person authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly
provides otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)
§ 31.09 RECORDS AND PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR.
   All books, vouchers, monies or other property belonging to the city and in
the charge or possession of any city officer shall be delivered to his or her
successor when qualified.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.20 COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; VACANCIES AND REMOVALS.
   There is created a planning commission for the city. The Planning Commission
shall consist of not less than five members, all of whom shall reside within
the city. The members shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City
Council by simple majority vote. Each member shall serve for a term of three
years or until his or her successor takes office. When the Commission is first
appointed, the terms of one-third of the members shall be for three years, one-
third for two years and one-third for one year. Appointments to fill vacancies
shall be for the unexpired term only made by the Mayor, with confirmation by
the City Council. The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
pay. The appointed members of the Commission shall be nominated and appointed
solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to any party
affiliation. Members may be removed by the City Council only for inefficiency,
neglect of duty or malefaction in office.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-1) (Ord. 2014-07, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 2017-07, passed
12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-07, passed 9-16-2019; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 31.21 ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Officers. Each year, the Commission shall elect a chair, a vice chair
and a secretary, and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem
necessary. The term of the Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary shall be one year.
   (B)   Rules. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction
of business and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of Chapters
157 and 158.
   (C)   Quorum. Three members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. Any action taken shall be official when
concurred by not less than a majority of all appointed members of the Planning
Commission entitled to vote.
   (D)   Technical staff. The Planning Commission, subject to approval of the
City Council, shall have the power and authority to employ planners, engineers,
attorneys, clerks and other help deemed necessary within the limits of the
appropriation fixed by the City Council. The salary and compensation of such
employees shall be fixed by the City Council and shall be paid out of the City
Treasury as for other officers and employees.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)
§ 31.22 COMPENSATION.
   The appointed members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
Necessary expenses incurred by the Commission shall be paid from the City
Treasury as other legal expenses of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-3) (Ord. 2017-07, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 31.23 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (A)   Powers of Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have the
power to prepare and recommend to the City Council for adoption a comprehensive
plan for the physical development of the city. In conducting its work, the
Planning Commission may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to
the development and betterment of the city and may make recommendations as it
may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof to the City Council. The
Planning Commission may make or cause to be made surveys, studies, maps and
plans in the conduct of its activities. Before final action is taken by the
City Council on the location or design of any public buildings, statue,
memorial, park, boulevard, street, alley, playground, public grounds, bridge or
change in any location of any street or alley, such question shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission for investigation and report. In the preparation of
the comprehensive plan, the Planning Commission may, from time to time, prepare
and recommend to the City Council for adoption a part or parts thereof, which
parts shall cover one or more major geographical divisions of the city or one
or more major elements of the comprehensive plan. The Planning Commission may,
from time to time, recommend extending, amending or changing any portion of the
comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Purposes of plan. In the preparation of such plan, the Planning
Commission may make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present
conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to
neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of
the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future
needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and
general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development; including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic,
the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for
light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of
population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement and the wise and
efficient expenditure of public funds.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)
§ 31.24 SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   The Planning Commission may prepare and recommend to the City Council for
adoption rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within the
corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in
lots, plots, blocks, streets, alleys or other ways intended to be dedicated to
public or private use within the corporate limits of the city may first be
submitted by the City Council to the Planning Commission for its
recommendations.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)
CHAPTER 32: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
32.01   Purpose and effect
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Jurisdiction
   
32.04   Municipal judge
   
32.05   Change of venue not allowed
   
32.06   Chief of Police
   
32.07   Clerk of the court
   
32.08   City Attorney
   
32.09   Rules of the court
   
32.10   Traffic violations
   
32.11   Schedule of fines
   
32.12   Prosecutions procedure
   
32.13   Citations
   
32.14   Summons
   
32.15   Failure to appear
   
32.16   Warrant of arrest
   
32.17   Bail or bond
   
32.18   Arraignment
   
32.19   Trials; judgments
 
   
32.99   Penalty
§ 32.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT.
   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal
court of the city, as put into operation by resolution duly passed and filed in
accordance with law, as authorized by state statutes. To the extent of conflict
between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
city.
   CLERK. The court clerk, including any deputy or member of the office staff
of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk’s office.
   COURT. The municipal court of this city.
   JUDGE. The judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or
alternate judge thereof as provided by the statutes of this state and this
chapter.
   THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The district court judicial district of the state
wherein the government of this city is situated.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)
§ 32.03 JURISDICTION.
   The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with
applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-3)
§ 32.04 MUNICIPAL JUDGE.
   (A)   Qualifications and restrictions; Mayor may serve as. There shall be
one judge of the court. The judge shall be a person at least 25 years of age,
be a resident of the city (unless he or she is a licensed attorney), have a
high school education (or the equivalent) and be of good moral character. The
Mayor may be designated as judge upon approval of the City Council. A judge who
is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but
he or she shall not accept employment inconsistent with his or her duties as
judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases
within the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become
subject of proceedings therein.
   (B)   Appointment. Judges shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent
of the City Council. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to
the City Council at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to
the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon
at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The City Council may decide upon the
proposed appointment by a majority vote of all the members of the Council.
Failure of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action
thereon at a later regularly scheduled meeting of the Council unless the Mayor,
in writing, withdraws the proposed appointment.
   (C)   Term of judge. The official term of the judge shall be two years,
expiring on April 30 in each odd-numbered year.
   (D)   Alternate judge. There may be appointed for each judge of the court an
alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His or her
appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as the
judge. He or she shall sit as judge of the court in any case if the judge is
absent from court, unable to act as judge or disqualified from acting as judge
in the case.
   (E)   Acting judge. If, at any time, there is no judge duly appointed and
qualified available to sit as judge, a person possessing the qualifications
required by this section for the judge shall be appointed as acting judge. The
acting judge shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of
pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be
available.
   (F)   Compensation. A judge shall receive such salary as may be established
and shall be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of the
city.
   (G)   Removal.
      (1)   Removal for cause. Judges shall be subject to removal from office
by the City Council for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of
this state for the removal of public officers.
      (2)   Filing of petition. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by
the filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by the Mayor, or 250 or more qualified electors of the city. In the
latter event, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners.
      (3)   Hearing; notice. The City Council shall set a date for hearing the
matter and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to
be served personally upon the judge at least ten days before the hearing. At
the hearing, the judge shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to
present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him or her, and to
have all evidence against him or her presented in open hearing.
      (4)   Procedures. So far as can be made applicable, the provisions of the
Oklahoma Administrative Procedure Act governing individual proceedings (75 O.S.
§§ 309-317 and any amendments or additions thereto in effect at the time of the
hearing) shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall
be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the City
Council in favor of such removal.
   (H)   Vacancy in office.
      (1)   Cause of vacancy. A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if
the incumbent:
         (a)   Dies;
         (b)   Resigns;
         (c)   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
         (d)   Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally
in judicial proceedings or is no longer subject to judicial review.
      (2)   Filling vacancy. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of
judge, the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a
successor to complete the unexpired term, upon the same procedure as an
original appointment is made.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-4)
§ 32.05 CHANGE OF VENUE NOT ALLOWED.
   In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed. The
judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her disqualification
or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and
procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the
matter shall be heard by an acting judge, appointed as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-5)
§ 32.06 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his or her
official title, to the Chief of Police, who shall be the principal officer of
the court.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-6)
§ 32.07 CLERK OF THE COURT.
   (A)   Duties. The court clerk shall:
      (1)   Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers;
      (2)   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court;
      (3)   Enter all pleadings, processes and proceedings in the dockets of
the court;
      (4)   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the judge shall direct;
      (5)   Receive any receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits and sums of
money payable to the court and as may be established by the court or the City
Council; and
      (6)   Pay to the Treasurer all monies so received by him or her, except
such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by him or
her for special purposes. All monies paid to the City Treasurer shall be placed
in the General Fund of the city, or in such other fund as the City Council may
direct.
   (B)   Bond. The clerk of the court shall give bond in such sum as set by the
City Council, in the form provided by state law. When executed, the bond shall
be submitted to the Council for approval. When approved, it shall be filed with
the City Treasurer and retained in the municipal archives.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-7)
§ 32.08 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney or his or her duly designated assistant may be the
prosecuting officer of the court. He or she may prosecute, in his or her
discretion, all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He or she
shall be authorized, in his or her discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals,
proceedings in error and review from the court to any other courts of the
state, and to represent the city in all proceedings arising out of matters in
the court.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-8)
§ 32.09 RULES OF THE COURT.
   The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and
with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of the
court.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-9)
§ 32.10 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Traffic Violations Bureau.
      (1)   Bureau created. A traffic violations bureau is established as a
division of the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by the
clerk or by subordinates designated for that purpose.
      (2)   Fines. Persons who are cited for violation of one of the traffic
ordinances of the city, other than a second offense within a 12-month period; a
driver’s license offense; or an offense punishable by more than $100 may elect
to pay a fine in the Violations Bureau according to a schedule of fines
prescribed, from time to time, by the city. The payment shall constitute a
final determination of the cause against the defendant.
      (3)   Rules. The court may adopt rules to carry into effect this division
(A). If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this division (A) fails
so to do, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Traffic Bail Bond Act.
      (1)   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any
person, whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a
law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic
law or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer
upon personal recognizance if:
         (a)   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States which is a party to the nonresident violator compact or any party
jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact;
         (b)   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
         (c)   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as
provided on the citation, unless the person is unconscious or injured and
requires immediate medical treatment as determined by the treating physician;
and
         (d)   The violation does not constitute:
            1.   A felony;
            2.   Negligent homicide;
            3.   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances, unless the person is unconscious or injured and requires immediate
medical treatment as determined by the treating physician;
            4.   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
            5.   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver’s license, or while the driving privilege and driver’s license is under
suspension, revocation, denial or cancellation;
            6.   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant; or
            7.   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in
divisions (B)(1)(d)1. through (B)(1)(d)6. above.
      (2)   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided in division (B)(1) above, then the arresting officer
shall:
         (a)   Designate the traffic charge;
         (b)   Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license
on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state
and expiration date;
         (c)   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
         (d)   Record the date and time on the citation on which, or before
which, the arrested person promises to contact, pay or appear at the court, as
applicable to the court; and
         (e)   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear
as provided in the citation.
      (3)   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person’s driving privilege and driver’s license
in this state, or in the nonresident’s home state pursuant to the nonresident
violator compact.
      (4)   Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely
appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines
and costs, issuance of arrest warrants and requests for suspension of driving
privilege and driver’s license shall be as required in state law, 22 O.S. §§
1115.1 through 1115.5.
      (5)   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter
a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he or she is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the
copy of the citation furnished to him or her or on a legible copy thereof,
together with the date of the plea and his or her signature. The defendant
shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the
court clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the
defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided in this
division (B)(5), such plea shall be accepted by the court, and the amount of
the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation
charged or as prescribed by the court.
      (6)   If, pursuant to the provisions of division (B)(5) above, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant, and the municipal or district court clerk, within
120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting
officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that:
         (a)   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided in the citation;
         (b)   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         (c)   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine or made any other
arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and
         (d)   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      (7)   The court clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety
to either suspend the defendant’s driving privilege and driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in this state, or notify the defendant’s home state and
request suspension of the defendant’s driving privilege and driver’s license in
accordance with the provisions of the nonresident violator compact. Such notice
and request shall be on a form approved or furnished by the State Department of
Public Safety. The court clerk shall not process the notification and request
provided in this division (B)(7) if, with respect to such charges:
         (a)   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed or otherwise settled the case;
         (b)   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided in this division (B) or, if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         (c)   The violation relates to parking or standing; or
         (d)   A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the date
the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
      (8)   The court clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driving
privilege and driver’s license suspension submitted to the State Department of
Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of this division (B). When the court
or court clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs,
settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the defendant or otherwise
closes the case, the court clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant,
if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class
mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or
at such other address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the court
or court clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on
the citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of the nonresident violator
compact, and shall, in all other cases, notify the State Department of Public
Safety of the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for
notification shall be approved by the State Department of Public Safety.
Provided, however, the court or court clerk’s failure to furnish such proof or
notice in the manner provided in this division (B)(8) shall in no event create
any civil liability upon the court, the court clerk, the state or any political
subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee thereof,
but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon
request.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-10)
§ 32.11 SCHEDULE OF FINES.
   The judge is authorized to establish a minimum fine schedule to become
effective upon approval by resolution of the City Council. The minimum fine
schedule, when established, shall provide for a minimum amount which a person
may pay upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the listed offenses. The
minimum fine schedule shall include the fine, court costs and any assessments
set by state law within the specified amount. Upon plea of guilty or nolo
contendere and payment of the required minimum fine prior to the date scheduled
for court appearance, no further court appearance shall be required. The judge
shall authorize the court clerk to accept pleas of guilty and nolo contendere
where the amount of the minimum fine is paid at the time of such plea and prior
to the scheduled court appearance date.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-11)
§ 32.12 PROSECUTIONS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Style of prosecutions. All prosecutions for violations of ordinances
of the city shall be styled “The City of New Cordell, Oklahoma vs. (naming
defendant or defendants)”.
   (B)   Written complaint. Except as provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall
be initiated by the filing of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by
the person making the complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense
charged. Complaints shall be verified before a judge, the court clerk, a deputy
court clerk or a police officer. No warrant for arrest shall be issued until
approved by the judge of the municipal court.
   (C)   City options. There is no duty on the part of the city or any of its
officers or employees to formally prosecute actions in the court. In the
absence of a prosecuting officer, the judge shall proceed with the case and
hear evidence and examine witnesses in such manner as he or she may deem
necessary to effect justice.
   (D)   Court cost fee. Any person, except a police officer or other employee
of the city, filing an offense complaint in the municipal court shall deposit
with the clerk of the court, unless waived by order of the court, the court
cost fee as provided in this chapter. The court costs so deposited by such a
complainant shall be refunded to the complainant or person depositing same upon
conviction or acquittal of the defendant; the court costs shall not be refunded
if the charges are dismissed at the request of the complainant who made the
deposit because the complainant fails or refuses to appear in court to testify
or aid in the prosecution of the charge filed by such complainant.
   (E)   Defects in complaint. All defects in the form or substance apparent on
the face of a complaint charging a violation of an ordinance of the city, and
being grounds for motion or demur, may only be raised by an accused in writing
and prior to trial.
   (F)   Amendment of complaint. A complaint may be amended in matter of
substance or form at any time before the defendant pleads, without leave, and
may be amended after plea or order of the court where the same can be done
without material prejudice to the rights of the defendant. No amendment shall
cause any delay of the trial, unless good cause is shown by affidavit.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-12)
§ 32.13 CITATIONS.
   (A)   Residents of city. If a resident of the city is arrested by a law
enforcement officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which other
provisions of this chapter do not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a
nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release the person if the
person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. However, the arresting
officer need not release the person if it reasonably appears to the officer
that the person may cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to
property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the
citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or
property. If the person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant
shall be issued for his or her arrest and his or her appearance shall be
compelled. If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign
a citation as provided in this division (A), he or she shall be admitted to
bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal
recognizance.
   (B)   Nonresidents of city. If a nonresident of the city is arrested by a
law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which §
32.10(B) does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail
either before or after arraignment.
   (C)   Parking violations. If the alleged offense is a violation of an
ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any
regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator is not present,
the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to
come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that
prescribed in this section, with such variation as the circumstances require,
the operator of the vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to
the citation as if it had been issued to him or her personally under division
(A) above.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-13)
§ 32.14 SUMMONS.
   (A)   Warrant of arrest issuance. Upon the filing of a complaint charging
violation of an ordinance, the judge, unless he or she determines to issue a
warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a
citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a
summons, naming the person charged; specifying his or her address or place of
residence, if known; stating the offense with which he or she is charged; and
giving him or her notice to answer the charge in the court on a day certain,
containing a provision for the official return of the summons, and including
such other pertinent information as may be necessary.
   (B)   Serving summons. The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to
the defendant personally or by certified mail. If he or she fails to appear and
to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued
for his or her arrest, as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-14)
§ 32.15 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   (A)   Summons or traffic citation. Any person who has been duly served with
a summons or traffic citation and who has signed a written promise to appear in
court as directed in the summons or the citation or as subsequently directed by
the court, and who fails to appear pursuant to his or her written promise or as
directed by the court, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, which shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Bond.
      (1)   If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear
according to the terms or conditions of his or her bond, either for hearing,
arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his or her
presence in court or before the judge may be lawfully required or ordered, the
judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby
declaring the bond to be forfeited. The judge may also order a bench warrant to
be issued for the defendant as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   The judge, without advancing court costs, may also cause the
forfeiture to be certified to the district court of the county, where it shall
be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of
a district court judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the
district court judgment docket, the district court clerk shall proceed in
accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S. § 1332, and a surety shall have all
remedies available under the provisions of 22 O.S. § 1108 and 59 O.S. §§ 1301
through 1340.
      (3)   Court costs shall be collectible from the proceeds of the bond.
   (C)   Complainants and witnesses. No person, having signed a complaint in
the municipal court of the city alleging the violation of an ordinance or any
other person in response to an order of the court, shall fail, refuse or
neglect to appear for the purpose of testifying as a witness at the trial of
the case, after having been notified of the time, date and place at which the
case is set for trial.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-15) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.16 WARRANT OF ARREST.
   (A)   Form of warrant. Except as otherwise provided by city ordinance, upon
the filing of a complaint approved by endorsement by the City Attorney or by
the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the
following form:
 
 
The City of New Cordell, Oklahoma to the police chief of the City of New Cordell,
Oklahoma. Complaint upon oath this day has been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense of (naming the offense in general terms) has been committed and accusing (name
of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to arrest the above named
(name of defendant) and bring (insert him, her or them, as appropriate) before me, at
(naming the place).
 
Witness my hand this          day of             , 2       
 
                          
Judge of the Municipal
Court of New Cordell, Oklahoma
 
   (B)   Police to serve warrant. It is the duty of the Police Chief
personally, or through a duly constituted member of the city police force or
through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute the warrant
as promptly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-16)
§ 32.17 BAIL OR BOND.
   (A)   Bail. Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to
citation or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment,
the defendant may be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the judge,
who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail and
release of the defendant. In case of arrests made at night or under other
conditions of emergency or when the judge is not available, the rules shall
authorize the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative to accept
a temporary cash bond of not less than $100 nor more than the maximum monetary
penalty provided by ordinance for the offense charged. The judge or Police
Chief is authorized, subject to conditions as may be prescribed by the judge,
to release a resident of the city on personal recognizance.
   (B)   Bail bond schedule. The city’s bail bond schedule setting forth
specific offenses and bail bond amounts and procedures therefor, as amended
from time to time, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Copies of
said schedule are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public use and
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-17)
§ 32.18 ARRAIGNMENT.
   Upon making his or her appearance before the court, the defendant shall be
arraigned. The judge or the City Attorney shall read the complaint to the
defendant; inform him or her of his or her legal rights, including the right of
trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction; and ask him
or her whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads
guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the
matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is
not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for
hearing at a later date.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-18)
§ 32.19 TRIALS; JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Postponement. Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
   (B)   Presence of defendant. The defendant must be present in person at the
trial of his or her case in court.
   (C)   Procedure. In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter,
by the statutes relating to municipal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by
the State Supreme Court, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in
the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
   (D)   Judgments.
      (1)   Judgment required; types. At the close of trial, judgment must be
rendered without undue delay by the judge, who shall cause it to be entered in
his or her docket:
         (a)   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, he or she must be discharged at once;
         (b)   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the
court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly; and
         (c)   A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may direct also that he
or she be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied, as provided in §
32.99(A).
      (2)   Judgment of imprisonment. If, after conviction, judgment of
imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be
delivered to the Chief of Police, the Sheriff of the county or other
appropriate officer. Such copy shall be sufficient warrant for execution of the
sentence.
      (3)   Suspension or deferment of judgment.
         (a)   The judge of the court, in imposing a judgment and sentence, at
his or her discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the
imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize the person to
be released upon his or her own recognizance for a period not to exceed six
months from the date of the sentence, under such terms or conditions as the
judge may specify. The judge may, with the consent of the defendant, defer
further proceedings, after a verdict, finding or plea of guilty, but before
passing a judgment of guilt and imposing a fine, and place the defendant on
probation for a period not to exceed six months, under such terms and
conditions as prescribed by the court, which may include, but not be limited
to, work on the streets, parks or other city-owned or maintained projects, with
proper supervision.
         (b)   A defendant is not entitled to a deferred sentence if the
defendant has been previously convicted of a felony.
         (c)   Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of release have
been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty and may cause
a warrant to be issued for the defendant.
         (d)   Upon the issuance of the warrant or judgment of guilty being
entered, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to
which he or she is sentenced and shall serve out the full term or pay the full
fine for which he or she was originally sentenced as may be directed by the
judge.
         (e)   The judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence
for a period of time not to exceed six months from the date of the sentence. At
the expiration of such period, the judge may allow the City Attorney to amend
the charge to a lesser offense.
         (f)   If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee of $100
may be imposed as costs in the case. The court may make payment of the fee a
condition of granting or continuing the imposition of a sentence, if the
defendant is able to pay.
         (g)   The court may also require restitution, and in the event there
was damage done to public or private property during the commission of the
offense, the court may require the defendant to repair or replace such damaged
property as a condition to a deferred sentence as may be directed by the court.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-19)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fines and costs. If judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of
the court shall tax the costs to the defendant in the sum of $30, or the
maximum sum permitted by state law, whichever is greater, and the fees and
mileage of jurors and witnesses, and any assessments levied, all of which the
defendant shall pay in addition to any fine that may be imposed.
   (B)   Witness fees.
      (1)   Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police or
peace officers who shall be employed by the city, shall be entitled to a
witness fee as established by the City Council by motion or resolution per each
day of attendance, plus mileage per mile actually and necessarily traveled in
going to and returning from the place of attendance, if the residence is more
than ten miles distant from the place of trial. No witness, however, shall
receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or
for the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit
with the court clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of
attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be
required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting forth:
         (a)   The names of no more witnesses than the municipal judge for the
city shall determine to be just, necessary and reasonable for the proper
defense of such indigent’s case;
         (b)   That the defendant, by reason of his or her poverty, is unable
to provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
         (c)   That the testimony of such witness is material; and
         (d)   That the attendance at the trial is necessary to his or her
proper defense.
      (2)   In any case where an indigent defendant has properly filled out and
filed with the city an affidavit setting forth the above mentioned information,
then the fees for such witnesses shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Enforcement of fines and costs.
      (1)   Imprisonment. If a defendant who is financially able refuses or
neglects to pay a fine or costs, or both, payment may be enforced by
imprisonment until the same shall be satisfied at the rate of $25 per day.
      (2)   Certified to district court. If the defendant is without means to
pay the fine or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total amount due to
be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court
where it shall be entered upon the district court docket and shall have the
full force and effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon, the same
remedies shall be available for the enforcement as are available to any other
judgment creditor.
      (3)   Prisoners to work.
         (a)   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of
guilty may be compelled, if their health permits, to work on community
projects, the public streets, avenues or ways, public buildings or other public
premises or property. For each day of such work, the working prisoner shall be
paid not less than $50 until the fine and costs are satisfied.
         (b)   The city shall direct where the work shall be performed. The
appropriate officer shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the Chief
of Police shall make provision therefor.
   (D)   Acts punishable under different sections. In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different sections of this code,
the City Attorney may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
   (E)   Contempt of court. Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made
by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for
contempt committed as to him or her while holding court, or committed against
process issued by him or her, in the same manner and to the same extent as the
district courts of this state.
   (F)   Penalty assessments.
      (1)   Any person:
         (a)   Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10 or more or
by imprisonment, excluding parking and standing violations; or
         (b)   Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under division
(F)(1)(a) above, shall pay a sum as set by state law as a separate penalty
assessment for law enforcement training, and as a separate fingerprinting fee,
which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all fines and
penalties and costs otherwise provided for such offense. The court shall
provide for separate bail for the assessments; however, a defendant admitted to
bail on an undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the assessment in
the undertaking.
      (2)   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the court shall collect the
assessment and deposit the monies for payment as required by state law.
      (3)   At the end of every quarter, the city shall deposit with the State
Treasury the funds deposited in the law enforcement training funds and the AFIS
(Automated Fingerprint Identification System) Fund as required by law. The
court clerk shall also furnish to the State Treasury reports required on the
funds collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter.
      (4)   For the purpose of this division (F), CONVICTION means any final
adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment.
   (G)   Failure to pay fines.
      (1)   All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of
competent jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.
      (2)   The failure to pay a fine levied pursuant to this code shall
constitute a separate offense against the city, subject to a fine as provided
in §
10.99.
      (3)   If a fine is not paid by the defendant, the fine may be collected
by committing the defendant to jail, where he or she shall remain until his or
her fine and any costs assessed against him or her are discharged, either by
payment or by confinement in jail, or by working in accordance with other
provisions of this code or state law.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-20)
CHAPTER 33: PUBLIC SAFETY; LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Department created; Chief
   
33.02   Duties of police officers
Fire Department
   
33.15   Department established
   
33.16   Duties of Department
   
33.17   Fire Chief
   
33.18   Other Department personnel
   
33.19   New members
   
33.20   Bylaws
   
33.21   Equipment
   
33.22   Rules and regulations
   
33.23   Authority at emergency scenes
   
33.24   Entry powers
Fire Department Service Outside City Limits
   
33.35   Authority to contract
   
33.36   Payment for services
   
33.37   Distance limitations
   
33.38   Serving in regular line of duty
   
33.39   Agent of state
   
33.40   Fees for fire calls
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 DEPARTMENT CREATED; CHIEF.
   There shall be a police department, the head of which is the Chief of
Police, or the Police Chief. He or she shall have such privileges,
responsibilities, authorities, powers, duties and functions as may be
prescribed by applicable law, ordinance, resolution or city policy. He or she
shall be subject to and under the administrative direction of the office of the
Mayor in the same manner as any and all other heads of city departments and
divisions. The Chief of Police shall, in a timely manner, enroll in, attend and
satisfactorily complete all specialty training required of Chiefs of Police by
the State Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training (CLEET). The Chief
of Police shall be a salaried employee of the city with such salary being
annually determined and established at such time and in such manner as are
salaries and wages for other city employees. The Chief of Police shall be
entitled to receive all the same employee benefits as are afforded to full-time
employees of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1) (Ord. 2007-01, passed 1-16-2007)
§ 33.02 DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   It is the duty of the Police Department to apprehend and arrest on view or
on warrant and bring to justice violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to their
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve warrants, writs,
executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating state laws as provided by law and to
turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects, to perform all
duties pertaining to the offices of police officers.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.15 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is a fire department of the city, the head of which is the Chief
of the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Fire Department of the city is a volunteer department, which has
in its service not more than two full-time, salaried firefighters and not less
than 12 nor more than 25 volunteer firefighters.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, a volunteer firefighter is considered
as one who is enrolled as a member of the Fire Department and who serves in the
capacity without receiving a regular salary.
   (D)   Membership of the department shall consist of such persons appointed
by the Chief and shall be persons residing within five miles of the city.
Determination of whether candidates for appointment are capable of performing
their duties shall be made by the Chief after a medical and physical
examination has been made in a manner prescribed by the Chief and approved by
the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 33.16 DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.
   It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish fires; to
rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate and to administer first aid
to persons injured in or about burning structures or elsewhere in case of an
emergency; to promote fire prevention; and, unless otherwise provided, to
enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention and safety of persons
from fire in public and private buildings.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)
§ 33.17 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be the administrative head of the Department,
subject to the laws of the state, ordinances of the city and the rules and
regulations adopted in this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief shall have the following powers and duties, and he or she
may assign duties to other members of the Department:
      (1)   Shall be responsible for the general condition and efficient
operation of the Department, the training of members and the performance of all
other duties imposed upon him or her and shall have supervision and control of
the Fire Department, subject to the supervision and control by the Mayor;
      (2)   May inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the Department
the fire hydrants, cisterns and other sources of water supply at least twice
each year;
      (3)   Shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire prevention
and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage of all
members;
      (4)   Shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the officers
and members in the performance of their duties;
      (5)   Shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in
the community and on the activities of the Department;
      (6)   Shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its
cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson, shall notify
proper authorities and secure the preservation of all possible evidence for
future use in the case;
      (7)   Is authorized to enter any building or premises in the city at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve written
notice on persons for any violations that may be found; and
      (8)   Shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections,
apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the Department and
shall make reports to the Mayor as he or she may require. He or she shall keep
the city informed regarding the Fire Department and its needs.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3)
§ 33.18 OTHER DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Assistant Chief.
      (1)   In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall
command the Department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with
the full powers and responsibilities of the Chief.
      (2)   The Assistant Chief shall be elected from among the members of the
Department and be appointed by the Chief, with the approval of the Mayor.
   (B)   Company officers. Company officers shall be selected by the Chief
based on the following criteria:
      (1)   Knowledge of firefighting;
      (2)   Leadership ability; and
      (3)   Knowledge of firefighting equipment.
   (C)   Secretary-Treasurer.
      (1)   One member elected by the members of the Fire Department, subject
to approval of the Chief, shall be a secretary-treasurer.
      (2)   His or her duties shall consist of the following:
         (a)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
         (b)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
         (c)   Collecting any money due the department by the members.
   (D)   Social officers. The Department may elect a president, vice president,
secretary or treasurer to be known as social officers. Such officers may be
elected in any manner and for any term the members may decide upon, and their
duties shall be to arrange for and manage any or all social functions sponsored
by the members. The functions and duties of the social officers shall in no way
interfere with those of the regular Department officers who are charged with
responsibility for all fire service activities of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4)
§ 33.19 NEW MEMBERS.
   (A)   Appointment; probation. New members of the Department shall be
appointed by the Chief and shall be on probation for one year after their
appointment. Upon completion of their probation period, new members must be
approved by the majority of the other members of the Fire Department, the Chief
and the Mayor.
   (B)   Training. Applicants for prospective firefighter positions shall serve
a six-month training program. During the training period, the trainee shall not
be granted a firefighter status and is not eligible to be placed on the rolls
as a firefighter or be enrolled in the fire pension plan until such time as the
firefighter is selected as provided herein. At no time will a trainee be
appointed, except when a regular firefighter’s employment is terminated or a
regular firefighter is within six months of retirement.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5)
§ 33.20 BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Department shall include the following:
   (A)   All volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
   (B)   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters;
   (C)   At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month;
   (D)   Any member having two unexcused absences in succession or three
unexcused absences in a period of three months will be expelled from the Fire
Department rolls;
   (E)   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Chief;
   (F)   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the Department will be expelled; and
   (G)   Any member of the Fire Department may be expelled from the rolls by a
majority vote of the members of the company and approval of the Chief for the
following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      (5)   Conviction of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6)
§ 33.21 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Authorized equipment. The Department shall be equipped with such
apparatus and other equipment as may be required, from time to time, to
maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire.
   (B)   Purchase of equipment. Recommendations of apparatus and equipment
needed shall be made by the Chief, purchased after approval as other city
purchases.
   (C)   Storage. All equipment of the Department shall be safely and
conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by the Mayor.
   (D)   Fire alarms. Suitable arrangements and equipment shall be provided for
people to turn in alarms and to notify members of the Department so that they
may promptly respond.
   (E)   Use of equipment.
      (1)   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away
or conceal any article used in any way by the Department.
      (2)   No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)
§ 33.22 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may adopt and change regulations
relating to the Fire Department and its organization, operation and
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)
§ 33.23 AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY SCENES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chiefs or other Fire Department
officers in charge shall have complete charge and control at all fires. Fire
orders shall be obeyed.
   (B)   The Chief or his or her officers may prescribe limits in the vicinity
of a fire which no persons, except those residing or owning property therein,
shall be permitted to enter except on the order of the officer in command.
   (C)   Police officers may aid in carrying into effect the provisions of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-9)
§ 33.24 ENTRY POWERS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department and his or her designee may, at all
reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within his or her jurisdiction
for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the
provisions of this chapter and other provisions of this code, he or she may
deem necessary to make.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)
FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
§ 33.35 AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT.
   The city is authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or agreements
with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or military
installations or commands, or political subdivisions of the state for fire
protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to contract to provide
fire protection jointly with other organizations and municipal subdivisions of
the state.
(Prior Code, § 6-2A-1)
§ 33.36 PAYMENT FOR SERVICES.
   Any contract entered into by the city, with an individual owner, a firm,
private corporation, association or political subdivision, for outside aid or
mutual aid for fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner,
firm, private corporation, association or political subdivision for such
service, equipment or personnel in an amount reached through negotiation by the
parties.
(Prior Code, § 6-2A-2)
§ 33.37 DISTANCE LIMITATIONS.
   The Fire Department is authorized to answer all calls outside the city
within a reasonable distance of the city limits if first approved by the Fire
Chief on duty. The Fire Chief shall determine that the equipment and personnel
to be dispatched for such calls are not needed for other purposes within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6-2A-3)
§ 33.38 SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY.
   All firefighters attending and serving at fires or doing fire prevention
work outside the corporate limits of the city, as herein provided, shall be
considered as serving in their regular line of duty as fully as if they were
serving within the corporate limits of the city. The firefighters shall be
entitled to all the benefits of any Fire Pension and Relief Fund in the same
manner as if the firefighting or fire prevention work was being done within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-2A-4)
§ 33.39 AGENT OF STATE.
   The Fire Department, when answering any fire alarm or call or performing any
fire prevention services outside the corporate limits of the city, shall be
considered an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone in a governmental
capacity, and the city shall not be liable in damages for any act of
commission, omission or negligence while answering or returning from any fire,
or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by virtue of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-2A-5)
§ 33.40 FEES FOR FIRE CALLS.
   The charges for fire calls shall be as specified in the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 6-2A-6)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
Section
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Duties of Department
   
34.03   Director
   
34.04   Emergency powers
§ 34.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to create an emergency management department
for the city to be prepared for and to function in the event of emergencies
endangering the lives and property of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 34.02 DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.
   The duty of the Emergency Management Department shall be the protection of
the lives and health of the citizens of the city and the property and property
rights, both private and public, and to perform all functions necessary and
incidental thereto.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 34.03 DIRECTOR.
   (A)   City Administrator serve as; duties. The department is headed by a
director. The City Administrator shall function as the Emergency Management
Director. The Director of the Department shall be the administrative head of
the Department and shall be responsible for carrying out the emergency
management program of the city in coordination with the City Council. He or she
shall have such further duties and responsibilities to coordinate with all
emergency services agencies of other governmental units, including the state
and federal governments.
   (B)   Deputy Director. The Mayor or Director, when empowered by the Mayor,
may designate some person as Deputy Director and shall prescribe the duties of
the Deputy, from time to time, as necessary for the carrying out of the
emergency management program of the city. The Deputy shall perform all duties
of the Director upon the death, disability or illness, or separation from
service of the Director. In addition to the foregoing duties, the Deputy shall
render such aid or assistance and perform such duties under the emergency
management program of the city as may be required by the Director.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-3) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 7-1-2002)
§ 34.04 EMERGENCY POWERS.
   (A)   In the event of an enemy caused emergency or emergency resulting from
natural causes, the Director, upon the signing by the Mayor of a disaster
emergency proclamation, shall assume the duties of incident commander, and
shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations
relating to emergency management and, if necessary, to take control of
transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine and
public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. The
incident commander shall have the authority to appoint personnel to the
emergency command structure as outlined in the city’s emergency operations
plan. He or she shall be responsible for coordination with other governmental
agencies and emergency management services.
   (B)   The Director and other members of the Department herein shall have the
power and authority to enforce the laws of the state and ordinances of the city
during the period of the emergency, and shall at such time have the further
power to make arrests for violations of such laws or ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-4) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 7-1-2002)
CHAPTER 35: POLICIES
Section
Personnel Policies
   
35.01   Social Security
   
35.02   Employee retirement system
   
35.03   Firefighters pension and retirement system
   
35.04   Police pension and retirement system
   
35.05   Morale and productivity incentive policy
City Records
   
35.20   Custodians of records
   
35.21   Requests for records
   
35.22   Procedures
   
35.23   Fees
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 35.01 SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   Declaration of policy. It is declared to be the policy of the city to
extend, at the earliest date, to the employees and officials thereof, not
excluded by law or this section, and whether employed in connection with a
governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of federal old
age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act,
being Pub. Law No. 734-271, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this
policy, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations.
   (B)   Agreement with state. The Mayor is authorized and directed to execute
all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the State Department of
Human Services as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and
officials as provided in division (A) above.
   (C)   Withholdings. Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and
officials for the purpose provided in division (A) above are authorized to be
made in the amounts and at such administration and government times as may be
required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid
to the state or federal agency designated by the laws or regulations.
   (D)   Contributions. There shall be appropriated from available funds such
amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations for employer contributions, which shall be paid to the state or
federal agency designated by said laws or regulations.
   (E)   Records and reports. The city shall keep such records and make such
reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
   (F)   Exclusions.
      (1)   There is excluded from this section any authority to make any
agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered
or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement
system for any employee or official of the city.
      (2)   There is excluded from this section any authority to make an
agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official,
compensation for which is on a fee basis or any position or any employee or
official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-1)
§ 35.02 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   System established; purpose. Pursuant to the authority conferred by
the laws of the state, and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and
meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public
efficiency, there is authorized created, established and approved and adopted;
effective as of January 1, 2025, the amended and restated plan designated
“Employee Retirement System of the City of New Cordell, Oklahoma, Defined
Benefit Plan” (hereinafter called system).
   (B)   Fund. A fund is provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the
persons entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund
shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city. Such
fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar
funds of other incorporated cities, towns and municipal trusts in the state as
a part of the State Municipal Retirement Fund in accordance with the trust
agreement of the State Municipal Retirement Fund, a public trust. The city
shall hold such contributions in the form received, and, from time to time, pay
over and transfer the same to the State Municipal Retirement Fund, as duly
authorized and directed by the Board of Trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal
and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is
made to the County Excise Board.
   (C)   Appropriations. The city is authorized to incur the necessary expenses
for the establishment, operation and administration of the system, and to
appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is authorized to
appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee
contributions to maintain the system and the fund in accordance with the
provisions of the defined benefit plan. Any appropriation so made to maintain
the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for the
payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration to be transferred
to the trustees of the State Municipal Retirement Fund for such purposes and
shall be paid into the fund when available, to be duly transferred to the State
Municipal Retirement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-2) (Ord. 2010-01, passed 11-15-2010; Ord. 2019-13, passed 1-
18-2019; Ord. 2022-1, passed 3-21-2022; Ord. 2024-03, passed 11-18-2024)
§ 35.03 FIREFIGHTERS PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   System created; purpose; city policy. There is created, for the
purpose of providing pension retirement allowance and other benefits for
firefighters of the city, a firefighters pension and retirement system. It is
declared to be the official policy of the city to participate in the pension
system as provided by state law.
   (B)   State regulations adopted. The firefighters pension and retirement
system, as established by 11 O.S. §§ 49-100.1 et seq., is adopted by reference.
   (C)   Board of Trustees. The local board of trustees of the firefighters
pension and retirement system, servicing the firefighters of the city, shall be
constituted as provided by state law and shall have the powers and duties
prescribed thereby.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-3)
§ 35.04 POLICE PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   System created; purpose; city policy. There may be created, for the
purpose of providing pension retirement allowance and other benefits for police
officers of the city, a police pension and retirement system. It is declared to
be the official policy of the city to participate in the pension system as
provided by state law.
   (B)   State regulations adopted. The police pension and retirement system,
as established by 11 O.S. §§ 50-101 et seq., is adopted by reference.
   (C)   Board of Trustees. The local board of trustees of the police pension
and retirement system, servicing the police officers of the city, shall be
constituted as provided by state law and shall have the powers and duties
prescribed thereby.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-4)
§ 35.05 MORALE AND PRODUCTIVITY INCENTIVE POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a policy that
enables the city to increase employee morale, encourage exemplary performance
and support overall productivity within the municipal workforce.
   (B)   Authorization of incentives. Subject to the annual appropriation of
funds within the General Fund under a designated line item titled “Morale and
Productivity Incentives”, the Mayor or City Administrator is authorized to
provide non-salary incentives to individual employees or groups of employees in
recognition of:
      (1)   Exemplary job performance;
      (2)   Innovation or cost-saving contributions;
      (3)   Noteworthy attendance or teamwork;
      (4)   Acts above and beyond normal duties; and
      (5)   Special projects or successful event execution.
   (C)   Allowable incentives. Incentives may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Certificates, plaques or commendations;
      (2)   Gift cards or small items of personal property;
      (3)   Meals or refreshments at city-hosted recognition events; and
      (4)   Monetary awards not to exceed thresholds approved in the city’s
adopted budget.
   (D)   Limitation of funds. Incentives shall not be granted beyond the
amounts specifically appropriated by the City Council. No employee shall be
entitled to a reward under this section as a matter of right.
   (E)   Compliance with law. This section shall be implemented in accordance
with all applicable provisions of the Oklahoma Constitution and statutes, and
shall not be construed to authorize any unlawful expenditure of public funds.
(Ord. 2025-01, passed 4-28-2025)
CITY RECORDS
§ 35.20 CUSTODIANS OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Official custodian; Clerk serve as. The City Clerk is appointed as
official custodian for purposes of the Oklahoma Open Records Act, 51 O.S. §§
24A.1 et seq., and is charged with responsibility for compliance with that act
with respect to all public records kept and maintained in the City Clerk’s
office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this chapter.
   (B)   Additional records custodians.
      (1)   Designation. The official custodian appointed in division (A) above
is authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as
records custodian. The records custodians shall have such duties and powers as
are set out in the Oklahoma Open Records Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq.
      (2)   Register kept. Whenever the official custodian shall appoint
another person as a records custodian, such designation shall be maintained in
a register kept by the City Clerk.
   (C)   Duties of custodians. All city officials and employees appointed or
designated under this chapter shall:
      (1)   Protect public records from damage and disorganization;
      (2)   Prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the
city;
      (3)   Provide assistance and information upon request;
      (4)   Ensure efficient and timely action and response to all applications
for inspection of public records; and
      (5)   Carry out the procedures adopted by the city for inspecting and
copying open public records.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-1)
§ 35.21 REQUESTS FOR RECORDS.
   (A)   All members of the public, in seeking access to or copies of a public
record in accordance with the provisions of the Oklahoma Open Records Act,
being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq., shall address their requests to the custodian
charged with responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be
inspected or copied.
   (B)   Whenever any city official or employee appointed or designated as a
custodian under this chapter is presented with a request for access to or copy
of a public record, which record the custodian does not have in his or her
possession and which he or she has not been given responsibility to keep and
maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. The
person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian the request
should be addressed, if such is known by the custodian receiving the request.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-2)
§ 35.22 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public
records. The following procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open
public records are adopted and shall be applied by the official custodian and
records custodians.
      (1)   Consistent with the policy, duties and procedures established by
the Oklahoma Open Records Act, being 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq., records
custodians shall provide full access and assistance in a timely and efficient
manner to persons who request access to open public records.
      (2)   Records custodians shall protect the integrity and organization of
public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected
and copied.
      (3)   Records custodians may prevent excessive disruptions of essential
functions and provide the record at the earliest possible time.
      (4)   All inspections and copying of open public records shall be
performed by or under the supervision of the records custodian responsible for
such records.
      (5)   All persons requesting the inspection of or a copy of open public
records shall make such request in writing prior to the request being honored;
except that no form shall be required for requests made for records which have
been reproduced for free public distribution.
      (6)   All records inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the
person requesting a record. The records custodian may demand reasonable
identification of any person requesting a record.
      (7)   Any fees for records inspection or for copies are due at the time
the records or copies thereof are provided to the requester, unless the records
custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made.
Fees are to be paid to the records custodian or City Clerk.
      (8)   The records custodian or City Clerk shall demand full or partial
prepayment of fees whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the amount set
out in §
35.23(B).
      (9)   No records search or copying fee shall be assessed against officers
or employees of the city who make requests which are reasonably necessary to
the performance of their official duties.
      (10)   Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all
regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours.
      (11)   Removal of open public records from the office where kept and
maintained, for purposes of inspection or the making of copies, shall not be
permitted.
      (12)   The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying
procedures, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the records
custodian.
   (B)   Procedures regarding inspection of open public records. The following
procedures regarding inspection of open public records are adopted and shall be
applied by every official custodian and records custodian.
      (1)   Records custodians shall handle all inspection requests in
accordance with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to
assist persons requesting inspection of open public records.
      (2)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
record. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
records custodian and presented to the records custodian.
      (3)   A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the
record sought. In instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient
information to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such
identification.
      (4)   The records custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection
request, forward a copy of the denial to the Mayor.
   (C)   Procedures regarding copies of open public records. The following
procedures apply regarding copies of records.
      (1)   Records custodians shall handle all copy requests in accordance
with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons
requesting copies of open public records.
      (2)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
copies. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
records custodian.
      (3)   Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it
is the judgment of the records custodian that any available means of
mechanically reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to such
records.
      (4)   No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record
requested have been prepared for free public distribution, or when the records
custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the
cost of providing a copy without charge.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-3)
§ 35.23 FEES.
   (A)   Fees established.
      (1)   Inspections. Where a request has been made for the inspection of an
open public record, no fee shall be charged.
      (2)   Copies.
         (a)   A fee per page as set by the Council by motion or resolution
shall be charged for photocopying an open public record; such fee to cover the
cost of labor, materials and equipment.
         (b)   For copying any open public record which cannot be reproduced by
photocopying, such as a computer printout or a blueprint, the requester shall
be charged the actual cost to the city, including the cost of labor, materials
and equipment.
      (3)   Search. A search fee shall be charged a requester who is using the
record solely for a commercial purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to
the city of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials and
equipment.
   (B)   Prepayment of fees. A records custodian may demand prepayment of a fee
whenever the estimated amount exceeds $20. The prepayment amount shall be an
estimate of the cost of copying, mechanical reproduction or searching for the
record. Any overage or underage in the prepayment amount shall be settled prior
to producing the requested record or delivering the copy or mechanical
reproduction of the record.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-4)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
36.001   Appropriations
   
36.002   Deposit of funds
   
36.003   Investment of funds
Purchases and Sales
   
36.015   Intent
   
36.016   Definitions
   
36.017   Purchasing procedure
   
36.018   Disbursements
   
36.019   Exemptions from competitive bidding purchases
   
36.020   Inventory and inventory control
   
36.021   Compliance with provisions; penalties
Unclaimed Personal Property or Money or Legal Tender
   
36.035   Authority to dispose of property
   
36.036   Application for sale of property
   
36.037   Property valued at more than $250; notice requirements
   
36.038   Disposal of unclaimed property
   
36.039   Money or legal tender
   
36.040   Specific properties regulated
Fees, Rates and Charges
   
36.055   Schedule of fees, rates and charges
   
36.056   911 emergency service fee
   
36.057   Telephone exchange fee and service charge
   
36.058   Waiver of certain fees and charges for residential construction
Automatic Annual Utility Rate Increase
   
36.070   Automatic annual utility rate increase
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.001 APPROPRIATIONS.
   All monies, however derived, belonging to the city shall only be
appropriated for such objects and defraying such expenses as accrue or
necessarily arise in the exercise of powers granted by law and the ordinances
of the city. No appropriation shall be made without an order to that effect
entered upon a proper book to be kept for that purpose by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 36.002 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Depositories designated. All banks and financial institutions as are
designated by the City Council shall be designated as depositories for the
funds of the city.
   (B)   Treasurer and Clerk duties. The City Treasurer shall deposit daily all
public funds received by him or her in these depositories. Funds may be
transferred from one depository to another upon direction of the Clerk.
   (C)   Securing deposits. The deposits of the city shall be secured as
provided for in the security for Local Public Deposits Act, 62 O.S. §§ 517.1 et
seq.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 36.003 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
    The City Clerk or any other person authorized to invest public monies shall
invest the same in those investments authorized by the City Council or
authorized by state law in a manner authorized by either or both such Council
and statutes.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)
PURCHASES AND SALES
§ 36.015 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to establish and to implement procedures to
acquire and to dispose of property for the city. It is the intent of this
chapter that the procedures herein established conform to state law, creditable
accounting standards and sound management practice. Although certain
responsibilities are assigned to various officers and employees, it is
anticipated that information technologies and accounting software will perform
and record most of the actual transactions, and that these technologies will be
utilized to the fullest extent feasible to expedite the implementation of the
processes herein described. The use of these technologies is specifically
authorized and encouraged to the extent their application does not compromise
the budget and control features required by law and by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 36.016 DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to definitions provided in applicable state law and as generally
understood in the accounting profession, for the purposes of this chapter, the
following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section.
   APPROPRIATION. An amount authorized by the City Council in a budget or
budget amendment, duly adopted or by the Mayor in a budget adjustment, to be
expended for a designated purpose (object) by or in support of a designated
unit, subdivision or function (department).
   BUDGET ADJUSTMENT. A redistribution, authorized by the Mayor, of
appropriations among departments within a fund or among objects within a
department.
   BUDGET AMENDMENT. Any revision, approved by the City Council in accordance
with state law, of appropriations at any level of the budget.
   BUDGET CONTROL OFFICER. The officer or employee charged with keeping the
appropriation and expenditure records. The accounts payable officer or employee
is the BUDGET CONTROL OFFICER. If no accounts payable officer or employee is
assigned or designated, the Treasurer is the BUDGET CONTROL OFFICER.
   CITY. The City of New Cordell, the New Cordell Utilities Authority, the New
Cordell Development and Redevelopment Authority and any other agency or entity
whose governing board is identical to the governing board (City Council) of the
City of New Cordell.
   COMPETITIVE BIDDING. Any equitable procedure approved by the City Treasurer
by which adequate public notice is given and means are provided to accept
offers from multiple individuals or entities, and includes sealed bidding, open
bidding and for sales, public auctions of any type, and online auctions (such
as eBay).
   COUNCIL, MAYOR, CLERK and TREASURER. Respectively, the Council, the Mayor,
the Clerk and the Treasurer of the city and, also respectively, the governing
board, the Chair, the Secretary (or Secretary/Treasurer) and the Treasurer (or
Secretary/Treasurer) of any agency or entity described in the definition of
“city” in this section, or their successors as defined by law or ordinance, or
such person(s) as they may in writing direct to act in their behalf.
   EXPENDITURE. Any use of funds to acquire goods, services or capital. The
term specifically excludes the disbursement of funds held on deposit or in
agency and not considered “revenue” (such as meter deposits, sales taxes
collected, income taxes withheld, debts collected for third parties and the
like). An EXPENDITURE may be executed (a disbursement made) by cash, by credit
or debit card, by check or warrant, by electronic funds transfer or by such
other method(s) as the Treasurer may approve. A single EXPENDITURE is the total
of funds used to purchase all goods, services and/or capital from a single
vendor in a single transaction.
   PURCHASE. Any transaction pledging, promising or requiring an expenditure of
city funds or other exchange of value (except goodwill).
   PURCHASE ORDER. A physical, electronic or virtual document authorizing a
purchase and subsequent expenditure of funds, such authorization being
evidenced by signature, seal or sign of the budget control officer and the
purchasing authority, and specifying in sufficient detail the goods, materials
or services to be purchased, the amount to be expended, the vendor to be paid
and the appropriation account(s) to be charged.
   PURCHASING AUTHORITY. The officer or employee authorized to approve purchase
orders. The Mayor is the PURCHASING AUTHORITY.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 36.017 PURCHASING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Petty cash accounts. Subject to the provisions of state law, and on
the request of the Treasurer, the Council may, by resolution separately adopted
for each budget year, establish one or more petty cash accounts. The resolution
shall specify the purpose of each account and the amount of the imprest balance
(which balance shall in no case exceed $500). Purchases, the aggregate amount
of which do not exceed $25, may be paid (or reimbursed) from petty cash
accounts when supported by receipts or other sufficient evidence as the
Treasurer may determine. Periodically, as needed, the Treasurer shall prepare a
purchase order to reimburse the petty cash account for purchases made
therefrom.
   (B)   Regular purchase orders. Purchases shall not be made without there
first being a properly executed purchase order authorizing the purchase. The
purchase order shall be prepared by the person requesting the purchase and
delivered to the budget control officer. The budget control officer shall
determine that the available appropriation in each account to be charged is
sufficient to cover the requested expenditure, shall attest to that fact in
writing and shall immediately encumber the required funds. (If the available
appropriation is insufficient to cover the requested expenditure, the budget
control officer shall not approve the purchase order until additional
appropriations are authorized as budget amendments or as budget adjustments.)
Once approved by the budget control officer, the purchase order shall be
delivered to the purchasing authority for approval. If the purchasing authority
approves the purchase order, the purchase may be executed. If not, the purchase
order shall be returned to the budget control officer who shall disencumber the
funds. Regular purchase orders, the aggregate amount of which exceeds $7,500,
shall not be approved by the purchasing authority unless and until first
approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Payroll purchase orders. Each actual or authorized officer or employee
of the city who is scheduled to receive compensation shall be assigned to a
budgeted position associated with an object level appropriation account for
personnel services. At the beginning of the fiscal year, the budget control
officer and the purchasing authority shall execute purchase orders for each
budgeted position and shall encumber the entire appropriation for each
position. If positions are or become vacant, the budget control officer shall
periodically adjust the appropriation account records to disencumber (and show
as available) such amounts as would have been disbursed had the position been
occupied.
   (D)   Contract purchase orders. For any contract requiring the expenditure
of city funds, at the time the contract is entered into, and at the beginning
of each subsequent fiscal year during which the contract remains active or in
force, the budget control officer and the purchasing authority shall execute a
purchase order for that contract, and shall encumber the entire actual or
estimated amount due under the contract during that fiscal year. Funds to be
expended pursuant to a contract may be charged to an appropriation account
established for that sole purpose, may be charged (along with funds expended
pursuant to other contracts) to a general “contracts” appropriation account or
may be subsumed under or distributed for charging to one or more other
appropriation accounts, as the budget control officer and the purchasing
authority may deem best.
   (E)   Purchase orders not required. A purchase order shall not be required
for individual purchases of fuel purchased through an established fueling
arrangement, nor for the arrangement itself; for the purchase of wholesale
power by the city or the use of retail power or other energy sources by city
facilities; for ongoing telecommunications services (telephones, internet
service and the like); for other public utilities (water, sewer, waste
collection) provided to city facilities; for the payment of debt service
(principal or interest) when the incurring of the debt has been previously
approved by Council; for payment of credit or revolving credit accounts when
the actual purchases charged to the credit or draw accounts were approved by
purchase order; for payments required by law or court order; or for the
disbursement of “pass through” funds (withholding taxes, meter deposits and the
like).
   (F)   Evidence of receipt. The person receiving the goods or services on
behalf of the city shall certify that goods and services were received in good
condition, as ordered, and in the amount and for the cost specified, and shall
so signify by signature or initials on the invoice, packing slip, receipt or
other document. Such certification shall be delivered to the budget control
officer who shall then make a request to the Treasurer that payment be made.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 2007-04, passed 2-
20-2007)
§ 36.018 DISBURSEMENTS.
   The Treasurer shall inspect all requests for payment and, for those that
comply with the procedure herein described, shall direct the preparation and
execution of all disbursements by appropriate instruments or means. Upon
disbursement (payment or partial payment), the budget control officer shall
enter appropriate adjustments to the appropriation account records. At least
monthly, the Treasurer shall prepare an itemized list of claims paid for
presentation to the Council for its information and review.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 36.019 EXEMPTIONS FROM COMPETITIVE BIDDING PURCHASES.
   All purchases shall be competitively bid except:
   (A)   Personnel and all employment arrangements;
   (B)   Contracts for professional services (engineering, architectural,
medical, legal, consulting and the like);
   (C)   Supplies, materials, equipment or services where the cost does not
exceed $7,500 in a single transaction or contract;
   (D)   Supplies, materials, equipment or services which can be furnished only
by a single dealer or sole source vendor, or which have a uniform price
wherever bought, or which are purchased from another unit of government at a
price deemed below that obtainable from private dealers, or which are purchased
through state contracts or other governmental purchasing arrangements, or which
are purchased at a price below that available through state contracts or other
governmental purchasing arrangements; and
   (E)   Commodities or services purchased from a public utility at a price or
rate determined by the State Corporation Commission, the Federal Communications
Commission or other regulatory agency, or similar energy, utility,
telecommunications commodities or services whose rates or tariffs are published
and not subject to negotiation.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 36.020 INVENTORY AND INVENTORY CONTROL.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Mayor to take and to keep current an
inventory of all city property, and to develop a system for maintaining an
inventory and inventory control for the parts, supplies and equipment routinely
used by city offices and departments. Sufficient quantities should be
maintained on hand to prevent the need for incidental or “spot” buying of
routine items. Surplus property in inventory, including equipment and real
estate, shall be removed from inventory and sold, discarded or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with the following.
   (A)   The Mayor may trade, sell at a price, offer for bid or donate for
charitable use any single item of city property, or any lot of items of city
property, the value of which, competently established or estimated, does not
exceed $1,000.
   (B)   The Council may authorize the Mayor to trade, to sell at a price, to
offer for bid or to donate for charitable use any single item of city property,
or any lot of items of city property, the value of which, competently
established or estimated, exceeds $1,000.
   (C)   Any single item of city property, or any lot of items of city
property, the value of which, competently established or estimated, exceeds
$2,500 shall be offered for sale by competitive bidding, or may instead be sold
at a price or traded at a value approved by Council, which price or value shall
not be less than the price paid by the city to acquire it.
   (D)   The Mayor may consider previous unsuccessful attempts to sell an item
as basis to revalue it, and may then attempt to dispose of the item at that
lesser value, or may declare it to have no significant value. Items determined
to have no significant value may be disposed of as the Mayor shall determine.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 36.021 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; PENALTIES.
   No expenditures shall be authorized, no purchases shall be made and no funds
shall be disbursed, except as shall conform to the requirements of this
chapter. No sale or disposition of city property shall be made except as shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter. Any person making or authorizing
any nonconforming purchase, disbursement or sale shall be personally liable for
the full amount thereof, may be subject to civil or criminal penalties and may
be subject to forfeiture of elective or appointive office and/or termination of
employment.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-7) (Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-1-2004)
UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY OR MONEY OR LEGAL TENDER
§ 36.035 AUTHORITY TO DISPOSE OF PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police is authorized to dispose of personal property or money
or legal tender as provided in this chapter which has come into the possession
of the Chief in any manner if:
   (A)   The owner of the personal property or money or legal tender is unknown
or has not claimed the property;
   (B)   The property or money or legal tender has been in the custody of the
Chief of Police for at least 90 days; and
   (C)   The property or money or legal tender or any part thereof is no longer
needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any
litigation.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 36.036 APPLICATION FOR SALE OF PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police shall file an application in the district court
requesting the authority of the court to conduct a sale of the personal
property which has a fair market value of more than its face value. The Chief
of Police shall attach to the application a list describing the property,
including any identifying numbers and marks, the date the property came into
the possession of the Chief and the name of the owner and the person in last
possession, if different, and the address of the person, if known. The court
shall set the application for hearing not less than ten days nor more than 20
days after filing of the application.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2)
§ 36.037 PROPERTY VALUED AT MORE THAN $250; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of more
than $250, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, written notice
of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to each
owner at the address as listed in the application. If the owner of any property
with an actual or apparent value exceeding $500 is unable to be served written
notice by first class mail, notice shall be provided by one publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice shall contain a
brief description of the property of the owner and the place and date of the
hearing. The notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the posting of
municipal notices, and at two other public places in the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3)
§ 36.038 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the
hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to
dispose of the property as follows:
      (1)   Donate the property having value of less than $500 to a not for
profit corporation as defined in 18 O.S. for use by needy families;
      (2)   Sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at
least five days’ notice of the sale has been published;
      (3)   Transfer the property to a third-party agent under contract with
the City Council for sale by internet or other electronic means, regardless of
whether the sale structure or distribution site is within the state; or
      (4)   By any other means as determined appropriate by the court,
including, but not limited to, destruction.
   (B)   Regardless of the means of disposition, the Chief of Police shall make
a return of the donation or sale, and the order of the court confirming the
donation or sale shall vest title to the property in the recipient or
purchaser. After payment of court costs and other expenses, the remainder of
money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the
Municipal General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4)
§ 36.039 MONEY OR LEGAL TENDER.
   All money or legal tender which has come into the possession of the Chief of
Police, pursuant to the circumstances provided in §
36.035, shall be transferred by the Chief of Police to the City Clerk for
deposit in the Municipal General Fund. Prior to any transfer, the Chief of
Police shall file an application in the district court requesting the court to
enter an order authorizing the Chief of Police to transfer the money for
deposit in the Municipal General Fund. The application shall describe the money
or legal tender, the date the same came into the possession of the Chief of
Police and the name of the owner and the address of the owner, if known. Upon
filing the application which may be joined with an application as described in
§
36.036, a hearing shall be set not less than ten days nor more than 20 days
from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as
provided in §
36.037. The notice shall state that, upon failure of anyone to appear to prove
ownership to the money or legal tender, the court shall order the same to be
deposited in the Municipal General Fund. The notice may be combined with a
notice to sell personal property as provided in §
36.036. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to the money or legal
tender at the hearing, the court shall order the same to be transferred to the
Municipal General Fund as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5)
§ 36.040 SPECIFIC PROPERTIES REGULATED.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any dangerous or
deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives or any property of any
kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by law.
   (B)   By order of the trial court, any property filed as an exhibit or held
by the city shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of pursuant to the
conditions prescribed in the order.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-6)
FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
§ 36.055 SCHEDULE OF FEES, RATES AND CHARGES.
   There is created a schedule of fees and charges which shall contain those
fees and charges for the various licenses, permits and other fees and charges
as designated by the City Council. Where a fee or charge is authorized to be
collected by the city in any ordinance, the amount of the fee or charge shall
be set by resolution or motion and entered into the schedule of fees and
charges. The schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk to
whom all fees and charges shall be paid unless otherwise provided. A copy may
be obtained upon payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and
charges. The schedule of fees and charges created shall also be known and may
be cited as “the fee schedule”.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)
§ 36.056 911 EMERGENCY SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   Fee established. A service fee or tax for 911 emergency telephone
service is established at the rate of 5% of the amount billed to a service user
for the tariff charges for exchange telephone service or its equivalent within
the city. Such fee or tax to be imposed shall remain as such until a new vote
of the electors of the city is conducted as authorized by law. Collection of
the emergency telephone service fee shall begin June 1, 1995.
   (B)   Administration. The City Council is authorized to designate by
resolution an appropriate agency or agencies to administer and collect the fee
for 911 emergency telephone service.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-2)
§ 36.057 TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   Fee and charge established. There is levied an annual inspection fee
and service charge upon each and every person operating a telephone exchange in
the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered
incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation
and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone
company in the city.
   (B)   Amount. The amount of the inspection fee and service charge shall be
equal to 2% of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone
transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city.
   (C)   Due date; disposition of monies. The inspection fee and charge shall
be due and payable to the city on or before March 1 of each year and shall be
paid into and appropriated and expended from the General Revenue Fund of the
city.
   (D)   Charge in lieu of other license tax. During continued substantial
compliance with the terms of this section by the owner of any telephone
exchange, the charge levied by this section shall be and continue to be in lieu
of all concessions; charges; excise, franchise, license, privilege and permit
fees or taxes or assessments except ad valorem taxes. This section is not
intended to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the city is
permitted to use the underground conduit, duct space or pole contracts of the
company for the fire alarm and police call systems of the city, or either of
them.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-3)
§ 36.058 WAIVER OF CERTAIN FEES AND CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Waivers established.
      (1)   Building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permit fees and water
and sewer tap charges will be waived on any single-family home constructed
within the corporate limits with a value between $40,000 and $70,000.
      (2)   One-half of the building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical
permit fees and water and sewer tap charges will be waived on any single-family
home constructed within the corporate limits with a value between $70,001 and
$99,999.
      (3)   Building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permit fees and water
and sewer tap charges will be waived on any state or federally assisted/funded
single- or multi-family home constructed within the corporate limits that are
leased or rented to families that meet state or federal income limits as set
for the county.
   (B)   Submission of information required. In order to qualify for the
waivers set out in division (A) above, the property owner, builder or developer
must submit the following to the city:
      (1)   One set of housing plans, drawings and the like (these may be
returned upon completion);
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of property owner, builder or
developer;
      (3)   Legal description and street address of the proposed development
site; and
      (4)   Commitment by the property owner, builder or developer to abide by
all housing and other appropriate codes of the city.
   (C)   Interpretation. Nothing in this section is to be construed as waiving
the requirement to obtain all needed building related permits or inspections.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-4) (Ord. 2001-08, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2002-01, passed 1-
7-2002)
AUTOMATIC ANNUAL UTILITY RATE INCREASE
§ 36.070 AUTOMATIC ANNUAL UTILITY RATE INCREASE.
   (A)   The utility rates for the utilities provided for and charged by the
city shall be automatically increased annually by 3% above the rate charged the
previous year without a vote or further action of the City Council. The
utilities subject to the automatic annual rate increase shall be the electric
rates, sewer rates, water rates and garbage rates. The annual increase shall be
effective for the first time on March 1, 2020 and increase each year thereafter
on February 1.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Council from increasing
the utility rates by a percentage greater than 3% should the City Council
determine by a majority vote of the Council that a greater percentage is needed
to meet the needs of the city and its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-1) (Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-21-2020)
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION
Section
Sales Tax
   
37.001   Short title
   
37.002   Definitions
   
37.003   Tax imposed; rate; purpose
   
37.004   Subsisting state permits
   
37.005   Classification of taxpayers
   
37.006   Sales subject to tax; exemptions
   
37.007   Tax due date
   
37.008   Payment of tax; brackets
   
37.009   Collection by vendors
   
37.010   Returns, remittances and discounts
   
37.011   Delinquencies; interest and penalties
   
37.012   Failure to file; fraudulent returns
   
37.013   Enforcement of payment
   
37.014   Refund of erroneous payments
   
37.015   Records confidential
   
37.016   Amendments
   
37.017   Provisions cumulative
Use Tax
   
37.030   Short title
   
37.031   Definitions
   
37.032   Tax imposed; subjects of taxation
   
37.033   Exemptions from tax
   
37.034   Purpose of revenues
   
37.035   Subsisting state permits
   
37.036   Classification of taxpayers
   
37.037   Tax due date
   
37.038   Collection of tax
   
37.039   Revoking permits
   
37.040   Remunerative deductions
   
37.041   Delinquencies; interest and penalties
   
37.042   Fraudulent returns
   
37.043   Enforcement of payment
   
37.044   Refund of erroneous payments
   
37.045   Records confidential
   
37.046   Provisions cumulative
Gas Utility Tax
   
37.060   Tax levied
   
37.061   Application of tax; exception
   
37.062   Due date; disposition of funds; interest on delinquent payments
   
37.063   Failure to pay tax
   
37.064   Tax constitutes lien
Cross-reference:
   Automatic annual utility rate increase, see §
36.070
SALES TAX
§ 37.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Sales Tax
Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-1)
§ 37.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1352 are adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The term TAX COLLECTOR, as used in this subchapter, shall mean the
department of the city or the official agency of the state duly designated
according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of
the tax herein levied.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-2)
§ 37.003 TAX IMPOSED; RATE; PURPOSE.
   (A)   There is levied an excise tax of 4% upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the State Sales Tax Code.
   (B)   It is declared to be the purpose of the revenues generated by the
first, second and third cent sales taxes levied herein to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city.
   (C)   It is declared to be the purpose of the revenues generated by the
fourth cent sales tax levied herein to provide for a limited-purpose tax fund,
known as the “Cordell Memorial Hospital Tax Fund”, to provide funds for the
operation and maintenance of Cordell Memorial Hospital. Monies in said account
shall be accumulated from year to year if not expended for the purpose provided
herein and shall be invested in accordance with the laws of the state, and the
charter of the city, and the interest which accrues in said fund shall be
retained by the fund. The monies in said fund shall be expended only as
accumulated and only for the limited purposes as set forth in this section.
Monies in the limited-purpose tax fund may only be appropriated for the
authorized purposes as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-3) (Ord. 2019-03, passed 6-17-2019; Ord. 2019-04, passed 9-
16-2019)
§ 37.004 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission, pursuant to the State Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-4)
§ 37.005 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Sales
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-5)
§ 37.006 SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS.
   The city sales tax shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds
of such sales as specified by state statutes, and exemptions from such taxes
shall be allowed pursuant to state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-6)
§ 37.007 TAX DUE DATE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall be due and payable at the time
and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under
the sales tax law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-7)
§ 37.008 PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the
sales tax law of the state.
   (B)   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be as the same is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the state sales tax.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-8)
§ 37.009 COLLECTION BY VENDORS.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor; and each and every vendor shall collect from the consumer or user the
full amount of the tax levied, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or
practicable to the average equivalent thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and, when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same
manner as other debts.
   (C)   No vendor shall willfully or intentionally fail, neglect or refuse to
collect the full amount of the tax levied; or willfully or intentionally fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this subchapter; or remit or
rebate to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever
means, all or any part of the tax herein levied; or make in any form of
advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he or she
is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an
adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 37.010 RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Sales Tax Code,
and remittances of the tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by the code for collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-10)
§ 37.011 DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Failure to pay tax. 68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this
subchapter. Interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts specified in the
state statute cited in this division (A) are levied and shall be applicable in
cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter.
The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this subchapter shall
cause such tax to be delinquent. If such delinquency continues for a period of
five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed
under this subchapter.
   (B)   Waiver. The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by
reason of a taxpayer’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as
applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220. To
accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said §
220 are adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-11)
§ 37.012 FAILURE TO FILE; FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Intentionally fail or refuse to make tax reports and remittances as
required under this subchapter; or
      (2)   Intentionally make false and fraudulent tax reports for the purpose
of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof due under this
subchapter.
   (B)   Any person required to collect and remit sales tax pursuant to the
State Sales Tax Code or this code, and engaging in any of the callings, trades,
avocations, professions, businesses or occupations for which a license is
required by the city, and applying for such license, must submit proof as a
condition precedent to issuing such license of a valid sales tax permit number
issued by the state.
   (C)   Any license issued by the city to any person engaging in any of the
callings, trades, avocations, businesses, professions or occupations for which
a license is required by this code may be suspended or revoked for failure to
maintain a lawful sales tax license or collect and remit sales tax if and as
required by the State Sales Tax Code or this code.
   (D)   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, any
violation of this section shall subject the offending taxpayer to the penalty
set forth in §
10.99. Each day of such violation shall be considered a separate offense and
charged separately.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 37.013 ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT.
   Taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall, at all times, constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-13)
§ 37.014 REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made
to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purposes of
this section, the applicable provisions of said § 227 are adopted by reference
and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-14)
§ 37.015 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same. The provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and all
subsections thereof, are adopted by reference and made fully effective and
applicable to the administration of the city sales tax as if herein set forth
in full.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-15)
§ 37.016 AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council, by ordinance duly enacted, is authorized to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this subchapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness; except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall
not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-16)
§ 37.017 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-17)
USE TAX
§ 37.030 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “City of New Cordell Use
Tax”.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-1)
§ 37.031 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the State Use Tax
Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the city government or the official agency
of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law,
to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
   TRANSACTION. Sale.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-2)
§ 37.032 TAX IMPOSED; SUBJECTS OF TAXATION.
   There is levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or
otherwise consuming within the city tangible personal property purchased or
brought into the city an excise tax on the storage, use or other consumption
within the city of such property at the same rate of taxation as that imposed
by the city on sales made within the city (sales tax) of the purchase price of
such property. Such use tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or
otherwise consuming within the city tangible personal property purchased or
brought into the city. The tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of
importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed
only to property purchased outside the state; provided that the tax levied
herein shall not be levied against tangible personal property intended solely
for use outside the city but which is stored in the city pending shipment
outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose
of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any
person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax
any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services;
provided that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have
been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such
goods or services.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-3) (Ord. 2006-05, passed 9-18-2006; Ord. 2019-14, passed
11-18-2019)
§ 37.033 EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX.
   Exemptions from the tax levied herein shall be allowed pursuant to state
statutes.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-4)
§ 37.034 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   It is declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide revenues for
the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any
and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the City Council for any
purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-5)
§ 37.035 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax
Commission, pursuant to the State Use Tax Code, are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-6)
§ 37.036 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Use Tax
Code.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-7)
§ 37.037 TAX DUE DATE.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the State Use
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-8)
§ 37.038 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within
and without the state, and making sales of tangible personal property from a
place of business outside this state for use in this city shall, at the time of
making such sales, collect the use tax levied by this subchapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form
prescribed by the Tax Commission if the Tax Commission shall, by regulation,
require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the Tax
Commission the name and address of all his or her agents operating in the city
and the location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or
other places of business in the city.
   (B)   The Tax Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize
the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in the city and by the out of state place of
business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within
and without this state and making sales of tangible personal property at such
out of state place of business for use in the city. Such retailer or vendor may
be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the Tax Commission
in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall
prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor
to collect the tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his or her
knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be canceled
when, at any time, the Tax Commission considers that such tax can more
effectively be collected from the person using such property in the city.
Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed
by delivery to the purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such
retailer’s or vendor’s vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common
carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
city sales tax at the point of delivery, and the tax shall be collected and
reported under the taxpayer’s sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-9)
§ 37.039 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the State Use Tax Code or any orders, rules or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided in 68
O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing above
provided, cancel the corporation’s license to do business in this state and
shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this subchapter, the State Use Tax Code or any orders, rules
or regulations of the Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-10)
§ 37.040 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Use Tax Code;
and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by the code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-11)
§ 37.041 DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Failure to pay tax. 68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this
subchapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as
herein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in
reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter. Provided that the
failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports
and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this subchapter shall
cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for
a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his or her claim to
any discount allowed under this subchapter.
   (B)   Waiver of interest and penalties. The interest or penalty or any
portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay
the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as
provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in the administration of the
state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this
division (B), the applicable provisions of said § 220 are adopted by reference
and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-12)
§ 37.042 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Each day of noncompliance with this subchapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-13)
§ 37.043 ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT.
   The taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-14)
§ 37.044 REFUND OF ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purpose of
this section, the applicable provisions of said § 227 are adopted by reference
and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-15)
§ 37.045 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and each
subsection thereof, are adopted by reference and made fully effective and
applicable to the administration of the city use tax as if herein set forth in
full.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-16)
§ 37.046 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
and all other taxing provisions of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-17)
GAS UTILITY TAX
§ 37.060 TAX LEVIED.
   There is levied and assessed an annual tax of 2% upon the gross receipts
from residential and commercial sales of gas in the city, which tax shall be in
lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the
city, all as provided by 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-1)
§ 37.061 APPLICATION OF TAX; EXCEPTION.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall, when levied, apply to all
persons, firms, associations or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing gas within the corporate limits of the city, except it shall not
apply to any person, firm, association or corporation operating under a valid
franchise from the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-2)
§ 37.062 DUE DATE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS; INTEREST ON DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall remain in effect until repealed
and shall be payable monthly on the fifteenth day of each month. The tax shall
be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the city. Amounts not paid when due
shall bear interest at the per annum rate established by the City Council until
paid.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-3)
§ 37.063 FAILURE TO PAY TAX.
   Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when
levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or
corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting the same,
including reasonable attorneys’ fees.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-4)
§ 37.064 TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   The tax imposed in this subchapter shall constitute a first and prior lien
on all the assets located within the city of any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of selling gas within the city limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-5)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SOLID WASTE
Cross-reference:
   Automatic annual utility rate increase, see §
36.070
   Gas utility tax, see §§
37.060 through
37.064
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Lease of Systems
   
50.01   Lease of utilities to public works authority
   
50.02   Rules of authority adopted
   
50.03   Identity theft protection
LEASE OF SYSTEMS
§ 50.01 LEASE OF UTILITIES TO PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   The city consents and agrees to the lease of the city’s water, electric and
sanitary sewer systems and facilities and all future additions thereto to the
city public works authority as authorized by statute, to be effective at the
time and upon the terms and conditions specified in a lease agreement and
operation and maintenance contract between the city and NCUA, prepared under
the direction of the City Council and filed in the office of the City Clerk on
December 5, 1988. The Mayor is authorized and directed, on behalf of the city,
to execute and deliver the lease of the city public works authority.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)
§ 50.02 RULES OF AUTHORITY ADOPTED.
   Rules and regulations adopted by the city public works authority are adopted
and incorporated herein by reference, applicable as if set out in full herein.
Any violation of the rules and regulations of the authority shall be punishable
as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-2)
§ 50.03 IDENTITY THEFT PROTECTION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 C.F.R. §
681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying
and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a
manner that will prevent identity theft.
   (B)   Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or
involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered
account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as
indicators of possible identity theft, and such red flags may include:
      (1)   Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies
or service providers;
      (2)   Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
         (a)   Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered
or forged;
         (b)   Identification on which the photograph or physical description
is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; and/or
         (c)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
information provided by the applicant or customer.
      (3)   Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address
change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include:
         (a)   Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with
external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor;
         (b)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of
birth; and
         (c)   The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal
identifying information on an application or in response to notification that
the application is incomplete.
      (4)   Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered
account. Examples of suspicious activity include:
         (a)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an
account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on
the account;
         (b)   An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is
used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of
usage and other relevant factors);
         (c)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as
undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with
the customer’s account;
         (d)   The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in
connection with a customer’s account; and
         (e)   The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement officer or
another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in
identity theft.
      (5)   Notice from customers, law enforcement officers, victims or other
reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to
covered accounts.
   (C)   Updating program.
      (1)   The City Council shall periodically review and, as deemed necessary
by the City Council, update the identity theft prevention program along with
any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to
the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity
theft.
      (2)   In so doing, the City Council shall consider the following factors
and exercise its discretion in amending the program:
         (a)   The city’s experiences with identity theft;
         (b)   Updates in methods of identity theft;
         (c)   Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and
mitigate identity theft;
         (d)   Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or
maintains; and
         (e)   Updates in service provider arrangements.
   (D)   Administration of program.
      (1)   The City Clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for
program implementation. The City Administrator is responsible for reviewing
reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and
with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary, in the opinion
of the City Administrator, to address changing identity theft risks and to
identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended
material changes to the program shall be submitted to the City Council for
consideration thereby.
      (2)   The City Clerk will report to the City Administrator, at least
annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address
material matters related to the program and evaluate issues, such as:
         (a)   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in
addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered
accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
         (b)   Service provider arrangements;
         (c)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
         (d)   Recommendations for material changes to the program.
      (3)   The City Clerk is responsible for providing training to all
employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account,
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity
theft prevention program. The City Clerk shall exercise his or her discretion
in determining the amount and substance of training necessary.
(Prior Code, § 9-1-3) (Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-27-2009)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water Use Restrictions
   
51.01   Lease of utilities to public works authority
   
51.02   Determination of emergency
WATER USE RESTRICTIONS
§ 51.01 LEASE OF UTILITIES TO PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY.
   Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to
inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of
equipment or materials, the Mayor is authorized to restrict or prohibit the use
of water from the city water system.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-1)
§ 51.02 DETERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   An emergency exists whenever the Mayor reasonably determines that the city
water system is unable to or will, within 60 days, become unable to supply the
full commercial and domestic needs of the users thereof, including adequate
fire protection.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-2)
CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Duty to request service
   
52.03   Container requirements
   
52.04   Tree limbs and debris
   
52.05   Collection and disposal
   
52.06   Unlawful use of containers
   
52.07   City landfill
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible waste, except sewage and body wastes, including all
meat, vegetable and fruit refuse and carcasses of small animals and fowl from
any premises within the city.
   PREMISES. Land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft or parts
thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
   RUBBISH. Tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs, leaves and similar materials
from any premises within the city.
   RUBBLE. Brushwood, cardboard boxes and other bulky earthen, wooden or metal
refuselike materials, longer, larger or heavier than refuse.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-1)
§ 52.02 DUTY TO REQUEST SERVICE.
   It is the duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy
of any premises in the city to notify the city at the beginning of such
occupancy and request, accept and use the refuse collection service of the
city. Failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of any premises to make
such request shall not prevent nor impair or impede the city from adding that
person’s name to the refuse collection records and providing such service and
otherwise enforcing, by appropriate action, the regulatory measures herein
prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-2) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Container required. It is the duty of every person owning, managing,
operating, leasing, occupying or renting any premises or any place where refuse
accumulates to provide, and at all times maintain, in good order and repair, on
the premises, a portable container or containers for refuse.
   (B)   Specifications.
      (1)   The container shall be rodentproof and flyproof and be of
sufficient capacity and in sufficient numbers to accommodate and securely keep
all of the refuse that may accumulate between collections except where approved
type bulk containers are in use.
      (2)   Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting any premises shall provide a metal or other satisfactory weatherproof
container for the disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish in the city. The
container shall be a polycart or such other container approved by the city or
its contractor.
   (C)   Maintenance required. All containers shall be kept clean and free from
accumulation of any substance remaining attached to the inside of the container
which would attract flies, mosquitoes or any other insects.
   (D)   Use of bulk containers. All refuse shall be transported to and emptied
into the bulk containers where they are provided.
   (E)   Commercial and institutional establishments. Commercial and
institutional establishments shall use containers as are necessary to keep the
premises in a sanitary condition and such as may be approved by the City
Council.
   (F)   Placement at curb. The containers shall be placed at curbside for
collection on the regular collection days in a location mutually convenient to
the resident and the refuse collector.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-3) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 TREE LIMBS AND DEBRIS.
   Tree limbs shall be cut into lengths not exceeding three and one-half feet
prior to pick up by the city. Tree limbs may be placed at curbside when tied in
bundles not to exceed three and one-half feet in length. No limbs shall be
greater in diameter than three inches. The bundle shall not exceed the maximum
size to be placed in a packer truck by one person. The City Council may, from
time to time, adopt regulations governing the pick up of other items of debris
not provided for herein.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-4) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   The city or its agents shall collect garbage, trash, debris, rubbish and
refuse as provided herein over routes approved by the city when such refuse is
placed in proper containers as prescribed by the city. The disposal of garbage
and rubbish shall be by landfill and daily cover.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-5)
§ 52.06 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTAINERS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to dispose of garbage, refuse,
rubbish or waste into any refuse container, dumpster or other receptacle for
the deposit of same belonging to or leased by another, whether by rental
agreement, lease or agreement with the city or a public or private trash,
garbage or refuse hauling service, without the permission of the owner, lessee
or other person entitled to the possession or use thereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-6) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.07 CITY LANDFILL.
   Use of the city landfill shall be subject to such regulations as the city,
from time to time, shall prescribe
(Prior Code, § 9-3-7) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Each day such violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-8)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
      
72.   DRIVING RULES
      
73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
74.   VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
      
75.   PEDESTRIANS
      
76.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
77.   RAILROADS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Short title
   
70.02   Scope
   
70.03   State Traffic Code adopted
   
70.04   Definitions
   
70.05   Application of provisions
   
70.06   Emergency and experimental regulations
   
70.07   Vehicle registration
   
70.08   Driver’s license requirements
   
70.09   Insurance requirements; exemptions
   
70.10   Accidents
   
70.11   Improvements on public ways; street closures
   
70.12   Dangerous objects in streets
Enforcement
   
70.25   Administration and enforcement of provisions
   
70.26   Direction of traffic; obedience required
   
70.27   Parking violations
   
70.28   Impoundment of vehicles
   
70.29   Permitting violations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Traffic violations, see §
32.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This title shall be known and may be cited as the “City Traffic Code”.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 70.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this title shall apply and be enforced on all roads,
streets and highways within the city and on all roads, streets and highways
forming the boundary lines of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)
§ 70.03 STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED.
   There is adopted and incorporated herein by reference the State Motor
Vehicle Code, 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq., and the State “Rules of the Road”, 47
O.S. §§ 11-201 et seq., and all other misdemeanor traffic and motor vehicle
violations in 47 O.S., as now exist and as may be, from time to time, amended.
Such state laws, as adopted herein by reference, shall be fully enforceable by
the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein. At
least one copy of the provisions adopted herein by reference is on file in the
office of the City Clerk for public use and inspections.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)
§ 70.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use not more than 30 feet
wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States- or state-numbered route, controlled
access highway or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by the City Council within its jurisdiction as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
      (1)   When equipped as prescribed in division (2) below, the following
are AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
         (a)   Vehicles of fire departments;
         (b)   Ambulances or vehicles specified pursuant to 63 O.S. § 1-2512(B)
of licensed ambulance service providers;
         (c)   State vehicles of law enforcement agencies;
         (d)   County vehicles of Sheriffs and full-time commissioned deputies
and vehicles designated by the Sheriff for support of the Sheriff’s office,
including privately-owned vehicles driven by the Sheriff and full-time, part-
time and reserve commissioned deputies; provided the audible sirens and
flashing red lights equipped on such privately-owned vehicles are used only in
a law enforcement capacity and in the course of duty;
         (e)   Municipal vehicles of police departments;
         (f)   Vehicles owned and operated by the United States Marshals
Service or the Federal Bureau of Investigation;
         (g)   Vehicles of Oklahoma National Guard units designated by the
adjutant general for support to civil authorities; and
         (h)   Vehicles owned and operated by any local organization for
emergency management, as defined by 63 O.S. § 683.3.
      (2)   All vehicles prescribed in division (1) above shall be equipped
with sirens capable of giving audible signals as required by the provisions of
47 O.S. § 12-218 and flashing red lights as authorized by the provisions of 47
O.S. § 12-218.
   BICYCLE, ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE and MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
      (1)   A BICYCLE is a device upon which any person or persons may ride,
propelled solely by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having two
or more wheels, excluding mopeds.
      (2)   (a)   An ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE is any bicycle with:
            1.   Two or three wheels; and
            2.   Fully operative pedals for human propulsion and equipped with
an electric motor:
               a.   With a power output not to exceed 1,000 watts;
               b.   Incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than
30 mph on level ground; and
               c.   Incapable of further increasing the speed of the device
when human power alone is used to propel the device at a speed of 30 mph or
more.
         (b)   An ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLE shall meet the requirements of the
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards as set forth in the Federal Regulations,
being 49 C.F.R. pt. 571, and shall operate in such a manner that the electric
motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied.
      (3)   A MOTORIZED BICYCLE is any bicycle having:
         (a)   Fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power;
         (b)   A power drive system that functions directly or automatically
without clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is
engaged; and
         (c)   A combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of 80
cubic centimeters or less, regardless of the number of chambers in the engine,
which is capable of propelling the BICYCLE at a maximum design speed of not
more than 35 mph on level ground.
      (4)   The term BICYCLE shall include tricycles, quadcycles or similar
human-powered devices, electric assisted bicycles and motorized bicycles unless
otherwise specifically indicated.
   BOULEVARD or THROUGH STREET. Any street or highway, or portion thereof,
designated by ordinances of the city which require vehicles to come to a full
and complete stop before entering such street or highway from intersecting
streets or highways.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUS LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when,
within any 600 feet along such highway, there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office
buildings, railroad stations or public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet
of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
   CLASSES OF VEHICLES.
      (1)   CLASS A COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any combination of vehicles,
except a Class D motor vehicle, with a gross combined weight rating of 26,001
or more pounds; provided the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or
vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds.
      (2)   CLASS B COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any single vehicle, except a
Class D motor vehicle, with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more
pounds, or any such vehicle towing a vehicle not in excess of 10,000 pounds’
gross vehicle weight rating. This class shall apply to a bus with a gross
vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds and designed to transport 16 or
more persons, including the driver.
      (3)   CLASS C COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any single vehicle or combination
of vehicles, other than a Class A or Class B vehicle, as defined herein, which
is:
         (a)   Required to be placarded for hazardous materials under 49 C.F.R.
pt. 172, subpt. F; or
         (b)   Designed by the manufacturer to transport 16 or more persons,
including the driver.
      (4)   CLASS D MOTOR VEHICLE.
         (a)   Any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles which:
            1.   Regardless of weight:
               a.   Is marked and used as an “authorized emergency vehicle”, as
defined in this section; or
               b.   Is designed and used solely as a recreational vehicle;
            2.   Is a single or combination vehicle with a gross combined
weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds;
            3.   Is a single or combination farm vehicle with a gross combined
weight rating of more than 26,001 pounds if:
               a.   It is entitled to be registered with a farm tag and has a
farm tag attached thereto;
               b.   It is controlled and operated by a farmer, his or her
family or employees;
               c.   It is used to transport either agricultural products, farm
machinery, farm supplies or any combination of those materials to or from a
farm;
               d.   It is not used in the operation of a common or contract
motor carrier; and
               e.   It is used within 150 air miles of the person’s farm or as
otherwise provided by federal law.
            4.   Is operated by a licensed driver employed by a unit of local
government that operates a commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of
that unit of local government for the purpose of removing snow or ice from a
roadway by plowing, sanding or salting, if:
               a.   The properly licensed employee who ordinarily operates a
commercial vehicle for these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle; or
               b.   The employing governmental entity determines that a snow or
ice emergency requires additional assistance.
         (b)   A Class D motor vehicle shall not include any vehicle which is:
            1.   Designed to carry 16 or more passengers, including the driver;
or
            2.   Required to be placarded for hazardous materials under 49
C.F.R. pt. 172, subpt. F; provided a farm vehicle, as defined herein, which is
required to be placarded for hazardous materials under 49 C.F.R. pt. 172,
subpt. F, shall be considered to be a Class D motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR OR DRIVER. Every person who operates, drives or is in
actual physical control of a Class A, B or C commercial motor vehicle, as
defined under the term “classes of vehicles” in this section.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
roadway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; and
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   CURB. The edge of a roadway marked or understood as such.
   CURB LOADING ZONES. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, freight or
materials.
   DAYTIME; NIGHTTIME.
      (1)   DAYTIME means one-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour
after sunset.
      (2)   NIGHTTIME means any other time.
   DOUBLE-PARK. The standing or stopping of a vehicle, parallel to another
vehicle parked, whether occupied or not, on the roadway.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EMERGENCY. A condition suddenly created, requiring immediate action for the
preservation of public peace, health or safety, and among other things,
particularly means any fire, unusual storm, death, riot or unusual traffic
condition.
   EXPLOSIVES. Shall have the same meaning as defined in 49 C.F.R. pt. 173.
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   FLAMMABLE SUBSTANCE. Includes any liquid, gas or other material as defined
in 49 C.F.R. pt. 173.
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY.
      (1)   Every device, whether it is self-propelled, designed and adapted so
as to be used exclusively for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising
operations or for lifting or carrying an IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY and, in either
case, not subject to registration if operated upon the highways.
      (2)   Farm wagon type tank trailers of not over 1,200 gallons’ capacity,
used during the liquid fertilizer season as field storage “nurse tanks”
supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and moved on highways only for
bringing the fertilizer from a local source of supply to farms or field or from
one farm or field to another, shall be considered IMPLEMENTS OF HUSBANDRY for
purposes of this title.
      (3)   Trailers or semitrailers owned by a person engaged in the business
of farming and used exclusively for the purpose of transporting farm products
to market or for the purpose of transporting to the farm material or things to
be used thereon shall also be considered IMPLEMENTS OF HUSBANDRY for purposes
of this title. Provided no truck or semitrailer with an axle weight of 20,000
pounds or more which is used to haul manure and operated on the public roads or
highways of this state shall be considered an IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY for the
purposes of this title.
      (4)   Utility type, all-terrain vehicles with a maximum curb weight of
1,500 pounds which are equipped with metal front or rear carrying racks when
used for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations shall be
considered IMPLEMENTS OF HUSBANDRY for purposes of this title.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict; or
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   LICENSE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any valid driver’s license or permit to operate a motor vehicle
issued under the laws of this state, including any temporary license or
instruction permit, the lawful possession of which by a resident of this state
shall be evidence that the resident has been granted the privilege to operate a
motor vehicle.
      (2)   Any “nonresident’s operating privilege”, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-
138, which is evidenced by the lawful possession of a valid driver’s license or
permit to operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of another state.
   METAL TIRE. Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the highway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Any motor vehicle having:
      (1)   A power source that:
         (a)   If the power source is a combustion engine, has a piston or
rotor displacement of greater than 35 cubic centimeters but less than 150 cubic
centimeters regardless of the number of chambers in the power source; and
         (b)   If the power source is electric, has a power output of greater
than 1,000 watts.
      (2)   A seat or saddle for the use of each rider; and
      (3)   Not more than three wheels in contact with the ground.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.
      (1)   (a)   Any vehicle which is self-propelled; or
         (b)   Any vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
      (2)   The term shall not include:
         (a)   “Implements of husbandry”, as defined in this section;
         (b)   “Electric personal assistive mobility devices”, as defined in 47
O.S. § 1-114A;
         (c)   “Motorized wheelchairs”, as defined in 7 O.S. § 1-136.3; or
         (d)   Vehicles moved solely by human or animal power.
   MOTORCYCLE. Any motor vehicle having:
      (1)   A seat or saddle for the use of each rider;
      (2)   Not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but
excluding a tractor; and
      (3)   A combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of 150
cubic centimeters or greater.
   MUFFLER. A device designed for the use on a particular internal combustion
engine and properly affixed thereto for the purpose of reducing the exhaust
noise of such engine to an unobjectionable level.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, barricades, signals, markings
and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic which conforms to the latest edition of the “Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways”, published by the
United States Department of Transportation, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the City Clerk for public use and inspection.
   OPERATOR or DRIVER. Every person, including a “commercial operator or
driver”, as defined in this section, who operates, drives or is in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle or who is exercising control over or
steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with a right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the OWNER.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   PASSENGER. A rider in any vehicle other than the driver.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Municipal Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, diesel, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificates and registration plates issued
under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of vehicles.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, is in the main improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
State Department of Public Safety of a person’s privilege to operate a motor
vehicle on the public highways. Such action shall include the requirement of
the surrender to the State Department of Public Safety of said person’s
driver’s license.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes
two or more separate ROADWAYS, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, refers to any
such ROADWAY separately but not to all such ROADWAYS collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. An area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or so marked or indicated
by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a
SAFETY ZONE.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately-
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school. This definition shall not include buses normally used in city
transit which may be used part-time for transportation of schoolchildren within
the city during some portion of the day.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests or is carried by another vehicle.
   SHOULDER. The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for
accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use and for lateral support of
base and surface courses.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
   SOLID TIRE. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   STOP or STOPPING.
      (1)   When required, means complete cessation from movement.
      (2)   When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic-
control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways,
roads, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, recreation and park lands used for vehicular
traffic, or other parkways or thoroughfares in the city, over which it has
jurisdiction, which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public
use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.
   SUSPENSION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGE. The temporary withdrawal by formal action
of the State Department of Public Safety of a person’s privilege to operate a
motor vehicle on the public highways. Such action shall include the requirement
of the surrender to said Department of said person’s driver’s license.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle for hire, designed to carry ten persons or less,
operated upon any street or highway, or on call or demand, accepting or
soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such
points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or
passengers so being transported. This classification shall not include:
      (1)   Motor vehicles of ten passenger capacity or less operated by the
owner where the cost of operation is shared by fellow workers between their
homes and the place of regular daily employment, when not operated for more
than two trips per day;
      (2)   Motor vehicles operated by the owner where the cost of operation is
shared by the passengers on a “share the expense plan”;
      (3)   Motor vehicles transporting students from the public school system
when said motor vehicle is so transporting under contract with a public,
private or parochial school board or governing body; or
      (4)    Transportation network companies, such as Uber or Lyft.
   THROUGH STREET or HIGHWAY. Every street or highway, or portion thereof, on
which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such THROUGH STREET or
HIGHWAY in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are
erected as provided in this title.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either single or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
   TRAFFIC LANE. The portion of the traveled way for the movement of a single
line of vehicles.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop,
proceed or proceed with caution.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle; provided, however, this definition shall not include
“implements of husbandry”, as defined in this section.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   U-TURN. Turning a vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite direction.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of one-fourth of a
mile or more.
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
      (2)   The term shall not include:
         (a)   “Implements of husbandry”, as defined in this section;
         (b)   “Electric personal assistive mobility devices”, as defined in 47
O.S. § 1-114A; or
         (c)   “Motorized wheelchairs”, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-136.3.
   YIELD. The yielding of the right-of-way to all vehicles or pedestrians
approaching from the right or left intersecting street which are so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 70.05 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Pushcarts, animals, animal drawn vehicles. Every person propelling any
pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any
animal drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this title
applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this title
which, by their very nature, can have no application.
   (B)   Public officers and employees.
      (1)   This title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or
used in the service of the United States Government, any state, county, city or
other governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. No such driver
shall violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise
permitted in this title or by state statute.
      (2)   This title shall not apply to the military forces of the United
States and organizations of the National Guard when performing any military
duty.
   (C)   Authorized emergency vehicles.
      (1)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law or ordinance or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this division (C), but subject
to the conditions herein stated.
      (2)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
         (a)   Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this title;
         (b)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         (c)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property;
         (d)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement; and
         (e)   Disregard regulations governing turning in specified directions.
      (3)   The exemptions herein granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver is properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal or of flashing red or blue lights or a
combination of flashing red and blue lights meeting the requirements of 47 O.S.
§ 12-218; except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue light visible from
in front of the vehicle. This division (C)(3) shall not be construed as
requiring a peace officer operating a police vehicle properly and lawfully in
response to a crime in progress to use audible signals.
      (4)   (a)   The exemptions in divisions (C)(2)(c) and (C)(2)(e) above
shall be granted to a law enforcement officer operating an authorized emergency
vehicle for law enforcement purposes without using audible and visual signals
required by this division (C) as long as the action does not endanger life or
property if the officer is following a suspected violator of the law with
probable cause to believe that:
            1.   Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the
suspect to:
               a.   Destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony;
               b.   End a suspected continuing felony before the officer has
obtained sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; or
               c.   Evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or the
vehicle of the suspect; or
            2.   Because of traffic conditions, vehicles moving in response to
the audible or visual signals may increase the potential for a collision.
         (b)   The exceptions granted in this division (C)(4) shall not apply
to an officer who is in actual pursuit of a person who is eluding or attempting
to elude the officer in violation of 21 O.S. § 540A.
      (5)   This division (C) shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor protect the driver from the consequences of his or her reckless
disregard for the safety of others.
   (D)   Public works vehicles.
      (1)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title
shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor
vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction,
maintenance or repair of public utilities. All highway and public utility
operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or
flaggers, but the provisions of this title shall apply to such persons and
vehicles when traveling to and from such work.
      (2)   This division (D) shall not relieve any driver exempted by this
division (D) from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor from the consequences of driving while intoxicated.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)
§ 70.06 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor is empowered to make effective the provisions of the traffic
ordinances of the city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental
regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-6)
§ 70.07 VEHICLE REGISTRATION.
   No person shall operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city
without a state vehicle license or tag as may be required by law. No person
shall fail to display the state vehicle license or tag as required by law or
attach any trailer hitch or other device in a manner as to cover or partially
cover the vehicle license.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   License required. No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle
on any public roadway within the city unless such person has a current, not
suspended or revoked, valid driver’s license as required by state law.
   (B)   Suspended, false license.
      (1)   No person shall:
         (a)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his or her
possession any canceled, revoked, suspended, fictitious, photostatic or
fraudulently altered driver’s license;
         (b)   Lend his or her driver’s license to any other person or
knowingly permit the use thereof by another;
         (c)   Display or represent as his or her own any driver’s license not
issued to him or her; or
         (d)   Permit any unlawful use of a driver’s license issued to him or
her.
      (2)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any public street within
the city at a time when his or her privilege to do so is canceled, suspended or
revoked.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW. The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in 47
O.S. Article VI, Chapter 7 and § 7-606.
      OPERATOR’S POLICY. An operator’s policy of liability insurance which
shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him
or her by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him or her of
any motor vehicle not owned by him or her, subject to the same limits of
liability required in an owner’s policy.
      OWNER’S POLICY. An OWNER’S POLICY of liability insurance which:
         (a)   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate
reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
         (b)   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other
person, except as provided in division (c) below, using an insured vehicle with
the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the
liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation or use of such vehicle;
         (c)   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with
existing laws; and
         (d)   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204.
      SECURITY.
         (a)   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204;
         (b)   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or
         (c)   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503,
having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond.
      SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM. A form, approved by the State Board for
Property and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the Compulsory Insurance Law of the state.
   (B)   Proof of insurance required.
      (1)   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall,
while operating or using such vehicle within the city’s boundaries, carry
either an operator’s or an owner’s security verification form issued by a
carrier; provided the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an
equivalent form issued by the State Department of Public Safety, reflecting
liability coverage.
      (2)   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall carry
in such vehicle, at all times, a current owner’s security verification form
listing the vehicle or an equivalent form which has been issued by the
Department of Public Safety and shall produce such form upon request for
inspection by any law enforcement officer or representative of the Department
of Public Safety, and in the case of collision, the form shall be shown upon
request to any person affected by such collision.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following shall not be required to carry an owner’s or
operator’s security verification form or an equivalent form from the Department
of Public Safety during operation of the vehicle:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of a business,
corporation or utility on the exterior, and which is in compliance with the
provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 7-600 through 7-607, according to the records of the
State Department of Public Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance
or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation pursuant to a permit number
issued by the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   Duties of drivers involved in accidents.
      (1)   Injury to or death of persons. The driver of any vehicle involved
in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately
stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible
but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene
of the accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of division (B)
below.
      (2)   Damage to property.
         (a)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only
in apparent damage to property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene
of such accident or as close thereto as possible. The driver shall remain at
the scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of
division (B) below. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with the
requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the damage resulting from such accident is to the property of
the driver only, with no damage to the person or property of another, the
driver need not stop at the scene of the accident but shall make a report of
the resulting damage.
      (3)   Unattended vehicle. The driver of any vehicle which collides with
any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there
either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the correct
name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended
vehicle, and provide the operator or owner with information from his or her
“security verification form”, as defined in §
70.09(A), or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written
notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the
vehicle doing the striking, and providing information from his or her “security
verification form”, as defined in §
70.09(A), and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
      (4)   Fixtures. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent
to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or
person in charge of such property of such fact and of his or her name and
address and the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving and
shall, upon request, exhibit his or her driver’s license and his or her
“security verification form”, as defined in §
70.09(A), and shall make a report of such accident when and as required in
division (C)(2) below.
   (B)   Information and aid. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is
driven or attended by any person shall give his or her correct name, address
and registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall, upon
request, exhibit his or her driver’s license and his or her “security
verification form”, as defined in §
70.09(A), to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending
any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such
accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of
arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or
hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.
   (C)   Notice and report of accident.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle involved in any accident shall immediately,
by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the
Police Department, on forms provided by the Police Department, after complying
with the requirements of division (B) above. Where personal injury or death
occurs, the driver or drivers of the vehicles shall remain at the scene of the
accident until police officers arrive, except in cases of personal injury
requiring immediate attention.
      (2)   An accident report is not required under this section from any
person who is physically incapable of making a report during the period of such
incapacity. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
an immediate notice of an accident as required in division (C)(1) above and
there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable
of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given
by the driver.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 IMPROVEMENTS ON PUBLIC WAYS; STREET CLOSURES.
   (A)   Authority to close streets. City personnel or contractors, while
repairing or improving or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the
streets, are authorized as necessary, subject to control of the Chief of
Police, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance or construction. In exercising such authority, such person shall
erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and
notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic.
   (B)   Obedience to barricades and traffic-control devices during street
closures. When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
division (A) above, and traffic-control devices or barricades have been
erected, no person shall drive any vehicle through, under, over or around such
traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise enter the closed area. This
division (B) shall not apply to persons while engaged in such construction,
maintenance and repair or to persons entering therein for the protection of
lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or places of
business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the
area at their own risk.
   (C)   Traffic-control devices required during construction. Whenever
construction, repair or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility
is being performed under traffic, the city personnel, contractor or utility
company concerned shall erect or cause to be erected traffic-control devices to
warn and guide the public. Every person using such street shall obey all signs,
signals, markings, flaggers or other traffic-control devices which are placed
to regulate, control and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance
area.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 DANGEROUS OBJECTS IN STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed or
let fall and remain, in or upon any street, any scrap iron, nail, tack, glass
or other thing which is likely to injure persons or damage property, or to
render a street unsafe for traffic.
   (B)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.25 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All traffic in the city shall be controlled by the ordinances of the
city and the laws of the state relating thereto.
   (B)   It is the duty of all city police officers to enforce the traffic
regulations of the city and the state, to make arrests for traffic violations
and to investigate accidents.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.26 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Direction of traffic.
      (1)   Officers of the Police Department or such officers as are assigned
by the Chief of Police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
mechanical signals or signs in conformance with the provisions of this title.
      (2)   In the event of a fire or other “emergency”, as defined in §
70.04, or other unusual traffic conditions, to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or Fire Department may direct
and take control of traffic as conditions may require and, as near as
practicable, follow the general provisions of this title.
      (3)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or
other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat
or in the immediate vicinity.
   (B)   Obedience to police and fire officials. No person shall willfully fail
or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or
Fire Department official.
   (C)   Direction by unauthorized person. No person shall direct or attempt to
direct traffic except police officers and other officers authorized by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.27 PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Prima facie proof. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law
or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any
such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such violation, the registered owner of such
vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred.
   (B)   Citation tags. In cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or
stopped in violation of this title, police officers and other persons appointed
by the Chief of Police shall affix citation tags to the vehicles. A violator of
any provision of this title who has been given a citation tag and fails to
appear in accordance with the instructions of such tag shall be subject to a
separate offense as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.28 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Purpose and effect. The impoundment of vehicles under authority of
this title shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of city streets and thoroughfares
from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles.
   (B)   Authority to impound. Members of the Police Department are authorized,
within the authority granted by division (A) above, to impound vehicles under
the provisions of this title. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under
order of an authorized police officer.
      (1)   Disabled vehicles. A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may
be impounded under the following circumstances:
         (a)   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway;
         (b)   If left unattended longer than 48 hours on the shoulder of any
highway; or
         (c)   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically
incapacitated to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or
removal.
      (2)   Vehicle creating traffic hazard. A vehicle left unattended upon any
street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to constitute a
definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic shall be
impounded.
      (3)   Illegal trespass by vehicle.
         (a)   An unattended vehicle trespassing on property of another may be
impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as
provided in this division (B)(3).
         (b)   If the owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a
complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner’s or legal
occupant’s property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is
unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the
vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining
party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is
parked or standing.
         (c)   Upon filing the complaint by the property owner or legal
occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe a trespass has
occurred, the property owner or legal occupant of the property may cause the
vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. The Police
Department may also cause such vehicle to be impounded where the Police
Department determines that the location of the vehicle constitutes a threat to
the public health or safety or is a public traffic hazard.
      (4)   Vehicle blocking fire exit or hydrant. Any vehicle illegally parked
in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit, or blocks
ready access to a fire hydrant, shall be impounded.
      (5)   Vehicle unattended or disabled. Any unattended vehicle illegally
parked in any street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled vehicle in an
intersection with the person in charge of the vehicle being present shall be
moved out of the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space
at the street curbing.
      (6)   Stolen vehicle. Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police, the
vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place of impoundment, and the
registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the place
of impoundment by the Police Department as soon as possible.
      (7)   Arrest and detention of driver. Whenever the driver or person in
charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and
detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle
unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded.
      (8)   Unlicensed vehicle. Any vehicle on public roads, streets or other
public places which does not have a current state license tag may be impounded
by the police if expired by 90 days or more.
   (C)   Place of impoundment. Every vehicle that is impounded under the
provisions of this section shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of
safekeeping designated by the Chief of Police, and to no other place.
   (D)   Duration of impoundment; release of vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the
authority of this section shall be stored and held until an order for its
release is received from an officer of the Traffic Violations Bureau or
Municipal Court or other proper police officer.
      (2)   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned
upon the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment
costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle.
      (3)   No order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be issued until
all fines and costs due the city because of traffic law or other law violations
involving the vehicle have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.29 PERMITTING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to authorize or knowingly permit a motor
vehicle owned by him or her, or under his or her control, to be driven upon any
street in the city by any person who is not authorized to drive a motor vehicle
under the laws of the state, or to be driven or to stand or to be parked in
violation of any provision of this title.
   (B)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle registered
in his or her name to be driven, or to stand, or to be parked in violation of
any provision of this title.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a parent of a child or the guardian of a ward to
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provision
of this title.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. No person shall do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this title. Any person who violates any provision
of this title, or performs any unlawful act as defined in this title, or fails
to perform any act required in this title is guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-6)
   (B)   Insurance requirements; enforcement and penalty.
      (1)   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid
and current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued
by the Department upon request of any peace officer of the Department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as
provided in §
10.99 and court costs.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for any violation of §
70.09 may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
      (3)   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the Department
reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
      (4)   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the Court
Clerk shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within
ten days reflecting the action taken by the court.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-9)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
Section
   
71.01   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
71.02   Specifications
   
71.03   Effect of traffic signs for enforcement
   
71.04   Obedience to devices
   
71.05   Unauthorized signs, signals or markings
   
71.06   Interference with, damage to traffic-control devices
   
71.07   Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
   
71.08   Traffic-control signal legend
   
71.09   Flashing signals
   
71.10   Pedestrian control signals
   
71.11   Testing traffic-control devices
§ 71.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Mayor, subject to direction of the City Council, shall have placed and
maintained traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required
under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of
such ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic-
control signs, signals and devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic
under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn
traffic.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 71.02 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the latest
edition of the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways”, as published by the United States Department of Transportation. All
signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All
traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of
state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 EFFECT OF TRAFFIC SIGNS FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject
to the exceptions granted in this title to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   Imitation traffic-control devices. No person shall place, maintain or
display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or
device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, which projects any flashing or revolving beams of light or
which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   Advertising on traffic-control devices. No person shall place or
maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic
sign, signal or device bearing thereon any commercial or other advertising.
   (C)   Advertising on public ways. No sign or advertising shall be placed in
a street right-of-way, except official signs or devices placed by authority of
this code or state law.
   (D)   Exemptions. This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (E)   Summary removal. Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device
is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city is empowered to
remove the same without notice.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 INTERFERENCE WITH, DAMAGE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, change the position of or remove any official
traffic-control device, including any 911 emergency telephone service route
markers, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
   The Mayor, subject to direction by the City Council, is authorized to:
   (A)   Designate and have maintained by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway crosswalks at intersections where, in his or
her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary; and
   (B)   Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places
as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-7)
§ 71.08 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   (A)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or colored lighted arrows successively one at a time,
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows.
      (1)   Green indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal, except when
prohibited by law, may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a
sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at
the time such signal is exhibited.
         (b)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         (c)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal,
pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a
turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
      (2)   Steady yellow indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being
terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, are thereby
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red
indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
      (3)   Steady red indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to
proceed is shown except as provided in divisions (A)(3)(b) and (A)(3)(d) above.
         (b)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular
traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to
turn right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street after
stopping as required by division (A)(3)(a) above. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and
to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         (c)   In order to prohibit right turns or left turns as prescribed in
division (A)(3)(b) above, on the red signal after the required stop, the city
must erect clear, concise signs informing drivers that such turns are
prohibited. The State Highway Department shall specify the design of the sign
to be used for this purpose, and it shall be used uniformly throughout the
city.
         (d)   1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the driver of a
motorcycle facing any steady red signal may cautiously proceed through the
intersection only if:
               a.   The motorcycle has been brought to a complete stop as
required by division (A)(3)(a) above;
               b.   The traffic-control signal is programmed or engineered to
change to a green signal only after detecting the approach of a motor vehicle
and has failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle because of its size or
weight; and
               c.   No motor vehicle or person is approaching on the roadway to
be crossed or entered, or the motor vehicle or person is at a distance from the
intersection that does not constitute an immediate hazard.
            2.   The driver of any vehicle approaching the intersection, which
lawfully may enter the intersection, shall have the right-of-way over any
motorcycle operator proceeding through a red light and, in no event where an
accident results from the driver of the motorcycle proceeding into the
intersection on a red light, shall such driver of the vehicle be charged with
any violation pursuant to failure to yield right-of-way, following too closely,
driving too fast for conditions.
         (e)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red signal alone shall not enter the
roadway.
   (B)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows.
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if
none, then before entering the intersection. The right to proceed shall be
subject to the requirements of law applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.10 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   (A)   Generally. Whenever special pedestrian control signals, exhibiting the
term “Walk” or “Wait” or “Don’t Walk”, are in place, such signals shall
indicate as follows.
      (1)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
      (2)   Wait, don’t walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the “Wait” signal is showing.
   (B)   Pedestrian activated school crossing signals. Whenever a pedestrian
actuated school crossing signal is provided, it requires obedience by vehicular
traffic and pedestrians as provided in division (A) above and §
71.08.
      (1)   Flashing yellow.
         (a)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or past such signal only with caution.
         (b)   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
actuate the signal control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal.
      (2)   Steady yellow alone.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the steady yellow alone signal is
thereby warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the
intersection or past the signal when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
         (b)   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which
the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown.
      (3)   Steady red.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the steady red signal shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then
before passing the signal or entering the intersection, and shall remain
standing until flashing yellow is shown alone.
         (b)   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the steady
red signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
      (4)   Steady red and steady yellow combined.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the steady red and steady yellow
combined signal is thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal will be
exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such vehicular traffic shall remain
standing until the flashing yellow is shown alone.
         (b)   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal
is about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing
shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety zone and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.11 TESTING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Mayor may have traffic-control devices tested under actual conditions of
traffic.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-11)
CHAPTER 72: DRIVING RULES
Section
   
72.01   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
72.02   Right-of-way
   
72.03   Through streets; stop and yield intersections
   
72.04   One-way streets and alleys
   
72.05   Speed restrictions
   
72.06   School zones
   
72.07   Drive on right
   
72.08   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
   
72.09   Driving on divided highways
   
72.10   Passing, overtaking vehicles
   
72.11   Turning movements
   
72.12   Restrictions on driving
   
72.13   Truck traffic
   
72.14   Processions
   
72.15   Railroad trains and crossings
   
72.16   Play streets
   
72.17   Miscellaneous prohibitions
   
72.18   Reckless, careless, negligent driving
   
72.19   Driving under influence of intoxicants
§ 72.01 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Operation of vehicle on approach of authorized emergency vehicle.
      (1)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws
of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal or red flashing lights, the driver of every other vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to,
and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear
of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   This division (A) shall not be construed to require a peace officer
operating a police vehicle properly and lawfully in response to a crime in
progress to use audible signals nor shall this division (A) operate to relieve
the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
   (B)   Following emergency vehicles. The driver of any vehicle, other than on
official business, shall not follow any emergency or fire apparatus traveling
in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such
vehicle within the block where emergency apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm.
   (C)   Driving over fire hose. Whenever any hose of the Fire Department is
laid upon any street, avenue, alley, bridge or vacant lot in the city, no
person shall drive any automobile, truck, locomotive, railroad car or any other
vehicle over the same unless the hose shall have been protected by wooden
railings or other device laid along the side thereof, and then only at the
places so protected unless otherwise directed by a city official.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Intersections at highways.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state or federal
highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway shall stop
and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or
which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
      (2)   When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
      (3)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2)
above are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter.
   (B)   T intersections. The driver of a vehicle approaching a T intersection,
traveling down the base of the T intersection approaching a dead end, must
yield the right-of-way to all traffic.
   (C)   Entering controlled intersections.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway; provided that the driver of a vehicle on a street which is not a state
or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway
shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
      (2)   Where one vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take
caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where
one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required
to take caution shall have the right-of-way.
   (D)   Left turn at intersection. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is so close thereto when initiating such turn as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (E)   Facing stop, slow, warning or caution signals. Where two or more
vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals on two or more
intersecting cross streets, and are approaching so as to enter the intersection
at the same time, where each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming
from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to
slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each
vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall
have the right-of-way.
   (F)   Emerging from alley or driveway. The driver of a vehicle emerging from
an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway
or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be
necessary to avoid collision and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Through streets. The Mayor, subject to direction of the City Council,
may designate any street or part of street as a through street. Whenever the
Mayor designates and describes a through street, the Mayor shall have placed
and maintained a stop sign or, if deemed more appropriate at any intersection,
a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street, and a
heavy traffic street not so designated. Stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the Mayor if deemed
desirable.
   (B)   Determination of stop and yield intersections.
      (1)   The Mayor, subject to direction by the City Council, is authorized
to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon
other than through streets and to determine:
         (a)   Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such
intersection, in which event, he or she shall cause to be erected a stop sign
at every such place where a stop is required; or
         (b)   Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a
different street at such intersection as prescribed in division (C) below, in
which event, he or she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place
where obedience thereto is required.
      (2)   Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the
nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
   (C)   Vehicles entering stop intersections. Except when directed to proceed
by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event
there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. Such driver, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way
to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which
is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard.
The driver having so yielded may proceed only when it is prudent and apparently
safe to do so.
   (D)   Vehicles entering yield intersections.
      (1)   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions, or shall stop if necessary and yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he or she is driving and to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
         (b)   If such driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a
crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign,
such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his or her failure to
yield the right-of-way.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Authority to designate. The City Council, by resolution, may designate
any street or alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   (B)   Direction of traffic.
      (1)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and
parts of alleys designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic
shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction
of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in
the opposite direction is prohibited.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of such island.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Reasonable and proper.
      (1)   Notwithstanding a maximum speed limit enumerated in this section,
no person shall drive a vehicle upon any alley, highway, roadway, street or
public parking area at a speed greater than or less than is reasonable or
prudent under the conditions then existing, considering visibility, amount of
traffic, condition of roadway surface, presence of pedestrians, obstruction of
view and other similar facts.
      (2)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a street at a speed greater
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   Speed limits established.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed
for compliance with division (A) above, the limits specified in this section or
established as authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds.
         (b)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in
excess of such maximum limits as follows:
            1.   Twenty five mph on any street in a residential district,
except as may be posted otherwise and except on state or federal highways; and
            2.   Fifteen mph as posted in school zones when school is in
session.
      (2)   Authority to alter speed limits. The Mayor has authority to post
lower speed limits than those prescribed in this section where special hazards
exist.
   (C)   Duty to decrease speed. The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower
than the designated limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow winding roadway or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions,
and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle or on entering the roadway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care and precaution.
   (D)   Minimum speed. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle
at such slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. Police
officers are authorized to enforce this division (D) by directions to drivers,
and in the event of willful disobedience to this division (D) or refusal to
comply with the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued
slow operation by a driver shall be unlawful and constitute a blocking of
traffic and a violation of this division (D).
(Prior Code, § 7-3-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Signs posted. The Mayor, subject to direction by the City Council, is
authorized to erect signs to designate school zones and school zone crosswalks.
   (B)   Obedience to signs and traffic-control personnel. No person may drive
a vehicle past a school sign or through a school zone at a speed greater than
that posted per hour on school days. Drivers proceeding in a school zone shall
stop and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians in school zone crosswalks when
so directed by a school safety patrol member or when such crosswalk is occupied
by pedestrians between the hours posted on school days.
   (C)   Prima facie proof. Any driver involved in a school zone crosswalk
collision with a pedestrian after failing to slow and yield the right-of-way to
such pedestrian shall be deemed prima facie in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07 DRIVE ON RIGHT.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the laws governing such movement;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the laws applicable thereon;
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or
      (5)   Upon a roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic.
   (B)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane when available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway and may be
temporarily driven upon the right-hand shoulder for the purpose of permitting
other vehicles to pass. This division (B) shall not apply when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for
a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
   (C)   (1)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2) above.
      (2)   However, this division (C) shall not be construed as prohibiting
the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley,
private road or driveway.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Marking traffic lanes. The Mayor, subject to direction of the City
Council, is authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway or any
street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   (B)   Driving on laned roadways. Whenever any roadway has been divided into
two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following requirements, in
addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within
a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety and then given a signal
not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle, of his or her
intention to change lanes;
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where
such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such
allocation; and
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use
a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
   (C)   Duty to stay in lane. Where traffic lanes have been marked, no
operator of any vehicle shall fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.09 DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAYS.
   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated divided section
so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven
only upon the right-hand roadway. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or
within any such dividing space barrier or section, except through an opening in
such physical barrier, dividing section or space or at a crossover or
intersection established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.10 PASSING, OVERTAKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite direction. Drivers of vehicles
proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon
roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction,
each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the traveled portion
of the roadway as nearly as possible.
   (B)   Overtaking vehicle on the left.
      (1)   The following requirements shall govern the overtaking and passing
of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to the following
limitations, exceptions and special requirements:
         (a)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle; and
         (b)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
      (2)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. The
overtaking vehicle must return to the roadway before coming within 100 feet of
any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
      (3)   Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the driver of a
vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass
to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right
side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
      (4)   Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, which requires movement of his or her vehicle from one lane of
traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety
and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or
mechanical device.
   (C)   When overtaking on right is permitted.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
         (a)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn and has so properly signaled for a left turn;
         (b)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied
by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles
in each direction; and
         (c)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two more lines of moving vehicles.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled
portion of the roadway.
   (D)   No passing zones.
      (1)   Specific no passing zones.
         (a)   Established. No vehicle shall, at any time, be driven to the
left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
            1.   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
            2.   When traversing an intersection or railroad grade crossing; or
            3.   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet
of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
         (b)   Violation. It is a violation to pass on the left by going to the
left of the center of the roadway across a double marked centerline for the
purpose of passing a vehicle traveling in the same direction.
         (c)   Exemptions. This division (D)(1) shall not apply upon a one-way
roadway.
      (2)   Authority to designate no passing zones; compliance required.
         (a)   The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and
federal highways, and the Mayor, subject to direction of the City Council, as
regards all other streets, are authorized to determine those portions of a
highway where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway
would be especially hazardous and shall, by appropriate signs or markings on
the roadway, have the beginning and end of such zones indicated. When such
signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
         (b)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing
zone, no driver shall, at any time, drive to the left side of the roadway
within such no passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping
designed to mark such no passing zone through its length.
   (E)   Passing stopped school bus.
      (1)   Procedure. The driver of a vehicle upon any street or highway in
the city, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus on
which the red loading signals are in operation and which has stopped for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren and other occupants,
shall stop the vehicle before it reaches the school bus. The driver may then
proceed to pass such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and prudent and
with due caution for the safety of such schoolchildren and other occupants
after the loading signals are deactivated.
      (2)   Signs and lights on bus. Every school bus used for the
transportation of schoolchildren shall bear upon the front and rear thereof
plainly visible signs containing the words “School Bus” in letters not less
than eight inches in height and, in addition, shall be equipped with visual
signs meeting the requirements of state law which shall be actuated by the
driver of the school bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped
on a street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging
schoolchildren.
      (3)   Exemptions. The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with
separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is
on a different roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and the school
bus is stopped in a loading zone which is part of or adjacent to such street or
highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   (A)   Turning markers or indicators. The Mayor, subject to direction by the
City Council, is authorized to have placed markers, buttons or signs within or
adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections. Such course to be traveled shall be indicated.
When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat,
no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
   (B)   Designation of restricted turns.
      (1)   The Mayor, subject to direction by the City Council, may determine
those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn,
left turn or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections.
The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours.
      (2)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
turn, left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of any such sign.
   (C)   Required position and method of turning at intersections. The driver
of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows.
      (1)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
      (2)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic
is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the
right of such centerline where it enters the intersection; and after entering
the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to
the left of the center of the intersection.
      (3)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways,
the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
   (D)   Turning movements and required signals.
      (1)   Safe turns; signals required.
         (a)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection, a public or
private road or a driveway unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the
roadway as required in division (C) above, or move right or left upon a roadway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person
shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal as provided in
division (D)(1)(b) below, in the event any other traffic may be affected by
such movement.
         (b)   A signal of intention to turn right or left as required by law
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning.
         (c)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in division
(D)(1)(b) above to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there
is opportunity to give such signal.
         (d)   When any person is properly preparing for, attempting or
executing a left turn, as described in division (D)(1)(a) above, no other
person operating another vehicle immediately following the turning vehicle
shall pass or attempt to pass the turning vehicle to the left. Such other
person shall come to a complete stop if necessary at a safe distance behind the
person preparing for, attempting or executing the turn or may proceed to the
right of the turning vehicle as provided by §
72.10(C).
      (2)   Methods of signaling.
         (a)   Signals by hand, arm or signal device.
            1.   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise
provided in division (D)(2)(a)2. below.
            2.   Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with,
and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single
vehicle and to any combination of vehicles.
         (b)   Method of giving hand signals. All signals herein required given
by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner:
            1.   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
            2.   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
            3.   Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward.
   (E)   U-turns.
      (1)   Prohibited. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall operate
a vehicle so as to turn more than 90 degrees on any street or highway.
      (2)   Exemptions. Persons excepted are those who can safely execute that
turn if at an intersection, but it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to
make such a turn at any intersection:
         (a)   Where traffic-control signals are installed;
         (b)   Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the
latter’s direction; or
         (c)   Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and is
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.12 RESTRICTIONS ON DRIVING.
   (A)   Following too closely. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard
to the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the
highway. Such driver following too closely shall be deemed negligent.
   (B)   Backing vehicles. No vehicle shall be backed upon any street or
highway except for such distance as may be necessary to permit the vehicle to
enter the proper driving lane from a parked position. Such backing shall be
done only after the driver of said vehicle has ascertained that such movement
can be made without endangering other traffic.
   (C)   Entering and leaving controlled access roadways. No person shall drive
a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway except at such entrances
and exits as are established by public authority.
   (D)   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. No driver shall enter an
intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or
she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
   (E)   Driving on sidewalk. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a
sidewalk or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary
driveway.
   (F)   Driving through safety zone. No vehicle shall, at any time, be driven
through or within a safety zone.
   (G)   Driving through service drives. No vehicle shall be driven through any
service drive or parking area except for the purpose of attaining service or
merchandise or for the purpose of parking thereon.
   (H)   Driving in public parks; driving on property without permission.
      (1)   Parks and public property.
         (a)   No person shall drive, operate or propel a motor vehicle or
motor-driven cycle, including a motor scooter or motor-driven bicycle, in any
park, public property, right-of-way or easement, within or owned by the city,
except upon established roadways or roadways designed for vehicular traffic. A
vehicle may be driven a reasonable distance from the roadway for the purpose of
going to and from a parking place.
         (b)   No person shall drive, operate or propel a motor vehicle or
motor-driven cycle past any barrier, sign or other device indicating that
vehicular traffic is prohibited in, upon or through any area upon which
vehicular traffic is prohibited.
      (2)   Private property; permission required. No person shall drive a
motor vehicle of any size on any private property unless the operator has
obtained the permission of the owner of the private property.
      (3)   Emergency vehicles exempt. Emergency vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this division (H).
(Prior Code, § 7-3-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.13 TRUCK TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Authority to establish and regulate truck traffic.
      (1)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes
through the city for the use of trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds
or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles passing
through the city.
      (2)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may prescribe certain
streets and roads in the city for restricted travel and limit any truck having
more than two axles from traveling on certain designated roads and streets.
Restrictions shall not apply to trucks making local deliveries, nor will it
apply to agricultural equipment or vehicles using the roads for agricultural
purposes.
   (B)   Signs posted. The city shall see that appropriate and adequate signs
are placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the
routes.
   (C)   Obedience to signs required.
      (1)   When such signs are so erected and in place as provided in division
(B) above, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been
prescribed as provided herein, while passing through the city, shall keep on
such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers
of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when
driving within the city and not merely through the city.
      (2)   When signs are erected and in place restricting trucks with two or
more axles as provided in division (A)(2) above, no driver of such vehicle
shall drive on the street so designated.
   (D)   Map of routes required. The City Clerk shall keep and maintain
accurate maps setting out the truck routes designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.14 PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Driving in procession. Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable except
when otherwise directed or escorted by a police officer. Each driver shall
follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practicable and safe and at a speed
as designated by the escort for the procession.
   (B)   Driving through processions. No driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while
they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as
required in this section. This division (B) shall not apply at intersections
where traffic is controlled by police officers.
   (C)   Identification of funeral procession. A funeral composed of a
procession of vehicles shall be identified by headlights turned on or by the
display upon the outside of each vehicle an identifying insignia or by such
other method as may be determined and designated by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.15 RAILROAD TRAINS AND CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Railroad signs and signals.
      (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. This division (A)(1) shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagger gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard;
         (d)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing; or
         (e)   The tracks at the crossing are not clear.
      (2)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed, or fail to obey the directions of a law
enforcement officer at the crossing.
      (3)   The operator of a Class A, B or C commercial vehicle not required
to stop at all railroad grade crossings, as prescribed in division (B) below,
shall slow down and check that all tracks are clear of an approaching train.
   (B)   Certain vehicles to stop. The driver of any “commercial motor
vehicle”, as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5, shall comply with railroad crossing
provisions as prescribed in 49 C.F.R. § 392.10.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.16 PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   Authority to establish. The Mayor, subject to direction by the City
Council, if any, shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same.
   (B)   Driving on play streets. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a
vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles
having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then such
drivers shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or
portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.17 MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Boarding or alighting from vehicles. No person shall board or alight
from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
   (B)   Unlawful riding. No operator of a motor vehicle shall allow a
passenger to ride outside the passenger compartment of the vehicle on the
streets of the city; provided this division (B) shall not apply to persons so
riding on private property or for parades or special events nor shall this
section apply to passengers riding on the bed of a pickup truck.
   (C)   Toy vehicles.
      (1)   Use on streets prohibited generally; crossing streets. No person
upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street in a crosswalk. While so crossing, such person shall be granted all of
the rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
division (C) shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street
authorized by ordinance.
      (2)   Clinging to vehicle. No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized
scooter, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or
himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.18 RECKLESS, CARELESS, NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
   (A)   Reckless driving. It shall be deemed reckless driving for any person
to drive a motor vehicle in a careless or wanton manner without regard for the
safety of persons or property or in violation of the conditions outlined in §
72.05.
   (B)   Careless, negligent driving.
      (1)   No person shall drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked or
stop any vehicle:
         (a)   In a careless manner;
         (b)   In a negligent manner;
         (c)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property;
or
         (d)   In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful
movement of traffic or use of the streets.
      (2)   Every driver shall remain alert and give full attention to the safe
control and operation of his vehicle while it is in motion. Every driver of a
motor vehicle shall, upon stopping, or upon stopping and leaving the vehicle,
park the same in a careful and prudent manner and place so as not to interfere
with the operation of other vehicles or with pedestrians or other traffic.
Failure to comply with these requirements shall be deemed careless driving in
violation of this division (B).
      (3)   Any driver who engages in any activity or does any act while
driving that interferes with the safe operation and control of his or her
vehicle, or who continues to operate his or her vehicle when any other person
riding thereon or therein engages in any activity or does any act which
interferes with his or her operation thereof is guilty of careless driving.
      (4)   A driver of a motor vehicle who collides with another vehicle or
with any person or property because of driving error or inattention is guilty
of careless driving.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.19 DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS.
   Regarding driving under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances, or combination thereof, in the city, the provisions of 47 O.S. §
11-902, as amended, shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
Parking Regulations
   
73.01   Method of parking
   
73.02   Operation of vehicle during and after parking
   
73.03   Parking prohibited in specified places
   
73.04   General parking restrictions
   
73.05   Parking restrictions on specific streets; signs posted
   
73.06   Parking in areas designated for persons with disabilities
   
73.07   Double-parking
   
73.08   Parking for emergency vehicles
   
73.09   Removing enforcement markings prohibited
Loading and Unloading
   
73.20   Authority to designate loading zones
   
73.21   Parking in passenger loading zones
   
73.22   Parking in freight loading zones
   
73.23   Permit to back to curb
   
73.24   Public carrier stops
 
   
73.99   Penalty
PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 73.01 METHOD OF PARKING.
   (A)   Parallel parking.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb. Every vehicle stopped and parked upon the left-
hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the left-
hand curb.
      (2)   A person engaging in the collection and disposal of solid waste or
recycling material, or both, as a business, pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, being 27A O.S. §§ 2-10-101 et seq., shall
be exempt from the provisions of this division (A) while in the performance of
such activities.
   (B)   Angle parking.
      (1)   The Mayor, subject to direction of the City Council, may determine
upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking will be permitted and
authority shall continue until changed permitting angle parking on any such
street or part of street and the angle parking markings or signs are amended.
      (2)   On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
      (3)   Angle parking is not permitted on any state or federal aid highway
unless the State Department of Transportation has determined that the roadway
is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the
free movement of traffic.
   (C)   Parking within marked spaces. In an area where parking spaces have
been marked on the surface of the street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park
it within a parking space as thus marked and not on or over a line delineating
a space.
   (D)   Width of roadway. No person shall park a vehicle upon a street or
alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic.
   (E)   Brakes set; motor off; wheels turned.
      (1)   The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively
setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front
wheels to the curb or side of the street.
      (2)   Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a
motor vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked.
Animals left or parked on the streets shall be securely hitched.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF VEHICLE DURING AND AFTER PARKING.
   (A)   Starting stopped vehicle. No person shall start a vehicle which is
stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with
reasonable safety.
   (B)   Opening and closing vehicle door. No person shall open the door of a
motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so. No person shall leave a door open on the side of a
motor vehicle available to moving traffic to load or unload passengers.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-2) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid a conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with law or ordinance or the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant except in a parking space
officially marked;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection except in a
parking space officially marked;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
city indicates the different length by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet
of such entrance when properly signposted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway underpass;
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking; and
      (15)   At any other place prohibited by this code or law.
   (B)   No person engaging in the collection and disposal of solid waste or
recycling material, or both, as a business, pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, being 27A O.S. §§ 2-10-101 et seq., shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer
or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   Within an intersection;
      (3)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (4)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway underpass; or
      (5)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (C)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is lawful.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-3) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Obstructing traffic.
      (1)   No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to prohibit the free movement of authorized
emergency vehicles or vehicular traffic.
      (2)   Any vehicle parked upon the public streets or right-of-way shall be
parked so as not to obstruct the view of any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal by oncoming traffic.
   (B)   Parking on left.
      (1)   The Mayor, subject to direction of the City Council, may determine
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-
way roadway and to have signs or marks placed giving notice thereof.
      (2)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs or marks are placed to permit such standing or parking.
   (C)   Parking on private property. No person shall park a vehicle on the
private property of another without the consent of the owner of the property,
his or her agent or tenant. Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this
division (C) may, upon complaint of the property owner, his or her agent or
tenant, be removed and impounded by the police; and the vehicle owner must pay
removal, storage and impounding fees.
   (D)   Parking in private spaces.
      (1)   The parking, leaving or keeping of vehicles, either with or without
occupants, upon real property owned or leased for use of hotels or business
establishments as private parking places, without permission of the owner or
lessee, as the case may be, is prohibited. Any vehicle parked or left in
violation of this division (D) shall, upon the complaint of the owner or lessee
of the property, be removed from the premises by the police or on the order of
any police officer, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. Such removal
may be accomplished by the Police Department or by a Police Department order
directing any person operating a towing service to pull the vehicle to his or
her garage or place of business, where it shall be held in the custody of the
Police Department until the towing charges and the fine and costs, if any, are
paid.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or park a motor vehicle onto
the driveway, parking area or any portion of the premises of any business or
commercial property if signs are posted. This division (C)(2) shall be enforced
as to all private property where a sign shall have been posted in a clearly
visible location stating substantially as follows:
PRIVATE PROPERTY. NO PARKING OR TRESPASSING.
   (E)   Alleys. No person shall, at any time, stop, stand or park a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device or in case of
emergency within any alley except for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise, with the maximum time permitted for
loading or unloading being one hour; however, such vehicle must be headed in
the proper direction in the alley and it must be parked on the right half of
one-way alleys.
   (F)   Parking for certain purposes prohibited. No person shall park his or
her vehicle upon any street or highway for the principal purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
      (2)   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise;
      (3)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency; and
      (4)   Selling merchandise or any other thing from vehicles without
appropriate permit or license from the city.
   (G)   Parking more than 24 hours. No person shall park a vehicle on any
street for a period of time longer than 24 hours.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-4) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON SPECIFIC STREETS; SIGNS POSTED.
   The City Council, by resolution, may establish parking time limits, or
prohibit parking, on designated streets by having appropriate signs placed
thereon. When such signs are in place, no person shall park a vehicle in
violation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-5) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 PARKING IN AREAS DESIGNATED FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle
in any parking space that is designated and posted as a reserved area for the
parking of a motor vehicle operated by or transporting a physically disabled
person unless such person has applied for and been issued a detachable placard
indicating physical disability under the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112, and
such placard is displayed as provided in said § 15-112 or in rules adopted
pursuant thereto, or has applied for and been issued a physically disabled
license plate pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 1135.1 or 1135.2, and
such license plate is displayed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma
Vehicle License and Registration Act, being 47 O.S. §§ 1101 et seq.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor
vehicle, whether with or without a physically disabled placard or plate, in any
disabled parking space access aisle, wheelchair ramp, wheelchair loading/
unloading area or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-6) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 DOUBLE-PARKING.
   (A)   Prohibited generally. No vehicle shall be double-parked on any street
within the city limits except in compliance with the direction of a police
officer, or traffic-control device, or except when necessary to avoid conflict
with another vehicle.
   (B)   Delivery vehicles. Delivery vehicles, either loading or unloading, may
double-park in the right-hand lane while in the process of loading or unloading
and making delivery to local business establishments; provided that the driver
of the delivery vehicle shall keep a lookout for cars and vehicles needing or
attempting to move away from the curb and shall move his or her delivery
vehicle as soon as possible to permit the parked vehicles to be moved. Such
double-parking shall be permitted only so long as both traffic lanes are not
blocked, and the vehicle so parked is making use of proper caution or hazard
signals to alert other motorists.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-7) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 PARKING FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Areas designated; parking restricted. The Mayor, subject to any
directions which the City Council may give, is authorized to designate streets
or portions thereof where parking is limited to authorized emergency vehicles.
When signs are in place giving notice of such limitation, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle,
upon any such street or portion thereof.
   (B)   Fire lanes. The Mayor, or his or her authorized representative, when
the public safety shall require, is authorized and directed to prohibit parking
upon private property used for shopping centers, schools, hospitals, nursing
homes, restaurants and places of public entertainment within zones to be
clearly designated and defined by appropriate sign, when the same is necessary
for the establishment of fire lanes to avoid obstruction of free passage and
access. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except an authorized
emergency vehicle, within such prohibited fire lanes, except on direction and
by authority of a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-8) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 REMOVING ENFORCEMENT MARKINGS PROHIBITED.
   No person, with intent to extend the time during which a motor vehicle can
be parked at a time restricted parking space, shall remove, erase, obliterate,
smudge or otherwise delete or disfigure any chalk or any other mark or symbol
used by authorized employees of the city in connection with the enforcement of
motor vehicle parking restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-9) Penalty, see §
73.99
LOADING AND UNLOADING
§ 73.20 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE LOADING ZONES.
   The Mayor, subject to direction of the City Council, may determine the
location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and
maintained appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-1)
§ 73.21 PARKING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period
not to exceed three minutes.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-2) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.22 PARKING IN FREIGHT LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up
and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which
is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-3) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.23 PERMIT TO BACK TO CURB.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing
of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or
materials, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
   (B)   Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the
privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may revoke such permits at any time.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any permit issued under this section.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-4) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.24 PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS.
   (A)   Authority to designate public carrier stops. The Mayor, subject to
direction of the City Council, may establish bus stops and stands, taxicab
stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such
public streets in such places and in such manner as it determines to be of the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop, bus stand,
taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
   (B)   Bus stops.
      (1)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand.
      (2)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street
at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so
designated, except in case of an emergency.
      (3)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or
passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with
the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb
and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic.
   (C)   Taxicab stands. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such
vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated. This division (C) shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
   (D)   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. No person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a
taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and
appropriately signed; except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus or taxicab waiting to enter such zone.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-5) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Parking in areas designated for persons with disabilities.
      (1)   (a)   Violation of §
73.06 shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the person shall be fined
$500; provided any person cited for a first offense of a violation of this
section who has displayed a placard which has expired pursuant to 47 O.S. § 15-
112(D)(4) or (D)(5) shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge and shall not
be required to pay the fine or court costs if the person presents to the court,
within 30 days of the issuance of the citation, a notice from the State
Department of Public Safety that the person has obtained a valid placard
pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112(D).
         (b)   Fines collected pursuant to this section shall be distributed as
follows:
            1.   Eighty percent to the general fund of the city, subject to the
provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-115(C); and
            2.   Twenty percent to a dedicated fund established by the State
Department of Public Safety for the development, implementation and maintenance
of a system for the enforcement of the disability parking provisions of the
state.
      (2)   In addition, vehicles unlawfully parked in violation of §
73.06 shall be subject to immediate tow by a licensed tow truck operator at the
request of the landowner or a duly appointed agent of the landowner, at the
request of any person unable to lawfully gain access to or move his or her
vehicle, at the request of any person unable to lawfully gain access to the
area blocked by the unlawfully parked vehicle or at the request of a city
police officer. The owner of any vehicle unlawfully parked in violation of this
section shall pay any and all reasonable and necessary costs associated with
towing and storage of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-6)
CHAPTER 74: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
Section
   
74.01   Compliance with state laws
   
74.02   Certain vehicles prohibited; loads
   
74.03   Permit for vehicles with protrusions on wheels
   
74.04   Obstruction to driver’s view and driving mechanism
   
74.05   Windshield wipers
   
74.06   Noise control; vehicle emissions
   
74.07   Child restraint
   
74.08   Seat belts
   
74.09   Vehicle size; weight and load
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS.
   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by 47 O.S. No person shall operate a vehicle upon a street of the city
which is not equipped as required by state law. No person shall fail to use
such equipment in the manner required by the state law, or use it in a manner
prohibited by state law.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-1) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.02 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; LOADS.
   (A)   No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface
of a street shall be driven or moved on any street. Vehicles equipped with
metal tires or lugs are specifically prohibited.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed,
or so loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the city
and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, unless such vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom; except that sand may
be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other substances
may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
   (D)   No person shall operate on any street any vehicle with any load,
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders or other
loose materials susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
such load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry
or agricultural products only, except baled agricultural products; however, any
such trucks shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or
poultry from escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.03 PERMIT FOR VEHICLES WITH PROTRUSIONS ON WHEELS.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, pull or move, otherwise than by
hauling, upon the paved streets of the city, any tractor or other vehicle with
lugs, flanges or other protruding parts upon the surface of the wheels of the
same without first obtaining a written permit from the Street Commissioner.
Such permit shall not be granted unless all lugs, flanges or other protruding
parts upon the surface of the wheels are first removed, or unless a base or
board is laid upon the paved street for the wheels of such vehicle to run upon
so as to keep the wheels from coming in contact with the pavement and so as to
entirely protect the pavement from the wheels.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2-1) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW AND DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with
the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, other
nontransparent material or debris, including, but not limited to, snow, ice or
frost, upon the front windshield or the side wings, or side or rear windows or
suspend any sign, poster, object or other material from the interior of the
vehicle which materially obstructs, obscures or impairs the driver’s clear view
of the roadway ahead or to either side or of any intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-3) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 WINDSHIELD WIPERS.
   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with an electric
windshield wiper mechanism for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the
windshield. Every windshield wiper blade and windshield wiper mechanism upon a
motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. When replacing the
wiper blade, the length of the blade shall not be reduced from the
manufacturer’s specification.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-4) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.06 NOISE CONTROL; VEHICLE EMISSIONS.
   (A)   Noise control.
      (1)   Every vehicle shall be equipped, maintained and operated so as to
prevent excessive or unusual noise.
      (2)   Every motor vehicle shall, at all times, be equipped with a muffler
or other effective noise suppressing system in good working order and in
constant operation, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar
device.
      (3)   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in any
manner which will amplify or increase the noise or sound emitted louder than
that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle.
   (B)   Vehicle emissions. The engine and power mechanism of every motor
vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive
fumes or smoke or both.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-5) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.07 CHILD RESTRAINT.
   (A)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Every driver, when transporting a child under six years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways or streets of the city, shall provide
for the protection of said child by properly using a child passenger restraint
system. For purposes of this section, CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM means an
infant or child passenger restraint system which meets the federal standards as
set by 49 C.F.R. § 571.213.
      (2)   Children at least six years of age but younger than 13 years of age
shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      (2)   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use;
      (4)   The transportation of children who, for medical reasons, are unable
to be placed in such devices; provided there is written documentation from a
physician of such medical reason; or
      (5)   The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and
who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap
safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination
lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety
belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40
pounds; provided, however, for purposes of this division (B)(5), BACK SEAT
shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by
a licensed childcare facility or church; provided further there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this
division (B) if, at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed
childcare facility or church provides the officer with a written statement,
verified by the parent or legal guardian, that the child weighs more than 40
pounds.
   (C)   Legal proceedings.
      (1)   A violation of the provisions of this section shall be admissible
as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages unless the plaintiff
in such action or proceeding is a child under 16 years of age.
      (2)   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of
damages.
   (D)   Nonliability of child passenger safety technicians. A person who is
certified as a child passenger safety technician and who, in good faith,
provides inspection, adjustment or educational services regarding child
passenger restraint systems shall not be liable for civil damages resulting
from any act or omission in providing such services, other than acts or
omissions constituting gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-6) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.08 SEAT BELTS.
   (A)   Requirements for front seat passengers. Every operator and front seat
passenger of a Class A commercial motor vehicle, Class B commercial motor
vehicle, Class C commercial motor vehicle or a passenger vehicle operated in
the city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system,
required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to 49
C.F.R. § 571.208. For the purposes of this section, PASSENGER VEHICLE shall
mean a Class D motor vehicle, but shall not include trucks, truck tractors,
recreational vehicles, motorcycles or motorized bicycles or a vehicle used
primarily for farm use which is registered and licensed pursuant to the
provisions of state law.
   (B)   Exemptions from provisions.
      (1)   The State Commissioner of Public Safety, upon application from a
person who, for medical reasons, is unable to wear a safety seat belt system
supported by written attestation of such fact from a physician licensed
pursuant to state law, may issue to the person an exemption from the provisions
of this section. The exemption shall be in the form of a restriction appearing
on the driver’s license of the person and shall remain in effect until the
expiration date of the driver’s license. Nothing in this division (B)(1) shall
be construed to prevent the person from applying for another exemption as
provided in this section. The issuance of an attestation by a physician and the
subsequent issuance of an exemption by the Commissioner, in good faith, shall
not give rise to, nor shall the physician and the state thereby incur, any
liability whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason
of failure of the person to wear a safety seat belt system.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle
while performing official duties as a route carrier of the United States Postal
Service.
   (C)   Points for violations not applicable. The State Department of Public
Safety shall not record or assess points for violations of this section on any
license holder’s traffic record maintained by said Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-7) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.09 VEHICLE SIZE; WEIGHT AND LOAD.
   (A)   No person shall drive or convey through any street or bridge any
vehicle the width, height, length, weight or load of which exceeds that
authorized by state law, or which vehicle exceeds the width, height, length,
weight or load limits established by the city, county or state as indicated by
appropriate signs erected on the street, road or bridge.
   (B)   The maximum load limit on all residential streets within the city is
eight tons.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-8) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Child restraint. Any person convicted of violating §
74.07(A)(1) or (A)(2) shall be punishable by a fine of $50 and shall pay all
court costs thereof. Revenue from such fine shall be apportioned to the State
Department of Public Safety restricted revolving fund and used by the State
Highway Safety Office to promote the use of child passenger restraint systems
as provided in 47 O.S. § 11-1113. This fine shall be suspended and the court
costs limited to a maximum of $15 in the case of the first offense upon proof
of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system;
provided the State Department of Public Safety shall not assess points to the
driving record of any person convicted of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-6)
   (C)   Seat belts. Fine and court costs for violating the provisions of §
74.08 shall not exceed $20.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-7)
CHAPTER 75: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
75.01   Applicability of traffic regulations
   
75.02   Drivers to exercise care
   
75.03   Right-of-way
   
75.04   Pedestrians crossing roadway
   
75.05   Pedestrians walking along roadways
   
75.06   Soliciting prohibited
   
75.07   Pedestrians with disabilities
§ 75.01 APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in
this chapter. At all other places, pedestrians shall be granted those rights
and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.02 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.03 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.04 PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAY.
   (A)   Prohibited crossings. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-
control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place
except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   Leaving curb suddenly. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or
other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so
close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (C)   Use right half of crosswalk. Pedestrians shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks.
   (D)   Crossing at right angles. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any
place other than by route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route
to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk.
   (E)   Pedestrians to yield.
      (1)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within
a marked crosswalk or within an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles upon the roadway.
      (2)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian
tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
      (3)   This division (E) shall not apply under the conditions stated in
division (A) above when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain
designated places.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.05 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of
the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction and shall yield to approaching vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.06 SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, donation, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for
the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked
or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.07 PEDESTRIANS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
with clearly visible disabilities.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to display any item designated
for use by those persons with disabilities unless the person requires such use.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 76: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles, Electric Assisted Bicycles, Motor-Driven Cycles, Motorcycles,
Motorized Scooters and Mopeds
   
76.01   Application of provisions
   
76.02   State traffic laws apply
   
76.03   Riding on motorcycles, motorized scooters, motor-driven cycles and
mopeds
   
76.04   Time of operation restricted
   
76.05   Speed restrictions
   
76.06   Operation by persons under 16
   
76.07   Equipment required
   
76.08   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
76.09   Riding on bicycles
   
76.10   Operation of bicycles
   
76.11   Parking bicycles
   
76.12   Responsibility of parent or guardian
Utility Vehicles, Golf Carts and Similar Vehicles
   
76.25   Definitions
   
76.26   Special provisions
 
   
76.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.04
   Enforcement of traffic provisions, see §§
70.25 through
70.29
BICYCLES, ELECTRIC ASSISTED BICYCLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES,
MOTORCYCLES, MOTORIZED SCOOTERS AND MOPEDS
§ 76.01 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are applicable to “bicycles”,
“electric assisted bicycles”, “motor-driven cycles”, “motorcycles”, “motorized
scooters” and “mopeds”, as said terms are defined in 47 O.S., as the same may
be amended or superseded.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this subchapter shall
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or highway or upon any
path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-1)
§ 76.02 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.
   (A)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the
rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of any
vehicle regulated by this title, except as to such regulations which, by their
nature, can have no application to bicycles.
   (B)   No person operating any vehicle covered by this chapter shall pass
other vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction (“lane
splitting”).
(Prior Code, § 7-8-2) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.03 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES, MOTORIZED SCOOTERS, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLES AND
MOPEDS.
   Any person operating a motorcycle, motorized scooter, motor-driven cycle or
moped shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and
such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride
on the vehicle, unless it is designed to carry more than one person, in which
event, a passenger may ride only upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two persons or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or
side of the operator.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-3) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.04 TIME OF OPERATION RESTRICTED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven cycle or a motorized
scooter on a street or highway in the city during a time when state law
prohibits the operation of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-4) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.05 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized
scooter or moped at a speed greater than the speed limit provided by ordinance
of the city for automobiles or other motor vehicles nor at a speed greater than
the speed limit regularly posted for automobiles or other motor vehicles within
the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor-driven cycle at a speed greater than
35 mph.
   (C)   No person shall operate any motorized scooter:
      (1)   At a speed greater than 25 mph; or
      (2)   On any roadway with a posted speed limit of greater than 25 mph.
   (D)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-5) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.06 OPERATION BY PERSONS UNDER 16.
   (A)   The operation of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized scooters
and mopeds within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited for persons
under 16 years of age between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m.
   (B)   In no event nor at any time shall an operator under the age of 16
years drive a motorcycle on a street or highway which has a minimum speed limit
established and posted.
   (C)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate any motorcycle,
motorized scooter, motor-driven cycle or moped having an engine size greater
than 250 cc.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-6) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.07 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Motorcycles, motorized scooters and mopeds. The following equipment
shall be required on all motorcycles, motorized scooters and mopeds being
operated and driven in the city.
      (1)   Rearview mirrors. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than
three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and
positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of 200 feet to the rear of his or her vehicle.
      (2)   Windshield. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect
the operator from foreign objects; except that in lieu of such windshield, the
operator may wear goggles or a face shield of sufficient material and design to
protect his or her eyes from foreign objects.
      (3)   Brakes and brake light.
         (a)   All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped with
brakes adequate to control the movement of same to stop and hold such vehicles,
including two separate means of applying the brakes. One means shall be
effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall apply the
brakes to the rear wheel.
         (b)   All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear
of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade or color
between red or amber, visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the
rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon application of either
brake system described in division (A)(3)(a) above.
      (4)   Speedometer. All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least
the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle.
      (5)   Fenders. All vehicles covered under this section shall be equipped
with a fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the
manufacturer.
      (6)   Lights. All vehicles covered under this section shall carry at
least one lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least
300 feet in the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one taillamp
mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible
from at least 300 feet to the rear, and such lights required by this division
(A)(6) shall be illuminated whenever such vehicles are in motion.
      (7)   Muffler; cutout. It shall be an offense to operate any motorized
vehicle covered under this section with the exhaust system modified so that
motor noise is increased greater than that of the original muffler provided by
the manufacturer of the vehicle.
      (8)   Headgear. No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride
upon any vehicle covered under this section, unless such person is equipped
with and wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured
for use by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of
lining, padding and chinstraps and be of a design so as not to distort the view
of the driver.
   (B)   Bicycles.
      (1)   Lights and reflector. Every bicycle in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear
of a type which shall be visible from distances of 50 feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear may
be used in addition to the red reflector.
      (2)   Brake. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake of sufficient
braking force that the operator is able to make the braked wheel skid on dry,
level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-7) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.08 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to all
other vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle
to make any such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-8) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.09 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped by the manufacturer.
   (C)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-9) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.10 OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   Riding on roadways.
      (1)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then
existing shall ride as near as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway except under any of the following situations:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway; and
         (c)   When reasonably necessary to avoid hazardous conditions and
while exercising due care, including, but not limited to:
            1.   Fixed or moving objects;
            2.   Parked or moving vehicles;
            3.   Pedestrians or animals;
            4.   Surface hazards; or
            5.   Any time it is unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or
edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Any person riding a bicycle upon a one-way street or highway with
two or more marked lanes of travel may ride as near as practicable to the left-
hand curb or edge of the street or highway.
      (3)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and
reasonable flow of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single
lane.
   (B)   Emerging from alley, driveway or building. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk
or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to
all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering
the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
   (C)   Riding on sidewalks. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within the city limits in a manner that is unsafe or disrespectful to the
rights of pedestrians. The City Manager is authorized to have signs erected on
any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any
person, and, when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
   (D)   Use of bicycle paths. Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been
provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not
use the roadway if required by local, municipal or county ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-10) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.11 PARKING BICYCLES.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or highway other than upon the
roadway against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, or against a building, or at the curb in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-11) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.12 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   The parent or legal guardian of any child, or the guardian of any ward,
shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-12) Penalty, see §
76.99
UTILITY VEHICLES, GOLF CARTS AND SIMILAR VEHICLES
§ 76.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV). A vehicle powered by an internal combustion
engine manufactured and used exclusively for off highway use traveling on four
or more low pressure tires, and having a seat designed to be straddled by the
operator and handlebars for steering.
   GO-KART. Any four-wheeled internal combustion or electrical vehicle that is
powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage
batteries or other sources of electrical current and whose top speed may be up
to 30 mph designed primarily for operation on a GO-KART track or course and
which is not registered with the state.
   GOLF CART. Any four-wheeled internal combustible or electrical vehicle that
is powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable storage
batteries or other sources of electrical current and whose top speed is greater
than 20 mph, but not greater than 25 mph, designed primarily for the operation
on a recreational golf course which is not registered with the state.
   LOW SPEED ELECTRICAL VEHICLE (LSEV). Any four-wheeled electrical vehicle
that is powered by an electric motor that draws current from rechargeable
storage batteries or other sources of electrical current and whose top speed is
greater than 20 mph, but not greater than 25 mph, and is manufactured in
compliance with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration standards
for low speed vehicles in 49 C.F.R. § 571.500. Also, any three- or four-wheeled
electrical powered chair or scooter type vehicles used by handicapped persons
which generally have top speeds less than 20 mph which may or may not be in
compliance with National Highway Traffic Safety Administration standards.
   MAINTENANCE UTILITY VEHICLE. A vehicle powered by either an internal
combustion engine or electrical vehicle that is powered by an electric motor
that draws current from rechargeable storage batteries or other sources of
electrical current and whose top speed is greater than 20 mph, but not greater
than 25 mph, utilized for transportation of city employees or equipment during
routine maintenance of city-owned property or facilities.
   MINITRUCK. A foreign manufactured import or domestic manufactured vehicle
powered by an internal combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of
1,000 cubic centimeters or less, which is 67 inches or less in width, with an
unladen dry weight of 3,400 pounds or less, traveling on four or more tires,
having a top speed of approximately 55 mph, equipped with a bed or compartment
for hauling, and having an enclosed passenger cab.
   UTILITY VEHICLE (UTV). A vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine,
manufactured and used exclusively for off highway use, equipped with seating
for two or more people and a steering wheel, traveling on four or more wheels.
(Prior Code, § 7-10-1) (Ord. 2017-2, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 76.26 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the definitions of the terms “motor vehicle” and
“motorcycle”, contained in the Motor Vehicle License and Registration Act, 74
O.S., 1975, § 562, motor-driven cycles, known and commonly referred to as
“minibikes”, “trail bikes”, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and other similar trade
names, shall not be permitted to be operated on the streets or highways of the
city.
   (B)   Go-karts, power lawn mowers and other motor vehicles which are
manufactured principally for use off the streets and highways shall not be
permitted to be operated on the streets or highways of the city. However, this
shall not prohibit limited occasional necessary movement of such go-karts,
power lawn mowers and other such vehicles on city streets, and shall not
prohibit the use of minibikes and trail bikes used by participants in parades.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting farm
vehicles from using the streets or highways.
   (D)   Golf carts, UTVs, LSEVs and small vehicles commonly known as
minitrucks are prohibited from operating on federal and state highways and city
streets within the limits of the city, except as follows:
      (1)   When the UTV, LSEV, golf cart or minitruck is operated on a city
street by a person 16 years of age or older and possesses a valid operator
license during the daylight hours only. Daylight hours are determined to be
one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour before sunset as listed by the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;
      (2)   UTVs, LSEVs, golf carts and minitrucks may operate on a federal or
state highway only if making a perpendicular (90 degree) crossing of a federal
or state highway located within the limits of the city;
      (3)   Every person operating a UTV, LSEV, minitruck or golf cart upon a
street shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state,
declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances
of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special
regulations in this section and except as to those provisions of laws and
ordinances which, by their nature, can have no application;
      (4)   All golf carts, go-karts, power lawn mowers, minitrucks, LSEVs,
ATVs and UTVs while operating within the limits of the city shall have a slow
moving vehicle emblem which shall be affixed to the rear portion of the
aforementioned vehicle. Golf carts and UTVs shall be equipped with a lap safety
belt for each occupant of the golf cart or UTV. Passengers under the age of six
years old are restricted from riding upon such golf cart or UTV, unless the
driver of the golf cart or UTV is 21 years of age or older. LSEVs shall be
exempt from the lap safety belt requirement due to the lower speeds of such
vehicles;
      (5)   All vehicles subject to this chapter while operating in the limits
of the city shall be restricted from operating on a street or highway with a
posted speed limit greater than 35 mph and shall not be driven at a speed
greater than 25 mph; and
      (6)   No vehicle subject to this chapter may be operated on city streets
during periods of rain, snow or other inclement weather.
   (E)   City-owned maintenance utility vehicle(s) may be operated anywhere
within the city limits of the city while performing authorized city functions.
Operation of the maintenance utility vehicle on any street or highway with
speed limits posted greater than 35 mph must be authorized by the City
Administrator or his or her designee:
      (1)   Permitted only while performing specific tasks;
      (2)   Required to be done during normal business hours (daytime only);
and
      (3)   The restriction of use will be determined by the City Administrator
or his or her designee.
   (F)   All golf cart, LSEV or UTV vehicles operated on any city street of the
city will be required to:
      (1)   Register the golf cart, minitruck, LSEV or UTV with the Police
Department;
      (2)   Purchase a city permit for such operation at a rate established by
resolution of the City Council. All permits shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which they are purchased, and the cost of initial purchase shall be
prorated for any period of less than 12 months for which that permit will
apply. Subsequent permit purchases for the same golf cart, LSEV or UTV shall be
100% of the established rate, regardless of when purchased; and
      (3)   Golf carts, UTVs, LSEVs and minitrucks operating on city streets
and highways must carry liability insurance issued through a licensed insurance
company unless they are uninsurable because they cannot be classified as an
insurable vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 7-10-2) (Ord. 2017-2, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who commits any act forbidden, or fails to perform any act
required, in this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense
punishable as provided in §
10.99. The conviction for the violation of any offense in this chapter shall
not be recorded on the driving record of the person.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-13)
   (C)   Violation of §
76.26 shall be punished in accordance with §
10.99 and may include fines, the revocation, suspension, cancellation or denial
of registration under the provisions of this chapter and code provision, upon
conviction by the municipal court.
(Prior Code, § 7-10-2)
(Ord. 2017-2, passed 4-15-2019)
CHAPTER 77: RAILROADS
Section
   
77.01   Improvements to and maintenance of public ways required
   
77.02   Trains obstructing crossings
   
77.03   Obstructing passage of trains
   
77.04   Boarding, climbing on trains
§ 77.01 IMPROVEMENTS TO AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Streets.
      (1)   When a railway occupies any portion of a street with its tracks
running in a general direction of the street, either on or adjacent thereto,
the railway shall improve the space between its tracks and two feet on either
side thereof in the same manner that the remainder of the street is or has been
improved, or with such satisfactory materials as the city may approve.
      (2)   When the tracks of a railway cross any street that is being or has
been paved, the company shall pave as much of the street as is occupied by its
track and two feet on each side, using the same material which is or has been
used on the street, or such other satisfactory material as the city may
approve. When more than one track crosses a street within a distance of 100
feet, measuring from inside rail to inside rail, the railway company shall
grade, gutter, drain and curb the street area between its tracks and surface or
pave it with the same material which the city will use or has used on the
street.
   (B)   Alleys. In case any railway company shall occupy an alley with its
track or tracks, the company shall improve, gutter, drain and grade such alley,
and shall surface or pave it with the same material which is or has been used
on the alley, or with such other satisfactory material as the city may approve.
   (C)   Sidewalks. Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their
rights-of-way using the same material which is used in adjacent sidewalks
insofar as is practicable under the circumstances. The railway company shall
construct sidewalks on both sides of the streets when both sides are used by
pedestrians.
   (D)   Maintenance requirements.
      (1)   It is the duty of every owner of railroad tracks to maintain the
railroad tracks, roadbed and right-of-way in a good condition for use by the
public when the railroad tracks and roadbed cross or intersect any public
street within the city.
      (2)   Railway companies shall keep all such improvements made by them in
a good state of repair at all times.
   (E)   Violations. The failure to perform such duties as are herein required
after 30 days’ written notice from the Mayor shall be a violation, and each day
that the tracks and roadbed shall remain in an unsatisfactory condition shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-9-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.02 TRAINS OBSTRUCTING CROSSINGS.
   It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five minutes. This section shall not apply to trains or cars in
motion, other than those engaged in switching.
(Prior Code, § 8-9-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.03 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF TRAINS.
   Any person who willfully or maliciously places any obstruction or any other
thing on the track of any railroad within the limits of the city, or who tears
up, removes, burns or destroys any part of such railroad, or the works thereof,
with intent to obstruct the passage of any engine or car thereon, or to throw
them off the track, is guilty of an offense, punishable as provided in this
code.
(Prior Code, § 8-9-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 77.04 BOARDING, CLIMBING ON TRAINS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to or in any manner
attach himself or herself to any railway train, locomotive or railway car while
such is in motion within the city, unless such person is acting in the line of
duty.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to board any train or railroad car
except with a proper ticket or the permission of the person in charge of the
train or car or in the line of duty.
(Prior Code, § 8-9-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
92.   JUNK OR ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
93.   NOISE CONTROL
      
94.   PARADES AND PUBLIC EVENTS
      
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
96.   LIBRARY
      
97.   CEMETERY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Control
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals at large
   
90.03   Nuisance animals
   
90.04   Pasturing animals
   
90.05   Containment of animals; swine prohibited
   
90.06   Impoundment and redemption provisions
   
90.07   Animal bites; rabies suspects
   
90.08   Treatment of animals
   
90.09   Euthanization of deadly animals
   
90.10   Enforcement official
   
90.11   Investigations
   
90.12   Records kept
   
90.13   Court procedures and complaints
Pets
   
90.25   Licensing and registration
   
90.26   Kennels and pet shops
   
90.27   Nuisance dogs and other animals
   
90.28   Transfer of ownership; lost, stolen or deceased dogs or cats
   
90.29   Limitation on number of dogs and cats
   
90.30   Aggressive, dangerous dogs
   
90.31   Responsibilities of owner
   
90.32   Violation
 
   
90.99   Penalty
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. The voluntary relinquishment of an animal and shall include, but
shall not be limited to, vacating a premises and leaving the animal in or at
the premises, or failing to feed the animal, or allowing it to stray or wander
onto private or public property with the intention of surrendering ownership or
custody over the animal.
   AGGRESSIVE DOG. Any dog which engages in any of the following conduct within
the city limits:
      (1)   Approaches any person, without provocation, in a menacing manner,
whether or not an attack actually occurs;
      (2)   In an attacking manner, encroaches over, through or under a fence
onto public property or onto the private property of another;
      (3)   Inflicts a puncture wound, abrasion or other wound caused by the
dog’s teeth upon a person or animal, except a noxious animal, even if such
injury does not meet the definition of serious injury; or
      (4)   Kills any other animal, other than a noxious animal.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate, nonhuman animal, whether domesticated or wild,
including, but not limited to, birds and fowl, cats, dogs, livestock of all
types, other mammals and reptiles.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person or persons employed by the city as its
enforcement officer in the impoundment of animals, controlling of animals
running at large and as otherwise provided or required in this chapter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER. Any premises designated by action of the City
Council for purposes of impounding and caring for animals.
   AT LARGE OR RUNNING AT LARGE. Any animal that either:
      (1)   Is not securely confined while on the owner’s premises;
      (2)   Is not under the direct verbal control of the owner or responsible
designee, while on the owner’s premises; or
      (3)   Is not under the control of the owner or responsible designee, by
leash or by physical carrying of the animal, when not on the owner’s premises.
   CONFINE or CONFINED. To place in a state of “confinement”, as defined in
this section.
   CONFINEMENT. The condition in which an animal is securely and physically
restrained on and within the premises of the owner by means of walls, fences,
ropes, chain, leash or other device of such strength and size as to physically
prevent the animal from leaving the premises and to physically prevent the
animal from causing physical injury to persons or other animals which are off
the premises upon which the confined animal is located.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that:
      (1)   Has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on
public or private property;
      (2)   Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner
having received notice of such by the animal control officer or designee in
writing, and the dog thereafter aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the
safety of humans; or
      (3)   Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner
having received notice of such by the animal control officer or designee in
writing, and the dog thereafter attacks a dog which results in the death of
said dog either on public or private property.
   DISEASED ANIMAL. An animal believed to be infected with a dangerous or
communicable disease, such as rabies.
   ENCLOSED. To be within an enclosure.
   ENCLOSURE. While on the property of the owner, secure confinement either
indoors or in a locked pen or structure suitable to prevent unauthorized entry
and designed to prevent the animal from escaping.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. Any animal that has been bitten by or exposed to any
other animal known to have been infected with rabies.
   FOWL. Chickens, turkeys, guineas, geese, ducks and pigeons.
   IMPOUNDMENT. Placing an animal in the animal control vehicle or unit or
holding an animal in custody at the animal control shelter.
   KENNEL. Includes any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or
cats. KENNEL includes any place where more than one litter of puppies or
kittens, born to different female dogs or cats, are kept on any lot or premises
or kept in any structure whether or not for a business purpose. KENNEL also
includes any place where more than ten dogs, cats or combination of dogs and
cats are kept on any lot or premises or kept in any structure whether or not
for a business purpose.
   MENACING MANNER. An animal exhibits behavior that would cause any competent
person observing the animal to reasonably believe that the animal will cause
physical injury to persons or other animals.
   MUZZLE. A muzzling device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal
muzzle such as that used commercially with greyhounds. The MUZZLE must be made
in a manner which will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its
vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person, animal or
livestock.
   NEUTER. To remove the testicles of a male dog or cat in order to render the
animal unable to reproduce.
   NOXIOUS. When referring to an animal, means any nondomesticated or wild
animal that damages property or renders property unusable by being present in
the property. The term NOXIOUS shall not apply to any nondomesticated or wild
animal that is protected by state or federal regulations.
   OWNER or KEEPER. Any person, family, group of persons, firm or corporation
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring, or having care or custody of, an
animal or animals as defined in this chapter.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that:
      (1)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human either on public or
private property; or
      (2)   When unprovoked, attacks a dog which results in the death of said
dog either on public or private property.
   PROVOKE or PROVOCATION. With respect to an attack by an animal, means the
animal was teased, tormented or abused, including, but not limited to, being
hit, kicked or struck by a person with an object or part of a person’s body or
that any part of the animal’s body is pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person.
   SANITARY. A condition of good odor and cleanliness which precludes the
probability of disease transmission and insect breeding and which preserves the
health of the city.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
   SPAY. To remove the ovaries of a female dog or cat in order to render the
animal unable to reproduce.
   VACCINATION. An injection of rabies vaccine administered by a licensed
veterinarian.
   WITHOUT PROVOCATION. An animal was not provoked, as defined in this section;
also where the animal was not protecting its owner or owner’s property from
criminal activity by a perpetrator of a crime.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 90.02 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for an owner to permit, or fail to prevent, any animal
that he or she owns or keeps to run at large. An animal running at large in the
city may be taken by the animal control officer and impounded at the animal
shelter. The animal control officer may, at his or her discretion, cite the
owner of such animal to appear in municipal court to answer charges of
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person who is not the owner of an animal to turn
said animal at large without the consent of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-2) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall keep any animal which:
      (1)   Causes frequent or long continued noise or otherwise so as to
disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity;
      (2)   Causes excessive odor, either from itself or from its excretions,
so as to disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity;
      (3)   Molests or chases passersby or passing vehicles;
      (4)   Damages public or private property; and/or
      (5)   Defecates on public or private property, other than the owner’s
premises, unless the owner immediately removes said feces, places the feces in
a sack or bag designed for the disposal of garbage or feces and disposes of it
in a proper garbage container.
   (B)   Any violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance, as
provided in §
91.017(B) and as such, may be abated.
   (C)   Any person with knowledge thereof may file a complaint in the
municipal court against the owner or keeper of an animal which disturbs the
comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity or which is in violation of
this chapter. If the court finds that an animal is a nuisance or in violation
of this chapter, the court may order the owner or keeper to prevent and abate
the nuisance, or order the animal impounded, with the owner or keeper to pay
impoundment costs, or order punishment as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-3) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 PASTURING ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to pasture any animal on any public property
or private property without the consent of the person owning or controlling the
property.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-4) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 CONTAINMENT OF ANIMALS; SWINE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Conditions. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal within
the city except when there has been compliance with the following conditions.
      (1)   Sanitary premises. Every building or place where any animal is kept
shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept
sanitary at all times.
      (2)   Livestock.
         (a)   1.   For fowl, horses, cattle or other livestock, except swine,
a lot or pen of not less than 40,000 square feet in area shall be provided, and
the lot or pen shall have substantial fencing. No part of the lot or pen shall
be within 50 feet of any private dwelling or place used for residential
purposes other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which the animal is kept.
            2.   DOMESTICATED FOWL shall be defined only as a chicken and
rooster. Such domestic fowl may be kept within the city up to a maximum number
of ten with one rooster and a chicken coop building to house them. No part of
the chicken coop building, fence or lot shall be located within 20 feet of any
private dwelling or place used for residential purposes other than that
occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the domesticated
fowl are kept. The chicken coop building and lot shall always be maintained in
a sanitary condition. This division (A)(2)(a)2. shall only apply to the keeping
of domestic fowl. All lots or pens where domesticated fowl are located shall
have substantial fencing suitable for containing domesticated fowl. All other
provisions of this code remain in full effect.
         (b)   Any lot or pen for keeping animals, as required by this section,
that, as of April 1, 2013, does not meet the area or distance requirements of
this section shall be considered nonconforming, and the continued use of such
lot or pen for the keeping of such animals shall be lawful; provided that no
new animals are added to the lot or pen in question, the area of the pen does
not decrease, the distance to the nearest residence does not decrease unless
the final distance is greater than or equal to 50 feet and the lot or pen is in
compliance with all other provisions of this code.
         (c)   All such lots or places shall comply with sanitary requirements
of this chapter and of state law.
   (B)   Swine prohibited. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to have
custody or control of, or to own or keep any hog, shoat, pig or other swine in
the city, except in the case of the animals in question being part of a
temporary event approved by the city.
   (C)   Inspections. The animal control officer or health officer may inspect
any structure or place where an animal is kept on his or her own initiative or
upon complaint. He or she may issue any such reasonable order as he or she may
deem necessary to the owner of such animal to cause the animal to be kept as
required in this chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He
or she may make a complaint before the municipal court against any person for
violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any such reasonable order.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-5) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 2023-01, passed 3-
20-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Animal shelter. The city may contract with an outside agency to serve
as the city’s animal shelter or pound to provide for the impoundment of animals
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Impoundment of animals.
      (1)   Any dog or cat or other domesticated animal found in violation of
any provision of this chapter may be picked up and immediately impounded in the
animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. The animal control
officer, upon receiving an animal for impoundment, shall record or cause to be
recorded the description of the animal and the name and address of the owner as
may be shown on applicable city animal control records.
      (2)   If the owner is known, the officer shall:
         (a)   Notify the owner at an address or telephone number available to
the city; or
         (b)   Leave a notice with a member of the owner’s family, or other
person residing at the owner’s home, as shown in the city’s records, over the
age of 15 years, to notify the owner that unless reclaimed within 72 hours
after impoundment, Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays excluded, the animal
will be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in one of the following manners.
            1.   The animal may be humanely euthanized, the cost of which shall
be borne by the owner of the animal if such owner is known.
            2.   The animal may be adopted to a new person, so long as such
adoption is in compliance with this chapter and with state law.
            3.   The animal may be handed over to the custody of a nonprofit
humane society or animal shelter, or the designee of such nonprofit entity, at
no charge. Such shelter or humane society must be organized under federal law
as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit entity.
   (C)   Redemption of impounded animal. An owner of an impounded animal or his
or her agent may redeem the animal prior to its sale or destruction as provided
herein by paying the required fees against the animal and meeting any other
requirements which may be prescribed in this chapter. If the owner or his or
her agent has not redeemed the animal within 72 hours after the impoundment of
the animal, the animal may be otherwise disposed of as provided herein.
   (D)   Adoption provisions.
      (1)   A person desiring to adopt a dog or cat from impoundment shall pay
an adoption fee as set by the City Council by motion or resolution, costs of
necessary vaccinations and a deposit to be set by the City Council by motion or
resolution of an amount not less than $10 to guarantee the neutering or spaying
of the dog or cat, and shall sign an agreement with the city ensuring that the
dog or cat will be spayed or neutered.
      (2)   Funds deposited for the guarantee of neutering or spaying shall be
refunded to the adopting party upon the adopting party’s presentation of a
written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted animal has
been spayed or neutered. However, no refunds shall be made unless said animal
was spayed or neutered within 60 days of adoption in the case of adult animals;
or in case of infant animals, within 30 days of the date a female animal
attained the age of six months or a male animal attained the age of eight
months.
      (3)   Upon the presentation of a written report from a licensed
veterinarian stating that the life or health of an adopted animal may be
jeopardized by surgery, a 30-day extension shall be granted for the period
within which the spay or neuter surgery would otherwise be required. Further
extensions may be granted upon additional veterinary reports stating their
necessity.
      (4)   Funds deposited for the guarantee of neutering or spaying shall be
refunded to the adopting party upon reasonable proof being presented that the
adopted animal died before the expiration of the period during which the
spaying or neutering was required to be completed.
      (5)   Funds which have been forfeited by adopting parties shall be placed
in a separate account, which shall be an interest bearing account whenever
feasible. Funds shall be allocated from said account to programs that directly
promote, subsidize or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering animals
of the city. The city shall maintain accurate records of accounts which fund
spay/neuter programs.
   (E)   Fees; vaccination requirements.
      (1)   Fees for impounding and boarding an animal, to be paid upon
redemption, are as set by the City Council by motion or resolution. In
computing a fee, a fraction of a day during which an animal or fowl has been
fed shall be deemed a full day.
      (2)   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the fees to the
City Clerk or designee and present the receipt therefor to the person in charge
of the animal shelter or designee before the animal or fowl is released.
      (3)   Any dog or cat not vaccinated against rabies, being held or
impounded by the city, shall not be released to the owner or any other person
without proof of current vaccination against rabies or without paying a deposit
in such sum as is set by the Council by motion or resolution, which deposit
shall be refunded to the person putting up the same upon proof of current
vaccination being shown to the animal control officer or designee within 72
hours of the release of the animal. If such proof is not presented, then the
animal control officer or designee may retake the animal into custody and
deposit the deposit with the City Clerk or designee to be retained as expenses
of taking the animal into custody.
      (4)   Any person owning an animal and requesting impoundment or disposal
of such animal by the city shall pay a fee for such a service as set by the
Council by motion or resolution. Any person receiving such voluntary
impoundment services must sign a waiver divesting themselves of ownership of
the animal concerned. Such voluntary impoundment shall not be considered
abandonment under the provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   The owner of an impounded animal shall be responsible for the
payment of all impoundment fees, boarding fees and any reasonable and necessary
medical expenses incurred during the impoundment of the animal, regardless of
whether or not the animal is redeemed by the owner from the animal shelter.
   (F)   Diseased animals. No dog or cat suffering from rabies or other
infectious or dangerous disease may be released from the animal control shelter
except as may be allowed or required by this code, state laws or federal laws.
   (G)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   Breaking into pound. If any person breaks open, or in any manner
directly or indirectly aids in, or counsels or advises the breaking open of any
city pound or contract pound, or hinders, delays or obstructs any person duly
authorized in taking up or taking to the city pound any animals liable to be
impounded, he or she shall be guilty of an offense.
      (2)   Interfering with impoundment officials. No person shall interfere
with, or hinder, or molest any agent of the city in the performance of any duty
of such agent, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the city or its
agents, except as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-6) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 ANIMAL BITES; RABIES SUSPECTS.
   (A)   Animal bites; rabies examination; quarantine; report to state.
      (1)   Every domesticated animal capable of transmitting rabies that bites
a person shall be reported within four hours to the animal control officer or
designee. If documentation cannot be provided that the biting animal is
currently vaccinated against rabies and that such vaccination was administered
by a licensed veterinarian, then the animal shall thereupon be securely
quarantined at a veterinary hospital for a period of ten days from the date the
person was bitten, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by
permission of the animal control officer or designee and the veterinary
hospital chosen by the owner. If documentation can be provided that the biting
animal is currently vaccinated against rabies and that such vaccination was
administered by a licensed veterinarian, then the animal shall thereupon be
securely quarantined by the animal’s owner or keeper. Failure of the owner or
keeper to quarantine his or her animal within the four-hour period herein will
make him or her guilty of an offense.
      (2)   The owner, upon demand by any city officer or animal control
officer, shall surrender any animal that has bitten a human, or which is
suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine testing
or euthanasia, the expense for which shall be borne by the owner, and the
animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies.
      (3)   Every nondomesticated or wild animal capable of transmitting rabies
that bites a person shall be reported within four hours to the animal control
officer or designee. Such animal shall be humanely euthanized, and the animal
control officer or veterinarian shall immediately send the head of such animal
to the State Health Department for Pathological Examination.
      (4)   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid,
or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under
such observation, the animal control officer or veterinarian shall immediately
send the head of such animal to the State Health Department for Pathological
Examination and shall notify the public health officer of reports of human
contacts and diagnosis made of the suspected animal.
   (B)   Report of bite cases required.
      (1)   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other
practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of
persons treated for bites inflicted by animals within the city limits, together
with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
      (2)   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the
animal control officer his or her diagnosis of any animal, which dwells within
the city limits, observed by him or her to be a rabid suspect.
   (C)   Disposition of rabid animals or suspects.
      (1)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human,
except as herein provided, nor remove the animal from the city limits without
written permission from the health officer of the city or the animal control
officer.
      (2)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon
demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer.
      (3)   The animal control officer or designee shall direct the disposition
of any animal found to be infected with rabies.
      (4)   No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for
quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by an
employee empowered to enforce this chapter. Such refusal shall be deemed an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-7) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Carrying in a cruel manner. Any person who carries or causes to be
carried in or upon any vessel or vehicle, or otherwise, any animal in a cruel
or inhumane manner or so as to produce torture is guilty of an offense.
   (B)   Abandonment.
      (1)   Any person who deposits any live dog, cat or other domestic animal
along any private or public roadway or in any other private or public place
with the intention of abandoning the domestic animal shall be guilty of an
offense.
      (2)   Any person owning or having charge or custody of a maimed,
diseased, disabled or infirm animal shall be guilty of an offense under any of
the following conditions:
         (a)   Abandonment of the animal;
         (b)   Knowingly allows the animal to lie, alive or dead, in a public
or private street or road;
         (c)   Knowingly allows the animal to lie dead in any public or private
place other than a lawful burial site; and
         (d)   Knowingly allows the animal to lie in any public or private
place without having the animal under observation by a responsible person to
render aid to the animal should such aid be necessary to alleviate or lessen
the suffering of the animal.
   (C)   Poisoning.
      (1)   Any person who unjustifiably administers any poisonous or noxious
drug or substance to any animal, or unjustifiably exposes any such drug or
substance with the intent that the same shall be taken by an animal, whether
such animal by the property of himself or herself or another, is guilty of an
offense.
      (2)   Any person who administers any poisonous or noxious drug or
substance to any animal that is undomesticated, wild or otherwise not the
property of another, or unjustifiably exposes any such drug or substance with
the intent that the same shall be taken by such animal, is guilty of an
offense, unless the animal in question is a noxious animal.
   (D)   Encouraging fights.
      (1)   It shall be an offense for any person to maliciously, or for any
bet, stake or reward, instigate or encourage any fight between animals, or
instigate or encourage any animal to attack, bite, wound or worry another.
      (2)   It shall be an offense for any person to keep any house, pit or
other place to be used in permitting any fight between animals.
   (E)   Lawful use of force against animals.
      (1)   To use or attempt to use force upon or toward an animal is not
unlawful in the city in the following cases:
         (a)   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the
performance of any legal duty or by any person assisting him or her or acting
by his or her direction;
         (b)   When necessarily committed by a licensed veterinarian in the
performance of any legal duty or by any person assisting him or her or acting
by his or her direction; and
         (c)   When committed either by the party about to be injured or by any
other person in his or her aid or defense in preventing or attempting to
prevent injury to his or her person or property in his or her lawful
possession; provided the force used is not more than sufficient to prevent such
injury, and that the same shall be necessary for the self-defense of his or her
person or property. It is not an affirmative defense if the party about to be
injured is currently committing or attempting to commit an offense, tort,
unlawful trespass or other unlawful action against any person or property on
public or private land.
      (2)   Where force is permitted to effect a lawful purpose, only that
degree necessary to effect such purpose shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-8) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 EUTHANIZATION OF DEADLY ANIMALS.
   Any animal that can be shown to have attacked a person, and through such
attack, to have caused the death of such person, shall be immediately
confiscated and taken by the animal control officer or designee to be humanely
euthanized, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the animal, with
the following exceptions:
   (A)   Such animal was one used by law enforcement officials in the lawful
commission of its duty at the time that it caused the death; or
   (B)   Such animal caused the death of a person who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the animal, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or
has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or
assaulted the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-9) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The animal control officer is responsible for the primary enforcement of the
animal protection and control provisions of this chapter and shall work under
the direction of the Police Chief and shall have such arrest powers as
necessary to carry out the duties of such provisions.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-10) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 90.11 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
to enforce its provisions, the animal control officer, health officer or any
police officer is empowered to call upon the residents of any premises upon
which a dog or cat or small animal is kept or harbored, and to demand
exhibition by the owner of such dog or cat or small animal.
   (B)   The animal control officer, health officer or any police officer, in
the manner authorized by law, may enter the premises where any animal is kept
in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal, and
to take possession of such animal when, in the officer’s opinion, it requires
humane treatment. The officer may demand, at the front door of any residence,
exhibition by the owner of current animal licenses at any time.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-11) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 90.12 RECORDS KEPT.
   The animal control officer shall keep or cause to be kept:
   (A)   An accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impounding and
disposition of all animals coming into his or her custody; and
   (B)   An accurate and detailed record of all bite cases reported to the
city, with a complete report of the investigation of each case.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-12) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 90.13 COURT PROCEDURES AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Summons and complaint.
      (1)   Any person who witnesses or has personal knowledge that an act or
acts made unlawful by this chapter have been committed may sign a complaint
against the alleged violator.
      (2)   Any police officer, animal control officer or code enforcement
officer who is employed by the city is authorized to issue a summons and
complaint when the officer personally observes a violation of this chapter.
      (3)   The complainant must provide a sworn complaint to the officer
receiving the complaint containing the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and other
witnesses to the incident;
         (b)   Date, time and location of the incident;
         (c)   Description of the animal;
         (d)   Name, address and telephone number (if known) of the animal
owner;
         (e)   If alleging an aggressive, potentially dangerous or dangerous
dog, a statement that the dog attacked the complainant or some other person or
animal as witnessed by the complainant, or such facts as warrant a finding that
the dog is aggressive, potentially dangerous or dangerous; and
         (f)   Other facts and circumstances of the incident.
   (B)   Impoundment. It is the duty of the animal control officer, upon
receipt of a verified complaint as outlined in this section, to cause the
animal involved to be impounded pending a determination as required in this
section. Any and all expenses associated with the impounding, including
shelter, food, handling and veterinary care, shall be borne by the owner of the
animal during the period of impoundment.
   (C)   Determination. On violations of this chapter, the judge may take
whatever action deemed necessary within the limits of the law, including, but
not limited to, fine or other penalty.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-13) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013)
PETS
§ 90.25 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   License required; exemptions. No person, without first obtaining a
written license from the Police Department or designee, shall own, keep, harbor
or have custody of any dog or cat over six months of age. No license shall be
required for animals temporarily brought and kept within the city or as service
dogs, when the dogs are actually used to aid persons with disabilities.
   (B)   Rabies vaccination required. Licenses shall be issued only upon
presentation of proof of current vaccination for rabies, as required by this
chapter.
   (C)   Registration of dogs and cats. The owner of the dog or cat shall, at
the time of paying the license fee, register the dog or cat by providing the
name and address of the owner; the name, breed, color and sex of the dog or
cat; type of vaccine and duration of immunity; signature of the veterinarian or
other authorized person administering the vaccination; and other reasonable
information as the Police Department or designee may request.
   (D)   Tags.
      (1)   The Police Department or designee shall deliver an appropriate tag
for the dog or cat, in addition to the written receipt. The tag shall
constitute the license.
      (2)   The owner shall cause the tag received from the Police Department
or designee to be affixed to the collar or harness of the dog or cat upon which
the license fee has been paid, and the owner shall see that the tag is so worn
at all times.
      (3)   Dog or cat license tags shall not be transferable from one dog or
cat to another, and no refunds shall be made for any dog or cat license fee
because of the death of the dog or cat or the owner’s departure from the city.
      (4)   No person shall counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit any tag
issued for a dog or cat, as provided in this division (D).
      (5)   In the event of loss of the tag before the end of the year for
which it was issued, the owner may secure another for the dog or cat by
presenting the original receipt and the fee established by the City Council to
the Police Department or designee.
      (6)   As an alternative to a metallic or plastic license tag, a dog or
cat may be implanted with an identifying subcutaneous microchip by a licensed
veterinarian. The microchip identification number shall be recorded with the
description and picture of the dog or cat at the time of application with the
Police Department or designee. The microchip identification number shall be
recorded as the dog or cat’s city identification number so long as such number
is not a duplicate of a city identification number already issued to another
dog or cat. License tags shall not be required for dogs or cats with properly
registered microchip implants.
   (E)   License fee.
      (1)   A fee established by the City Council for every male or female dog
or cat more than six months of age is imposed upon the owner of any dog or cat
kept or harbored within the city.
      (2)   All license fees shall be paid to the Police Department or designee
and shall be due not later than July 1 of each year, or within one week after
bringing an animal into the city after the date.
   (F)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The registration fee shall be waived on any dog or cat fitting the
following criteria:
         (a)   Any dog or cat used primarily as a service animal, or currently
in training as a service animal, when the owner or keeper establishes the
service animal’s function as an assistance animal under the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.; and
         (b)   Any dog used by a public agency or a private organization under
contract with a public agency as a police dog, tracking dog, search and rescue
dog, arson or drug sniffing dog or for any other job that furthers the mission
of the agency to protect and serve the public interest.
      (2)   The requirement of the annual registration under this section shall
be waived for any dog or cat which is with its rightful owner who is a
nonresident or traveler through the city. The waiver of this requirement shall
not exceed a period of 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-1) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 KENNELS AND PET SHOPS.
   (A)   Kennels. No person, firm or corporation shall own, maintain or operate
a kennel within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   Pet shops. Pet shops shall be annually licensed by the city. A fee
established by the City Council due on July 1 of each year of operation shall
be paid to the Police Department or designee. The pet shop shall at all times
be kept in a safe and sanitary condition and the animals therein kept in a
humane condition, subject to city inspection at any time during normal business
hours. In addition, any other requirements of this chapter or of the city
zoning ordinances which may involve specific animals sold in a pet shop shall
also be included in these regulations applicable to pet shops.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-2) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 NUISANCE DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   Nuisances enumerated.
      (1)   It shall be a public nuisance for any person to keep any dog or
other animal which, by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and
quiet of or creates a nuisance for any person or persons.
      (2)   It shall be a public nuisance for any person to keep any dog or
other animal which attacks other animals or damages private or public property.
   (B)   Abatement. Abatement of the public nuisance shall be handled in
accordance with the provisions of §
91.022.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-3) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; LOST, STOLEN OR DECEASED DOGS OR CATS.
   (A)   If ownership of any dog or cat registered with the city is transferred
to any other person or entity, the current owner of record shall notify the
city of such transfer, and the new owner, if keeping or maintaining the dog or
cat within the city limits, shall register the animal with the Police
Department or designee and pay the registration fee.
   (B)   If any dog or cat registered with the city is lost, stolen, deceased
or otherwise removed from the city, the current owner of record must notify the
city of such status within 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-4) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.29 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   No household shall keep or maintain more than four dogs, cats or any
combination of dogs and cats within the city limits. Dogs and cats that are
exempt from registration under §
90.25(F)(1) shall not be counted toward the total limit required by this
section.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-5) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.30 AGGRESSIVE, DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Possession of aggressive dog.
      (1)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to possess any
aggressive dog within the city limits, except under those conditions allowed by
this division (A).
      (2)   Any animal found to be aggressive under this section shall only be
possessed by the owner upon the owner’s compliance with the following
conditions.
         (a)   The dog must be kept indoors or within a fence or enclosure of
sufficient height, strength and repair to safely contain such dog on the
premises and prevent children from entering the yard or enclosure. Sufficiency
shall be determined by the size of the dog.
         (b)   If the dog is not within the prescribed enclosure, said dog must
be on a leash of not more than six feet in length and not an extension style
leash. Such leash shall not be attached to an inanimate object and must be held
by a competent person.
      (3)   Any owner of an aggressive dog who meets the requirements for the
lawful keeping of an aggressive dog, as outlined in this division (A), shall be
required to register said aggressive dog with the city for an annual fee, if
any, to be set by motion or resolution of the City Council.
      (4)   Any aggressive dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Police
Department or designee if:
         (a)   The dog is not validly registered as required by this
subchapter;
         (b)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure as outlined in
this division (A); and
         (c)   The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure, and not under physical restraint of the responsible person as
required by this division (A).
   (B)   Possession of potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to possess any
potentially dangerous dog within the city limits, except under those conditions
allowed by this section.
      (2)   Any dog found to be potentially dangerous under this section shall
only be possessed by the owner upon the owner’s compliance with the following
conditions.
         (a)   The dog must be kept indoors or in a fence or enclosure of
sufficient height, strength and repair to safely contain such dog on the
premises and prevent children from entering the yard or enclosure. Sufficiency
shall be determined by the size of the dog.
         (b)   The premises upon which the dog is kept must have a clearly
visible sign warning of the presence of the dog.
         (c)   If the dog is not within the prescribed enclosure, said dog must
be on a leash of not more than six feet in length and not an extension style
leash. Such leash shall not be attached to an inanimate object and must be held
by a competent person. In addition, said dog must wear a “muzzle”, as defined
by §
90.01.
      (3)   Any owner of a potentially dangerous dog who meets the requirements
for the lawful keeping of a potentially dangerous dog, as outlined in this
division (B), shall be required to register said potentially dangerous dog with
the city for an annual fee, if any, to be set by motion or resolution of the
City Council.
      (4)   Any potentially dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by
the Police Department or designee if:
         (a)   The dog is not validly registered as required by this
subchapter;
         (b)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure as outlined in
this division (B); and
         (c)   The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure, and not under physical restraint of the responsible person as
required by this division (B).
   (C)   Possession of dangerous dog.
      (1)   It is unlawful and an offense, punishable by up to the maximum fine
as allowed by state law without a jury trial, for any person to possess any
dangerous dog within the city limits, except under those conditions allowed by
this section.
      (2)   Any dog found to be dangerous under this section shall only be
possessed by the owner upon the owner’s compliance with the following
conditions.
         (a)   While on the owner’s property, any dangerous dog shall be
securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure
with at least 150 square feet of space for each dog kept therein which is over
six months of age, and which is suitable to prevent the entry of children and
designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have
secure sides and a secure top and shall also provide protection from the
elements for the dog.
         (b)   The premises upon which any dangerous dog is kept must be posted
with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the
property. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a
warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog.
         (c)   A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner’s insurance
or surety bond, issued by an insurer qualified under state statutes in the
amount of not less than $50,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries
inflicted by the dangerous dog.
         (d)   If the dangerous dog is outside the proper enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and remain under
the physical restraint of a responsible person over 16 years of age.
      (3)   Any owner of a dangerous dog who meets the requirements for the
lawful keeping of a dangerous dog, as outlined in this division (C), shall be
issued a certificate of registration for said dangerous dog for an annual fee,
if any, to be set by motion or resolution of the City Council, but not to
exceed $10.
      (4)   Any dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Police
Department or designee if:
         (a)   The dog is not validly registered as required by this
subchapter;
         (b)   The owner does not secure and maintain the liability insurance
coverage or surety bond required by this division (C);
         (c)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure as outlined in
this division (C); and
         (d)   The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside the
proper enclosure, and not under physical restraint of the responsible person as
required by this division (C).
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   A dog shall not be declared aggressive, potentially dangerous or
dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the
time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or
assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
      (2)   A dog shall not be declared aggressive, potentially dangerous or
dangerous if such dog is one used by law enforcement officials for police work
and inflicts threat, injury or damage during the commission of its lawful duty.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-6) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER.
   The owner of record, as registered with the city, shall be held responsible
for any fines or damages incurred by a dog or cat found in violation of any
provision of this subchapter or any other provision contained in this code.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-7) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 90.32 VIOLATION.
   It is unlawful and an offense to keep or own any dog or cat within the city
limits without first complying with the vaccination, licensing and limitation
on the number of animals requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4A-8) (Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-14) (Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-2013)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Littering prohibited
   
91.002   Open burning
   
91.003   Abandoned containers
Nuisances
   
91.015   Powers of city
   
91.016   Definitions
   
91.017   Certain public nuisances enumerated
   
91.018   Nuisances prohibited
   
91.019   Personal liable
   
91.020   Lapse of time; effect
   
91.021   Remedial action
   
91.022   Abatement of nuisances generally
   
91.023   Abatement by suit in District Court
   
91.024   Abatement of health nuisances
   
91.025   Procedures cumulative
Weeds, Grass and Trash
   
91.040   Definitions
   
91.041   Cleaning and mowing of property
   
91.042   Exceptions
Enforcement
   
91.055   Enforcement officials
   
91.056   Citations
   
91.057   Hearings
   
91.058   Appeals
   
91.059   Obstructing city officials prohibited
Food Regulations
   
91.070   Food establishments; state regulations adopted
   
91.071   Milk and milk products; federal and state regulations adopted
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall throw, place, leave, drop, put or otherwise abandon litter
upon any public property, private property or roadway, except as otherwise
specifically permitted in this code. LITTER means trash, refuse, rubbish and
all like material.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.002 OPEN BURNING.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful to burn any fire outside of
any enclosed building in the city for the purpose of burning grass, trash,
leaves, weeds, papers, refuse, garbage or any other substance, except in an
approved incinerator and except as may be allowed by the city fire code and any
applicable state or city regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 ABANDONED CONTAINERS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to leave outside of any
building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of any kind of
a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more which has an airtight door or
lock which may not be released from the inside of such icebox, refrigerator or
container, or which has a snap lock or other device for automatically fastening
such door in a closed position, without first removing such fastener, lock,
snap lock or doors of such container.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3) Penalty, see §
91.999
NUISANCES
§ 91.015 POWERS OF CITY.
   As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city is empowered to determine what is and
what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and for the
protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply,
outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city
has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner
and an opportunity for him or her to be heard, if this can be done.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-1)
§ 91.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE.
      (1)   Unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or any
thing or condition which:
         (a)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others;
         (b)   Offends decency;
         (c)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
render dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or
         (d)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use
of property.
      (2)   Provided, however, this definition shall not apply to preexisting
agricultural activities.
   PRIVATE NUISANCE. Every nuisance not included in the definition of “public
nuisance” in this section.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A nuisance which affects, at the same time, an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be
unequal.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-2)
§ 91.017 CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   Nuisances enumerated. In addition to other public nuisances declared
by other sections of this code or law, the following are declared to be public
nuisances:
      (1)   Unwholesome food or drink. The sale or offering for sale of
unwholesome food or drink, or the keeping of a place where such sales or
offerings are made;
      (2)   Liquor violations. The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of
alcoholic beverages in violation of state law or the ordinances of the city, or
the keeping of a place where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale or
furnished in violation of state law or the ordinances of the city;
      (3)   Obscene materials. The exposure, display, sale or distribution of
obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or
the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed;
      (4)   Bawdy, disorderly houses.
         (a)   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards,
slot machines, punchboards or otherwise;
         (b)   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced; and
         (c)   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state
law or city ordinance are practiced or carried on.
      (5)   Diseased persons. The public exposure of a person having a
contagious disease;
      (6)   Noisy conditions. The continued making of loud or unusual noises,
music or sounds, or strong vibrations which annoy persons of ordinary
sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
      (7)   Interfering with wireless reception. The operation or use of any
electrical apparatus or machine which materially and unduly interferes with
radio or television reception by others;
      (8)   Assemblies obstructing traffic. Any use of a street or sidewalk or
a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to
obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs
traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance;
      (9)   Water flowing, ice or snow falling upon streets. Permitting water
or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk;
      (10)   Stagnant water bodies. All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or
containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which
are so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public
safety;
      (11)   Conditions attracting pests. Rank weeds or grass, carcasses,
accumulations of manure, refuse or other things which are, or are likely to be,
breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin or disease causing germs, and the
premises on which such exist;
      (12)   Garbage accumulations. Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs,
manure, decayed or decaying vegetable matter left, kept or maintained in such
condition as to endanger the public health;
      (13)   Dangerous structures.
         (a)   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public
health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition; and
         (b)   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire,
by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants
from any cause.
      (14)   Dangerous premises. Any pit, hole or other thing which is so
constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (15)   Fire and explosive hazards. Any fire or explosion hazard which
endangers the public safety;
      (16)   Dangerous businesses. Any occupation or activity which endangers
the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare;
      (17)   Offensive premises.
         (a)   Any unclean, foul, leaking or broken or defective ditch, drain,
gutter, slop, garbage or manure barrel, box or other receptacle in the city;
and
         (b)   Permitting foul, noxious or offensive odors to escape from
premises; or unusual quantities of dust or other deleterious substances to
escape or emanate across the property line upon which the same originates.
      (18)   Animal houses and noises.
         (a)   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become
obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the city, by reason of any noise or
noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation;
         (b)   The keeping in violation of §§
90.01 through
90.13 of any dog kennels within the city for the breeding and raising of dogs
that shall become offensive or annoying to the public by reason of the barking
and noise made by the animals therein contained; and
         (c)   The keeping of any hog pen within the city limits in violation
of this code.
      (19)   Animal hides. Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in
any exposed or open place within the city limits;
      (20)   Sewer systems.
         (a)   Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement,
slops, garbage, refuse or other filthy substance; and
         (b)   Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing,
leaking or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious or annoying
to the comfort, health and welfare of any resident of the city.
      (21)   Bagworms. Permitting bagworms to be upon any trees or other plants
within the city.
   (B)   Enumeration cumulative. The enumeration in division (A) above of
certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of
law or ordinance defining public or private nuisances either in more general or
more specific terms.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-3) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.018 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall create or maintain a nuisance within the city or permit a
nuisance to remain on premises under his or her control within the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-4) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.019 PERSONAL LIABLE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is
liable therefor in the same manner as the person who first created it.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-5)
§ 91.020 LAPSE OF TIME; EFFECT.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-6)
§ 91.021 REMEDIAL ACTION.
   (A)   Public nuisances. The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      (1)   Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
      (2)   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      (3)   Civil action; or
      (4)   Abatement:
         (a)   By the person injured as provided in 50 O.S. § 12; or
         (b)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
   (B)   Private nuisances. The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      (1)   Civil action; or
      (2)   Abatement by the person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and
15.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-7)
§ 91.022 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Summary abatement. Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute
a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of
one or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that
circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the
administrative officer or other appropriate officer or agency of the city
government to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such
nuisances or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can
be taken toward such abatement.
   (B)   Statement of nuisance; recommended abatement. An officer subordinate
to the administrative officer may submit to the administrative officer a
statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the
city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated.
   (C)   Determination of nuisance existence; notice.
      (1)   The administrative officer or his or her designee shall determine
if a nuisance exists as defined by the ordinances of the city or law.
      (2)   If he or she finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, he or she
shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance
by:
         (a)   Certified mail; or
         (b)   By publication if the owner cannot be so served or found, to
abate the nuisance within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals
or welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay.
   (D)   Abatement by city; costs. If the peace, health, safety, morals or
welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or
other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within
the specified time, or if the persons responsible authorize the city to abate
the nuisance, the administrative officer shall direct the appropriate officer
to abate the nuisance or have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as
authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The city shall send a statement of the cost of such
summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the
nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses
are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city
collectible as other debts may be collected.
   (E)   Appeals. The determination of the existence of a nuisance and order to
abate, as made by the administrative officer, may be appealed by the occupant
or owner or person causing the nuisance by filing a request for hearing in
writing with the City Clerk within the period of time specified in the notice
for abatement of the nuisance. The Clerk shall cause the matter to be placed on
the agenda of the City Council for final determination with appropriate notice
of the hearing provided to the person requesting the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-8)
§ 91.023 ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT.
   (A)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to abridge the rights of
citizens of the city to bring and maintain actions in the proper courts for the
abatement of private nuisances or those specially injurious to them.
   (B)   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance,
the city may bring suit in the district court.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-9)
§ 91.024 ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES.
   (A)   Order to abate. Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the
city shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private
premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his or her own expense,
any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of
insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease or any
other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or
within such other time as may be reasonable. Such order shall be in writing and
may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises or authorized
agent thereof by the city or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left
at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known and
within the state. If the premises is unoccupied and the residence of the owner,
occupant or agent is unknown or is outside the state, the order may be served
by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least one
issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city.
   (B)   Failure to comply; abatement by city; costs. If there is noncompliance
with the order, the city may cause the order to be executed and complied with,
and the cost thereof shall be certified and the cost of removing or abating
such nuisance shall be charged to the owner or occupant, enforceable as a lien
or any other method allowed by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-10) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.025 PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE.
   The procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other
provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative one to the other. The city
may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating any
particular nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-11)
WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH
§ 91.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEANING. The removal of trash from property.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   TRASH. Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, offal or waste, wastepaper, litter objects, bottles, tin
cans or other used or disposed of objects or matter of any kind or form, which
is discarded, abandoned or in general not cared for.
   WEED.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison
sumac and all vegetation at any state of maturity which:
         (a)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden, unless
such trees and shrubbery, by their density or location, constitute a detriment
to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to
traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of said weeds;
         (b)   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposit or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
         (c)   Harbors rodents or vermin;
         (d)   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
         (e)   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
         (f)   Is dead or diseased.
      (2)   The term WEED shall not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for
other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-1) (Ord. 2017-04, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 91.041 CLEANING AND MOWING OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Cleaning and mowing. The city may cause property within the city
limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in
accordance with the following procedure.
      (1)   At least ten days’ notice shall be given to the owner of the
property, by mail, at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the
County Treasurer’s office before the City Council holds a hearing or takes
action. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of
trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and
said notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within ten
days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the city, and a
notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk against the property for
the costs due and owing the city. At the time of mailing of notice to the
property owner, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal
service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and
address of the mailee. However, if the property owner cannot be located within
ten days from the date of mailing by the City Council, notice may be given by
posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as defined in
11 O.S. § 1-102, one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action
by the city. If the city anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of division (B) below, the notice, whether by
certified mail, posting or publication, shall state: that any accumulations of
trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner’s property occurring
within six months after the removal of trash or cutting or mowing of weeds or
grass on the property pursuant to such notice may be summarily abated by the
city; that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and
that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without
further prior notice to the property owner.
      (2)   The owner of the property may give written consent to the city
authorizing removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving
written consent, the owner waives the owner’s right to a hearing by the city.
      (3)   A hearing may be held by the City Council to determine whether the
accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property
to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the
community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of
property.
      (4)   Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard, and that the property would benefit by the removal of such
conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass and performance of
the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. Immediately
following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the City Clerk or City
Treasurer shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the
property and the work performed by the city and stating that the city claims a
lien on said property for the cleaning or mowing costs.
      (5)   The City Council shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning
and mowing and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith,
including the cost of notice and mailing. The City Clerk or City Treasurer
shall forward by mail to the property owner specified in division (A)(1) above
a statement of such actual cost and demand payment. If the cleaning and mowing
are done by the city, the cost to the property owner for said cleaning and
mowing shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment
required. If the cleaning and mowing are done on a private contract basis, the
contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
      (6)   If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing
of the statement, then, within the next 60 days, the City Clerk or City
Treasurer shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the
County Treasurer, and the same shall be levied on the property and collected by
the County Treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. Once certified by the
County Treasurer, payment may only be made to the County Treasurer except as
otherwise provided in this division (A). Until fully paid, the cost and the
interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from
and after the date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer. In addition,
the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the
date the cost is certified to the County Treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad
valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and
superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien shall
continue until the cost shall be fully paid. At the time of collection, the
County Treasurer shall collect a fee of $5 for each parcel of property. The fee
shall be deposited to the credit of the General Fund of the county. If the
County Treasurer and the city agree that the County Treasurer is unable to
collect the assessment, the city may pursue a civil remedy for collection of
the amount owing and interest thereon by an action in personam against the
property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property.
A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the
surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created
pursuant to this division (A). Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk
or City Treasurer shall forward to the County Treasurer a notice of such
payment and directing discharge of the lien.
      (7)   The city may designate, by ordinance, an administrative officer or
administrative body to carry out the duties of the City Council in division (A)
(1) above. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City Council
from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days after the administrative order is rendered.
   (B)   Abatement. If the City Council causes property within the city limits
to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with
the procedures provided in division (A) above, any subsequent accumulations of
trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property occurring within a six-
month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated
without further prior notice to the property owner. At the time of each such
summary abatement, the city shall notify the property owner of the abatement
and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may
request a hearing within ten days after the date of mailing the notice. The
notice and hearing shall be as provided in division (A) above. Unless otherwise
determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and
collected as provided in divisions (A)(5), (A)(6) and (A)(7) above. This
division (B) shall not apply if the records of the County Clerk show that the
property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to division (A)(1)
above.
   (C)   Accumulation and deposit of litter.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, occupying
any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulation of brush,
broken concrete, ashes, sand, gravel, tree limbs in excess of two inches in
diameter, metal pipes, pieces of heavy metal, automobile frames and engines,
metal shavings, dimension lumber, appliances and other bulky, heavy, non-
compactable materials. Any accumulation of such shall be disposed of by the
owner or person controlling same at his or her expense, and the materials shall
not be placed in dumpsters or other receptacles provided by the city for the
collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and other refuse.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, occupying
any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, wastepaper,
litter objects, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of objects to
accumulate upon such real property or premises being so occupied or rented to
such an extent as to constitute a littering nuisance.
      (3)   No person, having, in his or her possession, supervision or
control, whether as owner, occupant or tenant, any premises situated in the
city, shall allow or permit any such premises to have thereon any rubbish,
wastepaper, tin cans, junk, old vehicle parts, refrigerators, iceboxes, refuse
or trash of any description not properly cared for. No person, firm or
corporation shall place or dump any of the items herein mentioned in any public
street, thoroughfare, avenue or alley, or upon any vacant lot or premises
within the city.
      (4)   Maintained, decorative ornamental landscaping with the above named
items will be permitted unless it constitutes a nuisance.
   (D)   Violation and penalties. The City Council may enact ordinances to
prohibit owners of property or persons otherwise in possession or control of
property located within the city limits from allowing trash to accumulate or
weeds to grow or stand upon the premises and may impose penalties for violation
of said ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-2) (Ord. 2017-04, passed 5-1-2017) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.042 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property zoned and
used for agricultural purposes or to railroad property under the jurisdiction
of the State Corporation Commission. However, the City Council may cause the
removal of weeds or trash from property zoned and used for agricultural
purposes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter but only if such weeds or
trash pose a hazard to traffic and are located in or within ten yards of the
public right-of-way at intersections.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-3)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 91.055 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   The Mayor or City Administrator is designated as the administrative officer
to perform the duties of the City Council with respect to public nuisance
abatement. The administrative officer may further delegate to his or her staff
the aforementioned duties of the administrative officer, including the duty of
administrative officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-1)
§ 91.056 CITATIONS.
   The administrative officer or his or her designee is designated to issue
citations for violations of this chapter, including nuisances, weeds and trash,
abandoned vehicles and health laws.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-2)
§ 91.057 HEARINGS.
   Any administrative hearings for violations of the above referenced sections
shall be before the Mayor or an administrative officer designated by the Mayor.
A hearing shall be scheduled on completion and filing with the City Clerk an
application therefor, pursuant to the appropriate sections of this chapter, in
accordance with the provisions contained therein.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-3)
§ 91.058 APPEALS.
   Appeals from the decision of the administrative officer shall be to the City
Council, in accordance with the applicable code provisions.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-4)
§ 91.059 OBSTRUCTING CITY OFFICIALS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any
health officer or other code enforcement officer charged with the enforcement
of the health or nuisance laws of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-5) Penalty, see §
91.999
FOOD REGULATIONS
§ 91.070 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS; STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The latest edition of the “Oklahoma State Department of Health Rules and
Regulations Pertaining to Food Establishments” in the Oklahoma Admin. Rules
Chapters 257 and 258 is adopted and incorporated by reference in this code. At
least one copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of
the City Clerk. The rules and regulations shall govern except in case of
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, in which case, the more
restrictive terms shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.071 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS; FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The latest edition of the United States public health service recommendation
“Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance with Administrative Procedures” and the
provisions of state law governing milk and milk products as set out in 2 O.S.
§§ 7-401 to 7-411, as amended from time to time, are adopted and incorporated
by reference in this code and are enforceable by the city as fully as if they
were set out at length herein. At least one copy of the milk ordinance and
referenced state law shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. The milk
ordinance and the referenced state law shall govern except in case of conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, in which case, the more restrictive terms
shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
91.070 and
91.071 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99. Such person may also be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each
day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3)
CHAPTER 92: JUNK OR ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Storing, parking or leaving abandoned, junk vehicles prohibited;
exceptions
   
92.03   Notice to remove
   
92.04   Request for hearing; procedure
   
92.05   Responsibility for removal; lien filed
   
92.06   Removal by city; notice
   
92.07   Redemption of impounded vehicles; release of lien
   
92.08   Civil remedy
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLASSIC AUTOMOBILE. A passenger car or truck, except a junked vehicle, which
is 25 model years or older and tagged pursuant to 47 O.S. § 1105B5.
   JUNKED AUTOMOBILE.
      (1)   Any motor vehicle, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded;
      (2)   A motor vehicle that has no lawful license plate affixed to it or
has affixed to it a license plate that has expired and that has remained
expired for more than 90 days from its lawful renewal date; and
      (3)   A motor vehicle that remains inoperable for a continuous period of
more than 45 days.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-karts, campers
and trailers.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property located within the city which is
privately-owned and which is not included within the definition of “public
property” herein.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and any other publicly-owned property or facility.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-1) (Ord. 2015-04, passed 5-19-2015)
§ 92.02 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING ABANDONED, JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving
of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not,
upon any private property within the city, except where reasonable progress is
being made toward restoration or repair of such motor vehicle, for a period in
excess of ten days. This section shall not apply to any vehicle in an enclosed
building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise which is properly
operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the city zoning ordinance
or when any such vehicle has been placed in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   (A)   When it comes to the attention of the Police Chief or City Zoning
Administrator that any vehicle is in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, a notice in writing shall be served on the owner of the property,
notifying him or her of the violation of this chapter and requesting the
removal of the vehicle within ten days of the service of the notice. Such
notice shall be served by posting a copy in a conspicuous place upon the
private property upon which the vehicle is located and sending duplicate copies
by mail to the owner of the private property as recorded on the current year’s
tax rolls in the office of the County Treasurer. At the time of mailing of the
notice, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service
which shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the
mailee.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time
specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that, upon failure to
comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such
removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner of the
property.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-3)
§ 92.04 REQUEST FOR HEARING; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The persons to whom the notices are directed or their duly authorized
agents may file a written request for hearing before the City Council or its
designee, within the ten-day period of compliance prescribed in this chapter
for the purposes of defending the charges by the city.
   (B)   The hearing shall be held as soon as is practical and possible after
the filing of the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed
shall be advised of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days in
advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the
notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either
party deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-4)
§ 92.05 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL; LIEN FILED.
   The owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and
the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located,
either or all of them, shall be responsible for the vehicle’s removal. In the
event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner of the private property
where the same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. The City
Clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the County Clerk stating
that the city claims a lien on the property for the removal of the junk motor
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 REMOVAL BY CITY; NOTICE.
   If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the
ten-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a
hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation is
affirmed by the City Council or its designee, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall have the right to take possession of the vehicle and remove it
from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with,
hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property
for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; RELEASE OF LIEN.
   The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may
redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or
destruction thereof. Upon proof of redemption of the vehicle, the City Clerk
shall file a release of lien, but if the vehicle is not redeemed prior to sale
or destruction, the City Clerk shall, within 30 days of such sale or
destruction, forward a certified statement of the amount of the actual costs of
impoundment, sale and/or destruction of the vehicle to the County Treasurer.
Such lien shall not be released until the costs shall be fully paid.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-7)
§ 92.08 CIVIL REMEDY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from pursuing a civil remedy
for the amount owing and interest thereon.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-8)
CHAPTER 93: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   City policy
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Noise levels established
   
93.05   Specific noises prohibited and restricted
   
93.06   Exemptions
   
93.07   Variances
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   Noise abatement in the city is declared a matter of public policy, and the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance
of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-1)
§ 93.02 CITY POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to comply with the noise emission
standards set forth in this chapter in its own operations, and its contractors
and subcontractors shall be notified of and required to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to purchase only equipment which complies
to the standards established for the same by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-2)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVICE. Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually
produces, noise when operated or handled.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE (commonly referred to as JACOBS BRAKE). A device used
primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal
combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the
use of wheel brakes.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or
to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property or a public utility
to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect
persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power,
including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semitrailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-karts, mopeds and racing
vehicles.
   MUFFLER. An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating
from such apparatus.
   NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs reasonable persons
with normal sensitivities or which injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, hearing, peace or safety of other persons.
   PERSON. Any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user,
owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or
employees.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE. Any noise for which the information content of that
noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as, but not limited
to, understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised
or normal or comprehension of musical rhythms.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at
the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person or such
imaginary line which separates individual living units in a multiple-family
dwelling.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway or alley or
similar place which is owned or controlled by a public government entity.
   USE DISTRICT. Those districts established by the city zoning ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-3)
§ 93.04 NOISE LEVELS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Stationary noise levels. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person to operate or permit to be operated any stationary source of sound
which creates a noise disturbance.
   (B)   Motor vehicle noise. No person shall operate or cause to be operated
any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of such vehicle is:
      (1)   Free from defects which affect sound reduction;
      (2)   Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device;
      (3)   Not equipped with any cutout, bypass or similar device; and
      (4)   Not modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise
emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler of the
type originally installed on the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-4) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 SPECIFIC NOISES PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED.
   (A)   In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in divisions (B)(1)
(b) and (B)(3) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or
cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance within the limits of the
city.
   (B)   The following acts are declared to be in violation of this chapter:
      (1)   Motor vehicles.
         (a)   Horns and signaling devices. Sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle or other vehicle
on any street or public place therein except as a danger warning signal as
provided in the vehicle code of the state, or the sounding of any such
signaling device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
         (b)   Racing events. Permitting any motor vehicle racing event at any
place in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance without first obtaining
a permit as provided in §
93.07;
         (c)   Dynamic engine braking devices (commonly referred to as Jacobs
Brakes). Operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic engine braking device
engaged except for the aversion of imminent danger;
         (d)   Defective vehicle. Operating or permitting to be operated or
used any truck, automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle which, by virtue
of disrepair or manner of operation, causes a noise disturbance;
         (e)   Garbage collection. The collection of garbage, waste or refuse
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day:
            1.   In any area zoned residential, or within 300 feet of an area
zoned residential.
            2.   In any land use district so as to cause a noise disturbance.
         (f)   Standing vehicles. The operating or causing or permitting to be
operated any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto in such
a manner as to cause a noise disturbance for a consecutive period longer than
15 minutes during which such vehicle is stationary in a residential zone; and
         (g)   Repair noises. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any
vehicle, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within
a quiet zone.
      (2)   Radios, musical devices and loudspeakers.
         (a)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices
as follows:
            1.   Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, except as
provided in division (B)(2) below, in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance; and
            2.   The operating of any such device between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at the property boundary of the source or plainly audible at 50 feet (15
meters) from such device when operated in or on a vehicle on a public right-of-
way or public space or in a boat on public waters.
         (b)   Using or operating a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment
in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound vehicle in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property for the purpose of
commercial advertising; giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses or
lectures; or transmitting music to any person or assemblages of persons in such
a manner as to cause a noise disturbance, unless a permit as provided by §
93.07 is first obtained.
      (3)   Hawkers and peddlers. Selling anything by outcry (vocal, electrical
or mechanical amplification) within any area of the city therein zoned
primarily for residential uses in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance. The provisions of this division (C) shall not be construed to
prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed
sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public
entertainment events or sales by auctioneers;
      (4)   Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal which,
by frequent or habitual noise making, causes a noise disturbance. The
provisions of this division (D) shall apply to all private and public
facilities, including any animal pounds, which hold or treat animals;
      (5)   Loading operations. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance;
      (6)   Construction.
         (a)   Operating or causing to be used or operated any equipment used
in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto in residential or
commercial land use districts between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day;
         (b)   Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment used
for home or building repair or grounds maintenance, including, but not limited
to, power saw, sander, lawn mower or garden equipment in residential or
commercial zones outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day; and
         (c)   Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment,
except construction equipment, used for construction activities, including, but
not limited to, chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers and powered hand
tools in residential or commercial land use districts between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
      (7)   Fireworks, guns and explosives. The use of explosives or fireworks
or the firing of guns or other explosive devices so as to be audible across a
property boundary or on a public space or right-of-way without first obtaining
a permit as provided by §
93.07. This division (B)(7) shall not be construed to permit conduct prohibited
by other statutes, ordinances or regulations governing such activity;
      (8)   Powered model mechanical devices. The flying of a model aircraft
powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing
or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day or in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance;
      (9)   Quiet zones. Creating noise within the vicinity of any school,
hospital, nursing home, institution of learning, court or other designated
area, while the same is in use; provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the
streets indicating that the same is a quiet zone;
      (10)   Bells and chimes. Sounding or operating or permitting to sound or
operate an electronically amplified signal limited to bells, chimes or clocks
in schools, houses of religious worship or governmental buildings for more than
five minutes in any hour;
      (11)   Fixed sirens, whistles and horns. The sounding or causing the
sounding of any whistle, horn or siren as a signal for commencing or suspending
work, or for any other purpose except as a sound signal of imminent danger or
the testing of such equipment, in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance;
      (12)   People. Talking, laughing, yelling, singing or otherwise making
noise by people between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance; and
      (13)   Testing emergency alarms. Testing of any emergency type alarm
shall be prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the
following day.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-5) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency; or
   (B)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-6)
§ 93.07 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions of
these regulations on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the City Clerk.
Any permit granted by the City Clerk or his or her authorized representative
shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including,
but not limited to, the effective dates, time of day, location of sound
pressure level or equipment limitation.
      (2)   The relief requested may be granted upon good and sufficient
showing:
         (a)   That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or
modify his or her activity or operation to comply with this chapter;
         (b)   That the activity, operation or noise source will be of
temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this
chapter; and
         (c)   That no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
   (B)   Conditions. The City Clerk may prescribe any reasonable conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon a community or
the surrounding neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-7)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Enforcement officials. The City Marshal or designated representative
or agent will have enforcement responsibility for this chapter as it relates to
stationary sources and joint enforcement responsibility with appropriate law
enforcement agencies as it relates to vehicular sources.
   (B)   Nuisance declared. A violation of any provision of this chapter is
deemed and declared to be a nuisance, and such may be subject to summary
abatement by means of a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be
punishable as provided in §
10.99. Each time such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-8)
CHAPTER 94: PARADES AND PUBLIC EVENTS
Section
   
94.01   Definition
   
94.02   Permit required; exceptions
   
94.03   Application for permit
   
94.04   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
94.05   Denial of permit; alternate permit
§ 94.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, demonstration, exhibition,
pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any
street, park or other public place in the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-1)
§ 94.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall use any street, alley, public way, park or other property
owned or controlled by the city, except those places specifically designed and
intended for such use, for the purpose of holding, conducting, causing or
participating in any parade, street fair, street dance, carnival, assemblage or
activity of any nature which may cause the disturbance or interference of the
normal and ordinary use of the property by other persons, without first having
obtained a permit for such purpose. The permit may be granted by the Mayor
under such conditions as deemed appropriate. Permits shall not be required
under this chapter in the case of construction or repairs to or within any such
street or property; provided there is compliance with all other requirements of
this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-2) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Not less than two weeks prior to the closing or use of a street or property
for a parade, an application shall be submitted by the party to the city. The
time requirements may be waived by the Mayor, at his or her discretion, if
sufficient time exists for the proper review of the application as herein
provided. The application shall be submitted upon a form prescribed by the
city. The application shall provide such other information as requested.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-3) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall issue a permit as provided hereunder when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
      (2)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;
      (3)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of emergency vehicles as to prevent normal emergency service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto;
      (4)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or emergency service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;
      (5)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
      (6)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a
disturbance; and
      (7)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
   (B)   The Mayor, in such cases as shall be determined in his or her
discretion, may require, as a condition to the issuance of a permit herein,
such insurance or bond holding the city harmless from any and all liability for
injury or damage of any kind whatsoever occurring during such activity covered
by the permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-4)
§ 94.05 DENIAL OF PERMIT; ALTERNATE PERMIT.
   (A)   Without regard to §
94.04(B), the Mayor, from his or her consideration of available, appropriate
and necessary information, shall deny the application for a permit provided by
this chapter when, from this information, he or she has reason to believe that
any contemplated advocacy at the proposed event will be directed to inciting or
producing imminent lawless action and will likely incite or produce such
action.
   (B)   The Mayor, in denying an application for a parade permit, may
authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route
different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an
alternate permit shall so indicate within five days after notice of the action
of the Mayor. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of,
and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-3-5)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Parks and Recreation Facilities
   
95.01   Park and Recreation Board
   
95.02   Regulations for all parks and recreational facilities
   
95.03   Motor vehicles and horses in parks
   
95.04   User fees
   
95.05   Authority of school system to use Lee Park
   
95.06   Authority to establish rules and regulations
Reservoir Fish and Wildlife Management and Public Use Area
   
95.20   Purpose
   
95.21   Description
   
95.22   Definitions
   
95.23   Reservoir Management Board
   
95.24   Natural resource management plan
   
95.25   Wildlife sanctuary designation
   
95.26   Use regulations
   
95.27   Fishing regulations
   
95.28   Scientific surveys and inventions
   
95.29   Wildlife conservation and management
 
   
95.99   Penalty
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
§ 95.01 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to foster and promote the
maintenance and operation of city parks and recreation facilities.
   (B)   Board created; appointment and term. There is created a park and
recreation board. The Board shall consist of five members, residents of the
city, appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council. The term
of each member shall be five years, overlapping with the terms of the other
members, or until his or her successor takes office.
   (C)   Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as provided herein for appointment. If a member ceases to be a
resident of the city, his or her position shall be automatically vacated.
   (D)   Duties. The Board shall:
      (1)   Act as an advisory board to the City Council with reference to all
city parks and recreational facilities within or without the city;
      (2)   Make recommendations with reference to the operation of the city
parks and recreational facilities and recommendations as to rules and
regulations concerning the use of the parks and recreational facilities by the
public;
      (3)   Make recommendations to the City Council with reference to the
beautification of the parks and recreational facilities, and particularly, but
not limited to, the layout of walks and drives in the parks; the planting of
trees, shrubs, flowers and making other improvements to the parks and
recreational facilities;
      (4)   Make recommendations to the City Council with reference to the
safety of the public in general in enjoying and using the parks and
recreational facilities as it deems appropriate; and
      (5)   Make recommendations as it deems appropriate for the overall
physical improvement of the parks and recreational facilities of the city. It
shall consult with any and all civic organizations, clubs or associations
desiring to contribute to or make improvements to the parks and recreational
facilities of the city.
   (E)   Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-1) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 95.02 REGULATIONS FOR ALL PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
   The following regulations apply in city park and recreation areas.
   (A)   Damage to property.
      (1)   No person shall injure, break, cut, mutilate, carry away or remove
any tree, shrub, plant, flower, stone, stone walk, bench, chair, seat, stand,
structure, fence, property or anything whatsoever in, upon or near any park.
      (2)   No person shall go or walk upon any space in the parks reserved for
flowers or other plants or otherwise invade any plot reserved by the city for
shrubbery, grass or flowers or for any other purposes.
   (B)   Disturbing animals. No person shall chase, kill, set snares for, pet
or tease any animal or fowl belonging to the park or kept therein.
   (C)   Fastening animals. No person shall fasten any horse, cow or other
animal to any tree, stake, building, post or other fastening in any park.
   (D)   Posting handbills. No person shall paste, affix or inscribe any
handbill, poster, card, device or inscription to or upon or against any fence,
structure or property of or on any park or highway, street or avenue
surrounding the same.
   (E)   Vendors. No person shall set up any booth, table, stand or other
device for vending or retailing any items or services without first obtaining
license therefor from the city.
   (F)   Disturbing activities of others. No person shall disturb or interfere
with any picnic or social gathering or program of any group of persons in a
city park.
   (G)   Polluting waters. No person shall throw stones or rubbish of any kind
into any lake, pond, stream or other place in the park except in receptacles
designed for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-2) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 MOTOR VEHICLES AND HORSES IN PARKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle or ride any
horse or animal in or upon the public parks, except upon clearly defined public
roadways or public parking areas in the parks or except in cases of public
necessity, when authorized and directed to do so by city officials.
   (B)   The speed of any motor vehicle in a park or recreational facility
shall not exceed 20 mph.
   (C)   All vehicles or equestrians, when meeting on the streets or driveways
in any park, shall keep to the right and comply otherwise with traffic rules of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-3) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 USER FEES.
   The city shall provide, by motion or resolution, from time to time, the fees
charged for any recreational privileges on any property or facility for
recreational purpose owned or operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-4)
§ 95.05 AUTHORITY OF SCHOOL SYSTEM TO USE LEE PARK.
   The city’s public school system is an authorized user of Lee Park in
accordance with city ordinance, state law and the city comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-5) (Ord. 2011-02, passed 2-22-2011)
§ 95.06 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such
rules, regulations and other requirements as it deems necessary or expedient in
connection with parks and recreational areas in the city and the use of all
other recreational facilities owned or operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-6)
RESERVOIR FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT AND PUBLIC USE AREA
§ 95.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the New Cordell Reservoir and
its surrounding public use area to ensure the conservation of fish and
wildlife, protect natural resources and provide safe, sustainable public
recreation opportunities for residents and visitors. This subchapter
establishes guidelines for management, use and preservation to maintain
ecological balance and community enjoyment.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.21 DESCRIPTION.
   The New Cordell Reservoir and its surrounding land, located within Washita
County, Oklahoma, serve as a critical resource for fish and wildlife habitat
and public recreation. The reservoir area includes the water body, adjacent
public use zones and designated wildlife sanctuaries, all managed by the city
to balance conservation and community access. The area supports activities such
as fishing, hiking and passive recreation, subject to regulations outlined
herein.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC USE AREA. Designated zones around the reservoir open for recreational
activities like fishing, walking and picnicking.
   RESERVOIR. The body of water and surrounding land owned or controlled by the
City of New Cordell for public use and conservation.
   SANCTUARY AREA. Specific zones within the reservoir area designated for
wildlife protection, with restricted public access.
   WELL-BEHAVED PETS. Domesticated animals under control, on a leash and not
posing a threat to people, wildlife or property.
   WILDLIFE. All native animal species, including fish, birds, mammals and
reptiles, inhabiting the reservoir area.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.23 RESERVOIR MANAGEMENT BOARD.
   (A)   Composition. A Reservoir Management Board, consisting of seven local
residents of the city or the county, appointed by the City Council, oversees
the reservoir’s operations and management.
   (B)   Terms. Members serve staggered three-year terms, with a maximum of two
consecutive terms.
   (C)   Qualifications. Board members must have an interest in conservation or
recreation and reside within 20 miles of the city to ensure local
representation.
   (D)   Board authority and responsibilities. The Board serves in an advisory
capacity to the City Council. Subject to City Council approval, the Board’s
responsibilities include developing recommendations concerning:
      (1)   Developing and updating policies for reservoir use and
conservation;
      (2)   Reviewing the natural resource management plan annually;
      (3)   Advising on permits, public access and wildlife protection
measures; and
      (4)   Holding public meetings at least quarterly to gather community
input.
   (E)   Reporting. The Board reports to the City Council and coordinates with
state agencies as needed.
   (F)   Authority and limitations. The Board serves in an advisory capacity
only. The Board has no independent authority to bind the city; adopt or amend
policies, rules or fee schedules; issue permits; commit or expend city funds;
enter into contracts or agreements; supervise city employees; or implement
operational or capital changes at the reservoir.
   (G)   Council approval required. Any recommendation or change proposed by
the Board, including, but not limited to, policies, rules, fee schedules,
permits criteria, operational changes, capital projects, grant applications,
memoranda of understanding or interlocal agreements is not effective unless and
until approved by the City Council by motion, resolution or ordinance at a duly
noticed meeting. Any delegation of limited authority to the Board must be made
expressly by City Council and shall specify scope, dollar limits, duration and
reporting requirements.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.24 NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Development. The city, in consultation with the Reservoir Management
Board, maintains a natural resource management plan to guide sustainable
management of the reservoir’s fish, wildlife and habitats.
   (B)   Contents. The plan includes:
      (1)   Strategies for preserving water quality and aquatic ecosystems;
      (2)   Guidelines for protecting native species and their habitats;
      (3)   Schedules for maintenance, such as vegetation control and erosion
prevention; and
      (4)   Provisions for public access that minimize environmental impact.
   (C)   Review. The plan is reviewed and updated every five years,
incorporating data from scientific surveys and public feedback.
   (D)   Compliance. The Board ensures compliance with state and federal
environmental regulations.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.25 WILDLIFE SANCTUARY DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Purpose. Portions of the reservoir area are designated as wildlife
sanctuaries to protect sensitive habitats and species.
   (B)   Restrictions. Within these zones:
      (1)   Hunting, trapping or disturbing wildlife is strictly prohibited;
      (2)   Public access is limited to designated trails or observation areas;
and
      (3)   Signage clearly marks sanctuary boundaries to inform visitors.
   (C)   Administration. The Reservoir Management Board, in coordination with
state wildlife agencies, determines sanctuary boundaries and monitors their
effectiveness in preserving biodiversity.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.26 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted activities. Permitted activities include fishing (per §
95.27), hiking, picnicking and non-motorized boating in designated areas.
   (B)   Pet policy. Well-behaved pets are welcome in public use areas if
leashed (maximum six-foot leash) and under control. Owners must clean up pet
waste and ensure pets do not disturb wildlife or other visitors.
   (C)   Prohibited activities. Prohibited activities include the following:
      (1)   Littering, dumping or disposing of waste;
      (2)   Unauthorized vehicles, including ATVs or off-road vehicles;
      (3)   Camping, fires or overnight stays without a permit; and
      (4)   Damaging vegetation, wildlife or city property.
   (D)   Permits. Special events, group activities (ten plus people) or
commercial use require a city-issued permit, obtainable from City Hall for a
fee.
   (E)   Hours. Public use areas are open from dawn to dusk, unless otherwise
posted.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.27 FISHING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   License requirement. A valid state fishing license is required for all
anglers aged 16 and older.
   (B)   Limits. Daily catch limits and size restrictions follow State
Department of Wildlife Conservation (ODWC) guidelines.
   (C)   Permitted methods. Permitted methods include rod and reel, trotlines
or jug lines; prohibited methods include netting, spearing or explosives.
   (D)   Commercial prohibition. No commercial fishing is allowed.
   (E)   Fish cleaning. Anglers must clean fish only in designated areas and
dispose of waste properly.
   (F)   Additional restrictions. The Reservoir Management Board may post
additional restrictions (e.g., seasonal closures) to protect fish populations,
with signage at access points.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.28 SCIENTIFIC SURVEYS AND INVENTIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The city or its authorized agents may conduct scientific
surveys to monitor fish, wildlife, water quality and habitat conditions.
   (B)   Purpose. These surveys:
      (1)   Support the natural resource management plan;
      (2)   May involve temporary restrictions on public access to specific
areas; and
      (3)   Are coordinated with state agencies or universities for accuracy.
   (C)   Reporting. The Reservoir Management Board reviews survey results to
inform management decisions and shares non-sensitive findings with the public
annually.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.29 WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Priorities. The city prioritizes wildlife conservation through:
      (1)   Protecting critical habitats, especially in sanctuary areas;
      (2)   Implementing measures to control invasive species and promote
native biodiversity;
      (3)   Limiting public access in sensitive areas to reduce disturbance;
and
      (4)   Collaborating with ODWC and other agencies for wildlife monitoring
and management.
   (B)   Education. The Reservoir Management Board encourages community
education on conservation through signage, workshops or local events.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to use any park or recreational
facilities operated by the city without having complied with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the City Council in connection therewith. Anyone
violating any of the rules and regulations, or failing to comply with such,
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 8-4-7)
   (C)   Violations of §
95.26 may result in fines up to $500 or removal from the area, as enforced by
city officials or law enforcement.
(Ord. 2025-2, passed 8-18-2025)
CHAPTER 96: LIBRARY
Section
   
96.01   Library established
   
96.02   Library Board
   
96.03   Participation in multicounty library system
§ 96.01 LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.
   The city is the possessor of the city public library and operates it for the
benefit of the people of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-5-1)
§ 96.02 LIBRARY BOARD.
   A Library Board, as designated by the City Council, may have advisory
responsibilities for the management of city public library. The Library Board
may make all necessary rules and regulations for its operation and for the care
and management of the city public library, subject to the approval and adoption
by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-5-2) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 96.03 PARTICIPATION IN MULTICOUNTY LIBRARY SYSTEM.
   The city is located within the proposed district to be served by a
multicounty library to be established and created pursuant to state law. In
order to provide good library service to city residents, the city participates
in the Western Plains library system.
(Prior Code, § 8-5-3)
CHAPTER 97: CEMETERY
Section
   
97.01   Cemetery Board of Directors
   
97.02   Cemetery Care Fund
   
97.03   Fees and charges
   
97.04   Deeds to lots
   
97.05   Sale of lots; issuance of burial permits
   
97.06   Monuments and improvements
   
97.07   Coping, walk or wall prohibited
   
97.08   Removal of wreaths and decorations
   
97.09   Vehicles in cemetery
   
97.10   Damage to property prohibited
   
97.11   Records kept
   
97.12   Authority to adopt rules and regulations
   
97.13   Utilization of a standard single cemetery plot
   
97.14   Placement of headstones and markers
   
97.15   Preexisting objects and markers
§ 97.01 CEMETERY BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   (A)   Board created; membership. There is created a board of cemetery
trustees to administer the affairs of the city cemetery. The Board of Cemetery
Trustees shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the City Council.
   (B)   Advisory recommendations. The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall have
the power to give recommendations on the following:
      (1)   Making rules and regulations governing the management and
improvement of the cemetery;
      (2)   Fixing the price for which lots shall be sold and for which an
interment shall be made; and
      (3)   Appointment of all officers necessary for the control and
management of the cemetery, including a Cemetery Superintendent, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-1) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 97.02 CEMETERY CARE FUND.
   (A)   Fund established. There is established a cemetery care fund for
maintenance and improvement of the city cemetery, to be operated in accordance
with state law.
   (B)   Financing and investment of fund.
      (1)   Financing and investment of the fund shall be as permitted by the
city and state law.
      (2)   Donations, deposits or bequests may be made in trust for special
care of specified lots, monuments or mausoleums in the cemetery. Such funds
shall be placed in a Perpetual Care Fund as provided by law, and a separate
account shall be kept of each amount so deposited, donated or bequeathed, and
expended as specified by the donor.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-2)
§ 97.03 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Fees and charges established.
      (1)   Lots. The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall fix the
price for which lots shall be sold.
      (2)   Interment. The interment fee for opening and closing graves in the
cemetery shall be established by motion or resolution of the City Council.
Additional fees shall be charged for opening graves on Sundays or legal
holidays.
   (B)   Payment of fees required.
      (1)   No deed for any lot shall be issued, no grave opened and no
monument or marker shall be set, located or placed until the requisite price,
fee or charge has been paid in full and in cash to the appropriate officer,
except as may be otherwise allowed by the city herein.
      (2)   In no case shall any person dig any grave or inter any human body
in or upon any lot owned by the city in the cemetery until the city shall have
received the full price to be paid for the lot in or upon which such grave or
interment is to be made, and until a permit is issued by the Clerk as provided
herein.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.04 DEEDS TO LOTS.
   All contracts or deeds for the sale or transfer of lots in the cemetery
shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk upon the payment of the charges
therefor to the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-4)
§ 97.05 SALE OF LOTS; ISSUANCE OF BURIAL PERMITS.
   The City Clerk may contract and sell any lot in the cemetery, at the price
or prices fixed by the city, and issue permits for the burial of the human dead
in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-5)
§ 97.06 MONUMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Permit requirements for monuments. A permit shall be obtained for
setting any monument or grave marker in the city cemetery, and the fee therefor
shall be established by motion or resolution of the City Council. The permit
issued by the city shall indicate the specific location for the marker or
monument, its cost and the name of the person securing the same.
   (B)   Erection of monuments; installation of improvements.
      (1)   Supervision. The erection of monuments, tombstones, filling of
graves, improving, adorning and embellishing graves, or the marking thereof, by
private parties in the cemetery shall be done under the supervision of the city
and not otherwise.
      (2)   Payment of fees required. No improvement shall be made and no
erection of monuments or marking of graves shall be had until all charges owing
the city on the lot to be improved shall have been fully paid.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.07 COPING, WALK OR WALL PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to install any coping, walk or wall in the
cemetery. This prohibition shall not affect the city in making improvements
necessary and maintaining the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.08 REMOVAL OF WREATHS AND DECORATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to remove wreaths, flowers, potted plants or
other decorations, whether live or artificial, placed on or near graves in the
cemetery other than by the person placing such wreath, flower, potted plant or
other decoration or his or her authorized agent or representative. The city
may, one week following Memorial Day and other occasions when graves in the
cemetery may be decorated, remove and dispose of such decorations other than
permanent plantings and potted flowers or plants placed upon grave markers in a
position where they do not interfere with the mowing or maintenance of the
cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.09 VEHICLES IN CEMETERY.
   No motorized vehicle shall be permitted in the cemetery except:
   (A)   Vehicles operated by the city or under contract to the city; and
   (B)   Vehicles entering, exiting or being parked or stored where part or
portion of the cemetery is designed and maintained for entrance, exit, parking
or storage of motorized vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.10 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure or deface any property, monument,
shrubbery, flowers or plants which have been erected or planted in the
cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.11 RECORDS KEPT.
   The Clerk or his or her designee shall keep a complete record of all sales
and burials in the books provided by the city. The record shall show the number
and location of the lot sold, the date of sale, to whom sold, the amount paid
for each lot and the name of the person whose body is interred in the lot.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.12 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, or upon recommendation of the
Cemetery Board, may adopt rules and regulations relating to the city cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-12)
§ 97.13 UTILIZATION OF A STANDARD SINGLE CEMETERY PLOT.
   Only one casket containing the remains of one person or two cremation urns
each urn containing the remains of one person per urn may be placed in one
standard single cemetery plot in the City Cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-13) (Ord. 2018-04, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 97.14 PLACEMENT OF HEADSTONES AND MARKERS.
   No more than two headstones or markers may be located at a cemetery plot.
One headstone or marker shall be allowed at the head of the plot and one at the
foot of the plot. No headstones, markers or similar solid objects shall be
allowed to be placed between the head of the plot and the foot of the plot. The
city shall have the right to remove any such object placed between the head of
the plot and the foot of the plot.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-14) (Ord. 2018-04, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 97.15 PREEXISTING OBJECTS AND MARKER.
   Objects placed and currently existing between the head of the plot and the
foot of the plot prior to the effective date of this section shall be allowed
to remain in their present location. However, if such an object is removed for
any reason whatsoever, no object will be allowed to be similarly placed on the
plot.
(Prior Code, § 8-6-15) (Ord. 2018-04, passed 5-21-2018)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES
      
114.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
      
115.   PAWNBROKERS
      
116.   PROPANE EXCHANGE PROVIDERS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Conditions of issuance of license or permit; not a city endorsement
   
110.02   License required; fees
   
110.03   Separate licenses required
   
110.04   Prohibitions regarding fees
   
110.05   Payment of fees; processing
   
110.06   Application for license
   
110.07   Nontransferability of license or permit
   
110.08   Expiration of licenses and permits
   
110.09   Renewal of licenses
   
110.10   Posting license
   
110.11   Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit
   
110.12   Appeal procedure
§ 110.01 CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; NOT A CITY ENDORSEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with provisions. All permits and licenses issued under the
provisions of this code for or to any person, business, activity, device or
machine shall be conditioned upon substantial compliance by the permittee or
licensee with all provisions of this code for the regulation and maintenance of
the public order, welfare, peace, health and safety. In addition, the permits
and licenses shall be conditioned upon strict compliance with the provisions of
this code relating specifically to the person, business, activity, device or
machine covered by the permit or license.
   (B)   Approvals; fees; inspection; bond. Whenever in any section any permit
or license issued by an officer, agency or department is made contingent upon
the approval of another officer, agency or department, or contingent upon the
payment of any fee or fees, or the making of any prior inspection or
examination, or the furnishing of any bond in connection therewith, then the
issuance of the permit or license shall be withheld until the approval,
inspection or examination is had or the bond provided and until the fee has
been paid as required.
   (C)   Not a city endorsement. No permit or license shall be construed or
used in any manner or by any person as an official endorsement by the city of
the person, activity or thing licensed or permitted.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, conduct, operate or
follow any of the trades, businesses, vocations, professions, callings or
activities set out in this code, unless he or she has a current license issued
by the City Clerk. The fees for such licenses shall be as set by the City
Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED.
   A separate license must be obtained for each branch or separate place of
business in which the trade, calling, profession or occupation is carried on.
Each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or
conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation described in the
license, except as may be otherwise provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING FEES.
   No free licenses shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, except as
specifically set forth by this code, nor any sum accepted less than the amount
specified, nor for a shorter period than required by this code.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 110.05 PAYMENT OF FEES; PROCESSING.
   All license and permit fees shall be paid in advance to the city prior to
the issuance of any license or permit. The fee, less the applicable charge for
processing the application for a permit or license, shall be refunded to the
applicant, upon demand, in case the license or permit for which filed is not
granted. Except as provided otherwise in this code, the processing fee shall be
as set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-5)
§ 110.06 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a license required by this code shall be filed with the City
Clerk and shall contain such reasonable information as he or she may require,
in addition to any information specifically required by other provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)
§ 110.07 NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   No license or permit issued shall be transferable nor may any license or
permit be sold, assigned or mortgaged, except as may be specifically authorized
by this code. No person may attempt to do business under a license or permit
transferred to him or her.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.08 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Licenses. All annual licenses issued shall expire on June 30. Where
the fee prescribed and paid for is for a period less than one year, the license
shall be issued only for such period and shall expire at the end thereof.
   (B)   Permits. All permits shall expire upon execution of the act or
activity for which the permit was issued, or at the expiration time noted on
the permit or in this code, whichever occurs first.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-8)
§ 110.09 RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
   For all occupations, activities or businesses regulated in this code, no
applicant for an initial or renewal license may engage in the activity,
occupation or business regulated without issuance of the license as provided in
this chapter unless otherwise provided herein. Renewal applications and fees
must be received by the city prior to the expiration of the license, except
where otherwise provided by this code, or else the applicant must proceed in
the manner required of an applicant for a new or initial license.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.10 POSTING LICENSE.
   Each license issued under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous
place where the business, vocation or calling is carried on, and the holder of
such license shall immediately show the same to any officer of the city upon
being requested so to do.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.11 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation.
      (1)   The City Council or other authorized official may refuse to issue
or renew a license or permit; or the licenses or permits issued pursuant to
this code, unless otherwise provided, may be suspended or revoked by the City
Council or such other authorized official, department, board or agency where
applicable, after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in
the application for permit or license;
         (b)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise and services;
         (c)   Conviction of the applicant, licensee or permittee of any crime
of misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a violation of any act of the state
or any law of the United States having a reasonable relationship to the purpose
and scope of the permit or license; or
         (d)   Conducting the activity under this code or any ordinance of the
city in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the public.
      (2)   Any permit or license shall be subject to suspension or revocation
for failure to comply with the terms of this code and as may otherwise be
provided by this code.
   (B)   Notice and hearing. Notice of hearing for the suspension or revocation
of a license or permit shall be in writing given by the Clerk, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Service of such notice shall be made by either personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or
permittee at the last known address, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
   (C)   Refunds and returns prohibited. In case of the suspension or
revocation of a license or permit as herein provided, no portion of the
application, license or permit fee shall be returned to the applicant, licensee
or permittee unless otherwise provided in this code or any ordinance of the
city.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation is in addition to penalty. Any suspension or
revocation hereunder shall be in addition to any penalty or fine as prescribed
in this code or any ordinance of the city.
   (E)   Action is final. The order of the City Council or such other
authorized official, department, board or agency where applicable shall be the
final municipal action for the purpose of judicial review unless otherwise
specifically provided.
   (F)   Provisions are additional. This section is in addition to any other
procedures in this code for license suspension or revocation.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.12 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Right to appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the city’s decision to the City Council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the Mayor within five
days of the action of the city which is appealed.
   (B)   City Council consideration. The City Council shall consider the appeal
at its next regularly scheduled meeting; at which time, the applicant shall be
entitled to present his or her appeal orally or in writing. The City Council
shall act on the appeal within seven days of the hearing and shall either
uphold the action of the city or shall direct the issuance of a license or
permit which the city has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which
the city had revoked.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-12)
CHAPTER 111: MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Medical marijuana licenses
   
111.03   Cultivator and processor facilities
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION. An establishment licensed under 63 O.S. § 422
whereby the growing of medical marijuana is conducted on the premises and then
sold to a licensed retailer or processor.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. An establishment licensed under 63 O.S. §
421.2 whereby the retail sale of medical marijuana is conducted on the
premises.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSOR. An establishment licensed under 63 O.S. § 423
whereby marijuana plants are processed (packaged) into concentrates, edible and
other forms for consumption.
(Prior Code, § 5-9-1) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 2019-05, passed 7-
1-2019; Ord. 2019-10, passed 11-4-2019)
§ 111.02 MEDICAL MARIJUANA LICENSES.
   (A)   All operators of retail marijuana dispensaries are required to obtain
a retail marijuana dispensary permit from the City Clerk.
   (B)   The City Council will establish, by resolution, a fee to obtain the
retail marijuana dispensary permit. The fee shall be used to offset municipal
expenses covering costs relating to licensing, inspection, administration and
enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
   (C)   A retail marijuana dispensary will not be granted to any applicant
where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of the following
uses: private or public preschool, elementary, secondary, vocational or trade
school, college or university.
   (D)   For the distance requirements outlined in this section, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the proposed medical marijuana dispensary to the
nearest entrance of the building or unit described above.
   (E)   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off-
premises.
   (F)   Any violations of this section shall result in the revocation of the
retail marijuana dispensary permit.
   (G)   It is the intent of the city that nothing in this chapter be construed
to:
      (1)   Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a
public nuisance;
      (2)   Allow the use of marijuana for nonmedical purposes; or
      (3)   Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by
city ordinance or state law.
(Prior Code, § 5-9-2) (Ord. 2018-05, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 2019-05, passed 7-
1-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 CULTIVATOR AND PROCESSOR FACILITIES.
   (A)   Medical marijuana cultivator facilities are allowed within the
municipal boundaries of the city.
   (B)   Medical marijuana processors are allowed within the municipal
boundaries of the city.
   (C)   All operators of medical marijuana cultivator facilities shall obtain
a medical marijuana cultivator permit from the City Clerk prior to commencing
such operations.
   (D)   All operators of medical marijuana processing facilities shall obtain
a medical marijuana processor permit from the City Clerk prior to commencing
such operations.
   (E)   The City Council will establish, by resolution, a fee to obtain the
medical marijuana cultivator permit and the medical marijuana processor permit.
The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs relating to
licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of laws relating to
medical marijuana cultivator facilities.
   (F)   Buildings where medical marijuana is grown, processed, stored and sold
by medical marijuana cultivators and medical marijuana processors must be
equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are
detectable off-premises.
   (G)   Any violation of this section shall result in the revocation of the
medical marijuana cultivator permit and the medical marijuana processor permit.
   (H)   Medical marijuana cultivators and medical marijuana processor shall
strictly follow all state statutes and state medical marijuana authority rules
and regulations relating to medical marijuana. Any breach of the state statutes
or state medical marijuana authority rules and regulations shall result in the
revocation of the medical marijuana cultivator permit and the medical marijuana
processor permit.
   (I)   Medical marijuana cultivator facilities and medical marijuana
processing facilities can only be located within areas of the city zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-9-3) (Ord. 2019-10, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Consumption in public
   
112.03   Location, zoning restrictions
   
112.04   Hours of operation
   
112.05   Stimulate consumption prohibited
   
112.06   Hours of sale
   
112.07   Taxes enumerated
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The terms set forth in this chapter are also contained in 37A O.S. §
1-103 which is the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as may be amended
(the “Act”) which became effective October 1, 2018.
      ABLE COMMISSION or COMMISSION. The Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement
Commission.
      ALCOHOL. Hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of
wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does not include
wood alcohol or alcohol which has been denatured or produced as denatured in
accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, beer and wine as those terms are
defined herein and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings.
      APPLICANT. Any individual, legal or commercial business entity, or any
individual involved in any legal or commercial business entity allowed to hold
any license issued in accordance with the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act.
      BEER. Any beverage of alcohol by volume and obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, or other grain, malt or
similar products. BEER may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products.
BEER includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and
other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice
wine.
      BEER DISTRIBUTOR. Any person licensed to distribute beer for retail sale
in the state, but does not include a holder of a small brewer self-distribution
license or brewpub self-distribution license. The term DISTRIBUTOR, as used in
this chapter, shall be construed to refer to a BEER DISTRIBUTOR.
      BEER KEG. Any manufacturer-sealed, single container that contains not
less than four gallons of beer.
      BOTTLE CLUB. Any establishment in a county which has not authorized the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required
to be licensed to keep, mix and serve alcoholic beverages belonging to club
members on club premises.
      BRAND. Any word, name, group of letters, symbol or combination thereof
that is adopted and used by a licensed manufacturer to identify a specific beer
and to distinguish that product from another beer.
      BRAND EXTENSION.
         (a)   After the effective date of this Act, any brand of beer
introduced by a manufacturer in this state which either:
            1.   Incorporates all or a substantial part of the unique features
of a preexisting brand of the same licensed manufacturer; or
            2.   Relies to a significant extent on the goodwill associated with
the preexisting brand.
         (b)   Any brand of beer that a manufacturer, the majority of whose
total volume of all brands of beer distributed in this state by such
manufacturer on January 1, 2016, was distributed as low-point beer, desires to
sell, introduces, begins selling or theretofore has sold and desires to
continue selling a strong beer in this state which either:
            1.   Incorporates or incorporated all or a substantial part of the
unique features of a preexisting low-point beer brand of the same licensed
manufacturer; or
            2.   Relies or relied to a significant extent on the goodwill
associated with a preexisting low-point beer brand.
      BREWER. Any person who manufactures for human consumption, by the use of
raw materials or other ingredients, any beer upon which a license fee and a tax
are imposed by any law of this state.
      BREWPUB. A licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food
and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises consumption.
      CIDER. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of
fruit juice, including, but not limited to, flavored, sparkling or carbonated
cider. For the purposes of the distribution of this product, CIDER may be
distributed by either wine and spirits wholesalers or beer distributors.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. Any person primarily engaged in retailing a limited
range of general household items and groceries, with extended hours of
operation, whether or not engaged in retail sales of automotive fuels in
combination with such sales.
      CONVICTED and CONVICTION. A finding of guilt resulting from a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere, the decision of a court or magistrate or the verdict
of a jury, irrespective of the pronouncement of judgment or the suspension
thereof.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the ABLE Commission.
      DISTILLER. Any person who produces spirits from any source or substance,
or any person who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for distillation or
for the production of spirits (except a person making or using such material in
the authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by
fermentation), or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits
from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort
or wash, has also in his or her possession or use a still.
      DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT. The written agreement between the distributor and
manufacturer of alcohol.
      DRUG STORE. A person primarily engaged in retailing prescription and
nonprescription drugs and medicines.
      DUAL-STRENGTH BEER.
         (a)   A brand of beer that, immediately prior to the effective date of
this Act, was being sold and distributed in this state:
            1.   As a low-point beer pursuant to the Low-Point Beer
Distribution Act in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this Act;
and
            2.   As strong beer pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this Act.
         (b)   DUAL-STRENGTH BEER does not include a brand of beer that arose
as a result of a brand extension as defined in this section.
      FAIR MARKET VALUE. The value in the subject territory covered by the
written agreement with the distributor or wholesaler that would be determined
in an arm’s length transaction entered into without duress or threat of
termination of the distributor’s or wholesaler’s rights and shall include all
elements of value, including goodwill and going-concern value.
      GOOD CAUSE.
         (a)   Failure by the distributor to comply with the material and
reasonable provisions of a written agreement or understanding with the
manufacturer; or
         (b)   Failure by the distributor to comply with the duty of good
faith.
      GOOD FAITH. The duty of each party to any distributor agreement and all
officers, employees or agents thereof to act with honesty in fact and within
reasonable standards of fair dealing in the trade.
      GROCERY STORE. A person primarily engaged in retailing a general line of
food, such as canned or frozen foods, fresh fruits and vegetables and fresh and
prepared meats, fish and poultry.
      HOTEL or MOTEL. An establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the individual drink and which contains guestroom accommodations
with respect to which the predominant relationship existing between the
occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the establishment is that of
innkeeper and guest. For purposes of this section, the existence of other legal
relationships as between some occupants and the owner or operator thereof shall
be immaterial.
      LEGAL NEWSPAPER. A newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for
publication of legal notices as prescribed in 25 O.S. §§ 101 through 114.
      LICENSEE. Any person holding a license under the Oklahoma Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, and any agent, servant or employee of such licensee while
in the performance of any act or duty in connection with the licensed business
or on the licensed premises.
      LOW-POINT BEER. Any beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight, including, but not limited
to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion by barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
      MANUFACTURER. A brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of any
alcoholic beverage and its subsidiaries, affiliates and parent companies.
      MANUFACTURER’S AGENT. A salaried or commissioned salesperson who is the
agent authorized to act on behalf of the manufacturer or nonresident seller in
the state.
      MEALS. Foods commonly ordered at lunch or dinner and at least part of
which is cooked on the licensed premises and requires the use of dining
implements for consumption. Provided that the service of only food such as
appetizers, sandwiches, salads or desserts shall not be considered MEALS.
      MINI-BAR. A closed container, either refrigerated in whole or in part, or
nonrefrigerated, and access to the interior of which is:
         (a)   Restricted by means of a locking device which requires the use
of a key, magnetic card or similar device; or
         (b)   Controlled at all times by the licensee.
      MIXED BEVERAGE COOLER. Any beverage, by whatever name designated,
consisting of an alcoholic beverage and fruit or vegetable juice, fruit or
vegetable flavorings, dairy products or carbonated water containing more than
0.5% of alcohol measured by volume but not more than 7% alcohol by volume at
60°F and which is packaged in a container not larger than 375 milliliters (mL).
Such term shall include, but not be limited to, the beverage popularly known as
a “wine cooler”.
      MIXED BEVERAGES. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or
part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal
size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a
mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, charitable event or
special event license.
      MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment which is licensed by the state
under the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act to sell alcoholic beverages
by the individual drink and where motion pictures are exhibited, and to which
the general public is admitted.
      NONRESIDENT SELLER. Any person licensed pursuant to title 37A O.S. § 2-
135 of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
      OCCUPATION. As used in connection with “occupation tax”, means the sites
occupied as the places of business of the manufacturers, wholesalers, beer
distributors, retailers, mixed beverage licensees, on-premises beer and wine
licensees, bottle clubs, caterers, public event and special event licensees.
      ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container of alcoholic beverage filled and stamped
or sealed by the manufacturer.
      PACKAGE STORE. Any sole proprietor or partnership that qualifies to sell
wine, beer and/or spirits for off-premises consumption and that is not a
grocery store, convenience store or drug store, or other retail outlet that is
not permitted to sell wine or beer for off-premises consumption.
      PATRON. Any person, customer or visitor who is not employed by a licensee
or who is not a licensee.
      PERSON. An individual, any type of partnership, corporation, association,
limited liability company or any individual involved in the legal structure of
any such business entity.
      PREMISES.
         (a)   The grounds and all buildings and appurtenances pertaining to
the grounds, including any adjacent premises if under the direct or indirect
control of the licensee and the rooms and equipment under the control of the
licensee and used in connection with or in furtherance of the business covered
by a license.
         (b)   Provided that the ABLE Commission shall have the authority to
designate areas to be excluded from the licensed premises solely for the
purpose of:
            1.   Allowing the presence and consumption of alcoholic beverages
by private parties which are closed to the general public; or
            2.   Allowing the services of a caterer serving alcoholic beverages
provided by a private party.
         (c)   This exception shall in no way limit the licensee’s concurrent
responsibility for any violations of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control
Act occurring on the licensed premises.
      PRIVATE EVENT. A social gathering or event attended by invited guests who
share a common cause, membership, business or task and have a prior established
relationship. For purposes of this definition, advertisement for general public
attendance or sales of tickets to the general public shall not constitute a
PRIVATE EVENT.
      PUBLIC EVENT. Any event that can be attended by the general public.
      RECTIFIER. Any person who rectifies, purifies or refines spirits or wines
by any process (other than by original and continuous distillation, or original
and continuous processing, from mash, wort, wash or other substance, through
continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is complete),
and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining spirits, shall,
by mixing (except for immediate consumption on the premises where mixed) such
spirits, wine or other liquor with any material, manufactures any spurious,
imitation or compound liquors for sale, under the name of whiskey, brandy, rum,
gin, wine, spirits, cordials or any other name.
      REGULATION OR RULE. A formal rule of general application promulgated by
the ABLE Commission as herein required.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
by the individual drink for on-premises consumption and where food is prepared
and sold for immediate consumption on the premises.
      RETAIL CONTAINER FOR SPIRITS AND WINES. An original package of any
capacity approved by the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
      RETAIL SALESPERSON. A salesperson soliciting orders from and calling upon
retail alcoholic beverage stores with regard to his or her product.
      RETAILER. A package store, grocery store, convenience store or drug store
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption pursuant to a
retail spirits license, retail wine license or retail beer license.
      SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor or as an agent, servant or employee. The term SALE is
also declared to be and include the use or consumption in this state of any
alcoholic beverage obtained within or imported from without this state, upon
which the excise tax levied by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act has
not been paid or exempted.
      SHORT-ORDER FOOD. Food other than full meals, including, but not limited
to, sandwiches, soups and salads. Provided that popcorn, chips and other
similar snack food shall not be considered SHORT-ORDER FOOD.
      SMALL BREWER. A brewer who manufactures less than 25,000 barrels of beer
annually pursuant to a validly issued small brewer license hereunder.
      SMALL FARM WINE. A wine that is produced by a small farm winery with 75%
or more state-grown grapes, berries, other fruits, honey or vegetables.
      SMALL FARM WINERY. A wine-making establishment that does not annually
produce for sale more than 15,000 gallons of wine as reported on the United
States Department of the Treasury, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau,
“Report of Wine Premises Operations” (TTB Form 5120.17).
      SPARKLING WINE. Champagne or any artificially carbonated wine.
      SPECIAL EVENT. An entertainment, recreation or marketing event that
occurs at a single location on an irregular basis and at which alcoholic
beverages are sold.
      SPIRITS. Any beverage other than wine or beer, which contains more than
0.5% alcohol measured by volume, and obtained by distillation, whether or not
mixed with other substances in solution and includes those products known as
whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, vodka, liqueurs, cordials and fortified wines and
similar compounds, but shall not include any alcohol liquid completely
denatured in accordance with the Acts of Congress and regulations pursuant
thereto.
      STRONG BEER. Beer which, prior to October 1, 2018, was distributed
pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37 O.S. §§ 501 et seq.
      SUCCESSOR MANUFACTURER. A primary source of supply, a brewer or an
importer that acquires rights to a beer brand from a predecessor manufacturer.
      TAX COMMISSION. The State Tax Commission.
      TERRITORY. A geographic region with a specified boundary.
      WINE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume and not
more than 24% alcohol by volume at 60°F obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or other products
containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added, and includes
vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
      WINE AND SPIRITS WHOLESALER or WINE AND SPIRITS DISTRIBUTOR. Any sole
proprietorship or partnership licensed to distribute wine and spirits in the
state. The term WHOLESALER, as used in this Act, shall be construed to refer to
a wine and spirits wholesaler.
   (B)   Words in the plural include the singular, and vice versa, and words
imparting the masculine gender include the feminine, as well as persons and
licensees as defined in this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 112.02 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person who
shall, in any public place or building, or upon any public or private road or
alley, or upon any parking or vacant lot, drink or otherwise consume any
intoxicating beverage or liquor of any kind or beer, including low-point beer,
or who shall be intoxicated in any public place or building or public or
private road, street or alley, or any public gathering, or who shall be drunk
or intoxicated and shall disturb the peace of any person, shall be guilty of an
offense.
   (B)   Public place defined. PUBLIC PLACE shall mean any place other than the
premises of a licensee of the ABLE Commission who is authorized to sell or
serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink or on the premises of any
place for which any person has received a special event or caterer’s license
from the ABLE Commission.
   (C)   Exemption. It shall not be unlawful to sell intoxicating beverages,
liquor, wine and beer, including low-point beer at a special event on city
public property where the person or entity conducting the special event has
received prior authorization for such special event from the city and, further,
the person or entity conducting such special event has also received a special
event or caterer’s license from the ABLE Commission, if such ABLE Commission
license is required by state law for such special event.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-3) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019; Ord. 2019-06, passed 7-1-
2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 LOCATION, ZONING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any beer distributor, bottle club, brewery,
brewpub or winery, which has been licensed by the ABLE Commission and which has
as its main purpose the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises, or package store, to be located within 300 feet of
any public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used
for worship services and religious activities; however, a college or university
located within an improvement district created pursuant to 11 O.S. § 39-103.1
may waive the 300 foot requirement by providing written notice to the
establishment seeking the license and to the ABLE Commission. Provided a
college or university prior to waiving the 300 foot requirement found in this
division (A) shall publish a notice of its intention to waive such requirement
in a legal newspaper of general circulation within the state at least 30 days
but not more than 40 days prior to providing any written notice, waiving the
300 foot requirement, to the establishment seeking the license or to the ABLE
Commission.
   (B)   As used in division (A) above, LEGAL NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL CIRCULATION
IN THIS STATE means a newspaper meeting the requisites of a newspaper for
publication of legal notices as prescribed in 25 O.S. § 106 in a majority of
the counties in this state. The distance indicated in this section shall be
measured from the nearest property line of such public or private school or
church to the nearest perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage
establishment, beer and wine establishment, bottle club or package store which
has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments
or bottle clubs, which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-
premises consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000;
provided if, at the time of application for license renewal, the licensed
location has not been in actual operation for a continuous period more than 60
days, the license shall not be renewed. If any school or church shall be
established within 300 feet of any package store, mixed beverage establishment,
beer and wine establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this
section after such package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine
establishment or bottle club has been licensed, the provisions of this section
shall not be a deterrent to the renewal of such license if there has not been a
lapse of more than 60 days. When any mixed beverage establishment, beer and
wine establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section
which has a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, or
package store, changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such
change of ownership results in the same type of business being conducted on the
premises, the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the
issuance of a license to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise
qualified.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-4) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and wine
occupational tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such
establishment shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any mixed
beverages, beer or wine on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-5) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 STIMULATE CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Use of any of the following means or inducements to stimulate the
consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time;
      (2)   Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks
at a price that is less than 6% below the markup of the cost to the mixed
beverage licensee; provided a mixed beverage licensee shall be permitted to
offer these drink specials on any particular hour of any particular day and
shall not be required to offer these drink specials for an entire calendar week
or from open to close;
      (3)   Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions
not open to the public;
      (4)   Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day or portion thereof at prices less than those charged the general
public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public;
      (5)   Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink
without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink
during the same calendar week; or
      (6)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
   (B)   Provided that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit the
advertising or offering of food or entertainment in licensed establishments.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-6) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 HOURS OF SALE.
   Sale of alcoholic beverages shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday, and shall not be permitted to
be sold on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; provided if the county, pursuant
to the provisions of 37A O.S. § 3-124, elects to allow such sales between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. Retail spirits licensees
shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on the day of any general,
primary, runoff primary or special election whether on a national, state,
county or city election; provided that the election day does not occur on any
day on which such sales are otherwise prohibited by law.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-7) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 TAXES ENUMERATED.
   There is levied an annual tax upon the following occupations hereinafter
named, in the sum of 50% of the amount charged by the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement Commission. Payment is due prior to any sales for new
organizations, and thereafter upon July 1 annually.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-8) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019; Ord. 2024-02, passed 7-15-
2024)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to complete a
substance abuse prevention program conducted by the Department of Mental Health
and Substance Abuse Services or a private entity approved by the department.
Such program shall include at least two sessions, each of which shall not be
less than two hours in length. The cost of the program shall be paid by the
person required to complete the program.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-9) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 4-1-2019)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND DEVICES
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Application for license
   
113.03   License fee
   
113.04   Issuance or denial of license
   
113.05   Display of license
   
113.06   Prohibited devices not legalized
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any and all nongambling mechanical or
electronic machines which, upon the payment or insertion of a coin, token or
similar object, provide music, amusement or entertainment, including, but not
limited to, such games as pool, phonographs, video television, shooting
galleries, pinball, foosball, bowling, shuffleboard or any other amusement
device with or without a replay feature which can be legally shipped interstate
according to federal law.
   COIN-OPERATED MUSIC DEVICE. Any music device which is operated, motivated,
released or played by or upon the payment or insertion of a coin, token or
similar object, whether there is one or more boxes or devices in the premises
for the reception of such coin, tokens or similar objects. Coin-operated radio
or television receiving sets in hotels, motels or tourist cabins for the use
and benefit of the guests and visitors of such hotels, motels or tourist rooms
or cabins shall be included in this definition.
   COIN-OPERATED POOL, BILLIARD or SNOOKER TABLES. Are defined as coin-operated
amusement devices, in accordance with the definition of said term in this
section.
   FAMILY AMUSEMENT CENTER. An establishment where more than two pool or
billiard tables are maintained and operated for a profit and offered to persons
of all ages and designed to furnish recreation for families.
   POOL, BILLIARD or SNOOKER TABLE. Any table specifically manufactured for the
purpose of playing pool, billiards or snooker, if not coin-operated.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-1)
§ 113.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for an annual license regulated by this chapter shall be made to
the city. The application form shall contain the name of the applicant, a
description of the device, location of the device and such other information
deemed necessary by the licensing officer to identify the device. Any number of
machines may be included in one application.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-2)
§ 113.03 LICENSE FEE.
   Every person who owns or has available to the public, or who permits to be
operated by the public in or on his or her place of business, any coin-operated
music device, coin-operated amusement device or coin-operated pool, billiard or
snooker table shall obtain and pay for an annual license fee for each such
device or table as set by the City Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-3) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   Upon payment of the license fee and approval of the application, the license
shall be presented to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting
after the application has been filed for approval or disapproval by the
Council. If approved by the City Council, the license shall be issued upon
payment of the fee.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-4)
§ 113.05 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Before any coin-operated music device, coin-operated amusement device or
coin-operated pool, billiard or snooker table is put into operation or placed
where the same may be operated by the public, and at all times when the same is
being operated or is available to the public for operation, a license issued by
the city shall be firmly affixed to the device covered thereby or displayed
with other licenses or permits on a wallboard and plainly visible to and
readable by the public.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-5) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 PROHIBITED DEVICES NOT LEGALIZED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to legalize any device that may
be prohibited by the laws of this state or the ordinances of the city. The city
may assume that any device described in any application, and for which a
license fee is paid, is lawful. No claim for a refund of any license fee will
be entertained based upon an owner’s or operator’s inability to operate such
device because of any law of this state or the city or for any other reason.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-6)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any owner of a coin-operated music device, coin-operated amusement device,
coin-operated pool, billiard or snooker table or recreation center, who places
such device in operation or in a place available to the public for operation,
and any person who permits such a device to be in operation or accessible to
the public for operation in his or her place of business without attaching and
displaying the license provided by this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense.
Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, such person shall be punishable
as provided in §
10.99. Each unlicensed device shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-7)
CHAPTER 114: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Licenses required; exemptions
   
114.03   Applications for licenses
   
114.04   Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license
   
114.05   Bond requirements
   
114.06   Signed document for service of process
   
114.07   License fee and exemptions
   
114.08   Display of license
   
114.09   Food sales
   
114.10   Suspension or revocation of license
   
114.11   Provisions cumulative; conflicting provisions
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL. Soliciting for a business purpose which is intended to be for
profit and is not intended to be charitable, religious, not for profit or
political.
   ITINERANT. Having no regular place of doing business or soliciting in the
city and includes, but is not limited to, making regular delivery or providing
goods over an established route through the city.
   PEDDLER. A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which
are to be provided from stocks or goods carried with the PEDDLER or which are
services provided by the PEDDLER at the time the order is made.
   SOLICITING. All activities of peddlers, solicitors and vendors attempting to
obtain business. Such activities may include, but are not limited to,
distribution of handbills or leaflets to the public directly or by placing them
in a mailbox, on a doorknob or otherwise on any property; coming personally
onto any property for the purposes defined herein; calling the occupants of any
property by telephone for the purposes herein defined; or calling or inviting
any prospective customers to purchase or obtain merchandise, product or
service.
   SOLICITOR. A person soliciting commercial orders for goods or services which
are to be provided or shipped to the consumer at a later date.
   VENDOR. Any person engaged in a business or occupation selling or offering
to sell any merchandise, product or service, and includes, but is not limited
to, peddlers and solicitors.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-1)
§ 114.02 LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Individual license. Any itinerant vendor, solicitor or peddler shall
obtain a license from the city prior to any soliciting in the city, unless
exempted herein, to cover each person who will be soliciting and each location
or separate place of business.
   (B)   Blanket license for itinerant vendors. Owners or lessees of buildings
in which itinerant vendors operate or locate must obtain a blanket license
covering all itinerant vendors who will be established in the building
controlled by the owner or lessee. Governmental agencies owning public
buildings may arrange a letter of agreement with the city in lieu of a license
if licensing is contrary to the regulations governing the governmental agency.
In such a case, the letter of agreement will provide for the same requirements
as are shown in this chapter and will provide that the city receive half the
rental fee paid by the itinerant vendor until the city’s receipts equal the
amount required for a blanket license fee.
   (C)   Exemptions from license. The following are exempt from the license
requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   Farmers and truck gardeners from lands owned, cultivated or
controlled by them, who offer for sale or sell, or who solicit and sell from
house to house, vegetables, butter, eggs and farm products produced and raised
by the farmers and truck gardeners from such land;
      (2)   Persons selling at wholesale to licensed dealers in such articles
whose stock of merchandise is listed with the county assessor for taxation:
         (a)   To persons in taking orders at the houses of their customers for
goods held in stock in their places of business; and
         (b)   To persons delivering to customers of goods so ordered in this
division (C).
      (3)   Sales or solicitations by youth on behalf of nonprofit charitable,
religious or educational organizations which possess a 501(c)(3) status; and
      (4)   Persons selling homegrown or homemade items of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-2) (Ord. 2019-11, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Individual license. Applicants for licenses shall file during regular
business hours a written application signed by the applicant, if an individual;
by all partners, if a partnership; and by a qualified corporate officer, if a
corporation, with the City Clerk showing:
      (1)   Name and address of person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city; the location or address of such person or persons
when engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such
person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act; the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and if a corporation, under the laws of
what state the same is incorporated;
      (2)   The place or places in the city within the proper zoning
classification where it is proposed to carry on the applicant’s business and
the length of time during which it is proposed that the business be conducted;
      (3)   The place or places, other than permanent place of business of the
applicant, within the six months next preceding the date of the application,
where the applicant has conducted a transient business;
      (4)   The nature of the goods or products being sold, that is whether
they are “seconds”, rejects or first line quality, and whether any warranty
applies to the items being sold; if a warranty applies, the period of the
warranty and the name and address of the warrantor and the procedures for
filing for the adjustment of refund shall be specified;
      (5)   A statement that the applicant agrees to the requirement to pay all
state and city sales taxes due on all items which are subject to sales taxes
and recognizes that a copy of all applications will be provided to the local
office of the State Tax Commission;
      (6)   Current state sales tax permit number;
      (7)   Current license or permit, if any, which may be required by state
law or ordinances of the city for the particular activity or business;
      (8)   If a motor vehicle is to be used in the business, a description of
the vehicle, together with motor vehicle registration number and the license
number for the vehicle:
         (a)   Proof of liability insurance required by state law; and
         (b)   Proof or verification from the insurance carrier that the City
Clerk will be provided at least ten days’ notice of any cancellation.
      (9)   Proof of 501(c)(3) tax status if claiming exemption from the
license fees.
   (B)   Blanket license for itinerant vendors. Applicants for a blanket
itinerant vendor license shall file during regular business hours a written
application signed by the applicant, if an individual; by all partners, if a
partnership; and by a corporation officer, if a corporation, with the City
Clerk showing:
      (1)   Name and address of person or persons having the management or
supervision of the building in which the itinerant vendor shall conduct
business;
      (2)   Name and address of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city; the location or address of such person or persons
when engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such
person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act; the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and, if a corporation, under the laws of
what state the same is incorporated and licensed to operate in the state;
      (3)   A general description of the products or services that will be sold
by the itinerant vendor; and
      (4)   A statement that the applicant shall establish the following
controls over itinerant vendors and shall maintain records concerning each
itinerant vendor for one year after the engagement dates involving the
itinerant vendors.
         (a)   The applicant shall determine the names and addresses of each
salesperson involved locally for an itinerant vendor and determine the names
and permanent addresses of the parent company, if any, controlling the
itinerant vendor.
         (b)   The applicant shall determine the nature of the merchandise or
product to be sold, determine whether it is a “reject” line or seconds,
determine whether there are warranties of the product and how any complaint is
to be filed for warranty adjustment. The applicant shall require that the
vendor display a sign prominent enough to disclose to all potential customers
that the product consists of seconds, rejects or irregulars if such is the
case.
         (c)   The applicant shall inform each vendor of the requirement to pay
state and city sales taxes and shall forward the name, product involved and
dates of the vendor’s engagement to the local office of the State Tax
Commission. Further, the applicant will furnish the vendor with one copy of the
state sales tax report form and require him or her to certify that he or she
will submit a sales tax report at the conclusion of his or her engagement in
the city.
         (d)   The applicant shall post proof of liability insurance policy in
effect in amount of $25,000.
         (e)   The applicant shall provide copies of all ordinances,
regulations, tax forms and the like, to the itinerant vendor and provide the
city with a statement signed by the vendor agreeing to comply with same.
         (f)   The applicant shall post a notice with the city 30 days in
advance, listing each itinerant vendor establishing a business.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-3)
§ 114.04 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   All applications for licensing shall be immediately referred for
investigation as to the truth thereof, which investigation shall be conducted
within ten business days after the application and fee are deposited with the
city. If the city finds no past history of the applicant indicating violations
of this code and that the application is properly made and truthful, a license
shall be issued to the approved applicant upon payment of the fee therefor and
the filing of the required bond. In all matters of denial of the license, the
applicant shall be forthwith advised thereof. The applicant shall be advised
that an appeal of a denied license may be submitted to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-4)
§ 114.05 BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Before any license as provided by this chapter shall be issued, such
applicant shall file a bond running to the city. A person engaging in business
as an itinerant vendor shall file a bond in the sum set forth in the bond
schedule, secured by the applicant as principal and two sureties upon whom
service of process may be made in the state.
   (B)   All such bonds shall be approved by the City Attorney and conditioned
that:
      (1)   The applicant shall comply with all of the provisions of the
ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning
the sale of goods or wares and merchandise; and
      (2)   The applicant will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant
for any violation of the ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with
all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him or her by any person
or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deceptive
practice by any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether
such misrepresentation or deception was made or practiced by the owner or by
his or her service, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale
or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated
with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise sold or any part thereof.
Any action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the
aggrieved person.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-5)
§ 114.06 SIGNED DOCUMENT FOR SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   (A)   Before any license for an itinerant vendor, as herein provided, shall
be issued, such applicant shall file with the city an instrument nominating and
appointing the City Clerk his or her true and lawful agent, with full power and
authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the
applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the
business transaction under the license and the bond given as required by this
chapter, or for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any breach
thereof.
   (B)   The instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that the
applicant for the license consents and agrees that service of any notices or
processes may be made upon the agent and, when so made, shall be taken and held
to be as valid as if personally served on the person or persons applying for
the license under this chapter, according to the laws of the state or any other
state and waiving all claims or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment
of service or manner of service.
   (C)   Immediately upon service of process upon the City Clerk, as herein
provided, the City Clerk shall send to the licensee at his or her last known
address, by certified mail, a copy of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-6)
§ 114.07 LICENSE FEE AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Fees established. The fee for licenses herein required shall be as set
by the City Council by motion or resolution.
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The fee may be waived for educational, charitable or religious
groups qualifying as 501(c)(3) organizations who make house to house
solicitations.
      (2)   Any person who desires to be exempt from the license fee levied
under this chapter due to engaging in interstate commerce shall provide
sufficient data on transactions and proof to the city to establish the
interstate commerce nature of his or her business and transactions. If the city
refuses to issue an interstate commerce exemption for the license fee to a
commercial business activity, then the applicant is entitled to a hearing
before the City Judge.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-7)
§ 114.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   At all times there shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon each:
      (1)   Licensee if an individual;
      (2)   Vehicle or booth used by a licensee; or
      (3)   Building or premises as appropriate for blanket licenses, a badge,
tag or card issued by the city as proof of issuance of a license.
   (B)   The card, tag or badge shall state the name of the licensee and the
date of expiration of the license. Blanket licenses shall be displayed and
readily available for inspection by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-8) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 FOOD SALES.
   All applicants for license to sell foods and merchandise for human or animal
consumption shall have their application for license approved in accordance
with the applicable state food establishment requirements before the licenses
are issued. The sale of foods requires an individual license not covered by
blanket licenses.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-9) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The provisions of
Chapter 110 on revocation or suspension of licenses shall apply to licenses
issued under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-10)
§ 114.11 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   The requirements of this chapter are cumulative to any provisions of state
law or city ordinances regulating or governing any of the activities licensed
herein. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
those of any other city ordinance or state law, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-11)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-12)
CHAPTER 115: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
115.01   Registration of property required
   
115.02   Copy of registration to pledgor
   
115.03   Inspections
§ 115.01 REGISTRATION OF PROPERTY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep, at his or her place of business, a
register, in which he or she shall record an adequate description of all
property purchased, taken or received by him or her, including any number that
may be thereon.
   (B)   The following information shall be recorded in the register:
      (1)   The date when all property is received;
      (2)   The name of the person leaving the property;
      (3)   The address of the person leaving the property;
      (4)   The amount loaned; and
      (5)   The time when the loan is to become due.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.02 COPY OF REGISTRATION TO PLEDGOR.
   The pawnbroker shall give, without charge, to the person leaving or pledging
property a legible ticket containing a true copy of all entries made in the
register concerning the property left or pledged.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 INSPECTIONS.
   The register herein required to be kept shall be subject to the inspection
at any time by the Chief of Police, any police officer, the Sheriff, the Deputy
Sheriff, the City Attorney, the District Attorney or any person authorized in
writing to make inspection by the Chief of Police. Upon request, the pawnbroker
shall show to such officer or person for inspection any article or articles
purchased, taken or received, unless such article or articles have already been
disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 116: PROPANE EXCHANGE PROVIDERS
Section
   
116.01   Permit required
   
116.02   Permit fee
   
116.03   Display of permit
   
116.04   Annual inspection
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   To protect the public health and safety, all businesses operating within the
city limits which keep and/or provide to the public prefilled propane exchange
containers shall obtain an annual permit and be subject to yearly inspections
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-1) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 12-6-2004) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.02 PERMIT FEE.
   Every person or business which keeps and/or provides to the public prefilled
propane exchange containers shall obtain and pay for an annual permit. There is
levied an annual permit fee on each person or business as set by the City
Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-2) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 12-6-2004) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.03 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Any person or business which keeps or provides to the public prefilled
propane exchange containers shall obtain and display the required permit, and
the failure to do so shall constitute an offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-3) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 12-6-2004) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 ANNUAL INSPECTION.
   Every person or business which keeps or provides to the public prefilled
propane exchange containers shall be subject to an annual inspection by the
city and shall meet or exceed all permit requirements in order to protect the
public health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-4) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 12-6-2004) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the person or business shall
be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-5) (Ord. 2004-04, passed 12-6-2004)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND PERSONS
      
132.   OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALITY
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
      
135.   OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
      
136.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Attempts to commit an offense
   
130.02   Conspiracy to commit an offense
   
130.03   Capacity to commit an offense
   
130.04   Lawful use of force
   
130.05   Voluntary intoxication no defense
   
130.06   Witness, self-incrimination
   
130.07   Time limit on actions
§ 130.01 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is
punishable, where no other provision is made by law for the punishment, as
provided in 21 O.S. § 42.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-1)
§ 130.02 CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   If two ore more persons conspire, either to do any of the following, they
are guilty of a conspiracy:
   (A)   To commit any crime;
   (B)   Falsely and maliciously to indict another for any crime, or to procure
another to be charged or arrested for any crime;
   (C)   Falsely to move or maintain any suit, action or proceeding;
   (D)   To cheat and defraud any person of any property by any means which are
in themselves criminal, or by any means which, if executed, would amount to a
cheat or to obtaining money or property by false pretenses; or
   (E)   To commit any act injurious to the public health, to public morals or
to trade or commerce, or for the perversion or obstruction of justice or the
due administration of the laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 CAPACITY TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except
those belonging to the following classes:
   (A)   Children under the age of seven years;
   (B)   Children over the age of seven years, but under the age of 14 years,
in the absence of proof that, at the time of committing the act or neglect
charged against them, they knew its wrongfulness;
   (C)   Persons who are impaired by reason of mental disability upon proof
that, at the time of committing the act charged against them, they were
incapable of knowing its wrongfulness;
   (D)   Mentally ill persons, and all persons of unsound mind, including
persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that, at the
time of committing the act charged against them, they were incapable of knowing
its wrongfulness;
   (E)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under an
ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent; but ignorance
of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation;
   (F)   Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof;
and
   (G)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while
under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-3)
§ 130.04 LAWFUL USE OF FORCE.
   (A)   To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person
of another is not unlawful in the city in the following cases:
      (1)   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance
of any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or her or acting by his
or her direction;
      (2)   When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has
committed any felony, and delivering him or her to a public officer competent
to receive him or her in custody;
      (3)   When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any
other person in his or her aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to
prevent an offense against his or her person, or any trespass or other unlawful
interference with real or personal property in his or her lawful possession;
provided the force used is not more than sufficient to prevent such offense;
      (4)   When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by
any guardian, master or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to
restrain or correct his or her child, ward, apprentice or scholar; provided
restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such
child, ward, apprentice or scholar, or by his or her refusal to obey the lawful
command of such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher, and
the force used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree;
      (5)   When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents
or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request,
in expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle, any
passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for
the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force
used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with a
reasonable regard to his or her personal safety;
      (6)   When committed by any person in preventing a person who is impaired
by reason of “developmental disability”, as defined by state law; a mentally
ill person; insane person; or other person of unsound mind, including persons
temporarily or partially deprived of reason from committing an act dangerous to
himself or herself or to another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary
for the protection of his or her person or for his or her restoration to
health, during such period only as shall be necessary to obtain legal authority
for the restraint or custody of such person;
      (7)   In preventing or interrupting an intrusion upon the lawful
possession of property; and
      (8)   To preserve the peace or prevent the commission of an offense.
   (B)   Where force is permitted to effect a lawful purpose, only that degree
of force necessary to effect such purpose shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION NO DEFENSE.
   No act committed by any person while in a state of voluntary intoxication,
whether from liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his
or her being in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-5)
§ 130.06 WITNESS, SELF-INCRIMINATION.
   No person shall be excused from giving evidence upon any investigation or
prosecution for any of the offenses specified in any section, chapter or title
of this code, or any ordinances hereafter enacted, upon the grounds that such
testimony or evidence might tend to convict him or her of a crime; but such
answer or evidence shall not be received against him or her upon any criminal
proceeding or prosecution, except in a prosecution against him or her for
perjury committed in giving such testimony.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-6)
§ 130.07 TIME LIMIT ON ACTIONS.
   The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be one year from the date of the commission or omission or in
cases involving fraud, deception or deceit; one year from the discovery of the
fraud, deception or deceit unless otherwise provided by the statutes of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-7)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND PERSONS
Section
   
131.01   Assault and battery
   
131.02   Disturbing the peace
   
131.03   Disturbing funerals
   
131.04   Disorderly conduct
   
131.05   Noisy conditions
   
131.06   Weapons control
§ 131.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ASSAULT. Any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence
to do corporal hurt to another.
      BATTERY. Any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the
person of another.
   (B)   Prohibition. No person shall commit an assault or battery, or both,
upon the person of another.
(Prior Code, § 6-5A-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   Definition. DISTURBING THE PEACE is the doing of any of the following
in such a manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or
others:
      (1)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
      (2)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      (3)   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      (4)   Holding an unlawful assembly of three or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      (5)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise; by
rude, indecent or improper behavior; by profane, improper or loud language; or
in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
      (6)   Obstructing the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on a
street, right-of-way or sidewalk, or other public place;
      (7)   Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully in a
public place;
      (8)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      (9)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise; by rude, indecent or improper behavior; by
profane, improper or loud language; or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      (10)   Committing any other act in such a manner calculated as to
unreasonably disturb, interfere or alarm the public or the comfort and repose
of any person.
   (B)   Prohibition. It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another
or others by doing any of the acts set out in division (A) above.
   (C)   Enforcement. Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of
reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public place
is causing any of the conditions enumerated in division (A) above, he or she
may, if he or she deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace
and safety, order that person to leave that place; and anyone who shall refuse
to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
   (D)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public
speaking or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other
laws.
(Prior Code, § 6-5A-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.03 DISTURBING FUNERALS.
   No person shall willfully disturb, interrupt or disquiet any assemblage of
people who have met for the purpose of any funeral, or obstruct or detain any
person engaged in accompanying any funeral to a place of burial.
(Prior Code, § 6-5A-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause
public inconvenience, annoyance, alarm or recklessly creating the risk thereof,
he or she:
   (A)   Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any
person is placed in fear of safety of his or her life, limb or health;
   (B)   Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby the
property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
   (C)   Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry
threats and abusive conduct;
   (D)   Jostles or crowds or pushes any person in any public place;
   (E)   Uses “fighting words” directed toward any person and thus creates a
turmoil;
   (F)   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so
as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or
   (G)   By acts of violence, interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful
occupation.
(Prior Code, § 6-5A-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.05 NOISY CONDITIONS.
   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-5A-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 WEAPONS CONTROL.
   (A)   Possession of certain weapons prohibited; exemptions. It is unlawful
for any person to carry upon or about his or her person, or in his or her
portfolio or purse, any pistol, revolver, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife,
switchblade knife, spring type knife, sword cane, knife having a blade which
opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other
device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand chain,
metal knuckles or any other offensive weapon, except as otherwise provided by
law. This section shall not prohibit the proper use of guns and knives for
hunting, fishing or recreational purposes, nor shall this section be construed
to prohibit any use of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted by law.
   (B)   Concealed weapons. It is unlawful for any person, except a law
enforcement officer, a registered security officer or a person employed by an
armored car firm licensed by the State Corporation Commission, to carry a
concealed weapon other than permitted by law.
   (C)   Discharge of weapons. It is unlawful for any person to discharge a
firearm, air rifle, BB gun or pellet gun, except when doing so in the line of
duty; when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, of another person or of
property; or when doing so during competition in or practicing skeet, trap or
other recognized and controlled sporting events, and when doing so in such
sporting event does not create unreasonable risk of harm to another and which
does not demonstrate a conscious disregard for the safety of another person, or
when otherwise authorized by law or ordinance.
   (D)   Reckless conduct while in possession of weapons.
      (1)   Definition. RECKLESS CONDUCT, as used in this division (D),
consists of an act which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and
probability of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a
conscious disregard for the safety of another.
      (2)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to endanger another’s
safety by reckless conduct in the operation or handling of any weapon or
instrument, including a pistol, revolver or other firearm.
(Prior Code, § 6-5A-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
Section
   
132.01   Theft and related offenses
   
132.02   Harmful deception
   
132.03   Damage to property
   
132.04   Taking or tampering with vehicles
   
132.05   Tampering with or damaging utilities
   
132.06   Trespassing and related offenses
   
132.07   Throwing or shooting objects
   
132.08   Throwing lighted materials
   
132.09   Littering; unlawful deposits
   
132.10   Posting advertisements
   
132.11   Interference with wireless reception
   
132.12   Electric fences
   
132.13   Fireworks
   
132.14   Nuisance conditions
§ 132.01 THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES.
   (A)   Petit larceny; embezzlement. No person shall steal, take and carry
away by fraud or stealth, with intent to deprive another thereof, any personal
property under the value of $500 or embezzle any money, personal property or
effects of another under the value of $500. This division (A) does not apply to
taking property from the “person” of another.
   (B)   Larceny by false pretense. No person shall induce, or attempt to
induce, any person to give up or pay over any money or other thing of value,
which money or value does not exceed $500, by any false representation or
pretense, or in exchange for any false or bogus coin or check, draft or other
false evidence of value, or in consideration of refraining from a lawful or
unlawful arrest, or in consideration of refraining from reporting any unlawful
act to any public official.
   (C)   Altering keys. No person shall make or alter or attempt to make or
alter any key or other instrument that will open the lock of a building unless
requested to do so by some person having the right and authority to make such
request.
   (D)   Defrauding public accommodations.
      (1)   No person shall obtain food, lodging or other accommodation in any
hotel; motel; inn; boarding, eating or rooming house or place; or any other
lodging place, with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper, when the value
is $500 or less.
      (2)   Proof that lodging, food and other accommodations were obtained by
false pretense or fictitious show of any package or other property or that the
person gave a check or negotiable paper on which payment was refused or that
the person left the hotel; motel; inn; boarding, eating or rooming house or
place; or other lodging place, without paying or offering to pay for the food,
lodging or other accommodation or that the person surreptitiously removed or
attempted to remove the package or property, or that the person registered
under a fictitious name shall be prima facie proof of attempt to defraud.
      (3)   This division (D) shall not apply where there has been an
agreement, in writing, for delay in payment.
   (E)   Failure to pay conveyance fare.
      (1)   No person shall use or accept the use and services of any
streetcar, taxicab, omnibus, automobile or any other means of public conveyance
or passengers, operating under this code or any ordinance, franchise, permit or
license of the city or state, and refuse or fail to pay to the operator of the
conveyance the usual, customary, regulation or legal charge, or price as fare
immediately upon the performance of the service.
      (2)   No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles
mentioned in this division (E) after having hired the same, and no person shall
hire any vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the
value of such service.
      (3)   This division (E) shall not apply where there has been an agreement
in writing for delay in payment.
   (F)   Shoplifting. Any person concealing unpurchased merchandise of any
establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises of the
establishment, shall be presumed to have so concealed the merchandise with the
intention of committing a wrongful taking of such merchandise. Such concealment
or the finding of such unpurchased merchandise concealed upon the person or
among the belongings of such person shall be conclusive evidence of reasonable
grounds and probable cause for the detention in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time of such person by a merchant, or his or her agent or
employee. Any such reasonable detention shall not be deemed to be unlawful nor
render any such merchant, or his or her agent or employee, criminally or
civilly liable.
   (G)   False or bogus checks.
      (1)   The term FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK OR CHECKS, when used in this section,
shall include checks or orders, including those converted to electronic fund
transfer, which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker
to pay same or because the check or order was drawn on a closed account or on a
nonexistent account when such checks or orders are given:
         (a)   In exchange for money or property;
         (b)   In exchange for any benefit or thing of value; or
         (c)   As a down payment for the purchase of any item of which the
purchaser is taking immediate possession, as against the maker or drawer
thereof.
      (2)   The making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or
order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence
of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit
with, such bank or other depository; provided such maker or drawer shall not
have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with the protest
fees, within five days from the date the same is presented for payment; and
provided further that said check or order is presented for payment within 30
days after same is delivered and accepted.
      (3)   A check offered for the purchase of goods or livestock that is
refused by a drawee shall not be considered to be an extension of credit by the
seller of goods or livestock to the maker or drawer of the check.
      (4)   A CHECK OR ORDER OFFERED TO A MERCHANT IN PAYMENT ON AN OPEN
ACCOUNT OF THE MAKER WITH THE MERCHANT shall mean “a check or order given in
exchange for a benefit or thing of value”, notwithstanding that the merchant
may debit the account of the maker or impose other charges pursuant to
applicable law in the event the check or order is not honored.
   (H)   False weights. It is unlawful for any person to sell any commodity or
article of merchandise and in the sale thereof knowingly make or give a false
or short weight therefor or for any person owning or keeping or having in his
or her charge any scale used in weighing any animal, commodity or article to
knowingly and willfully report any false or untrue weight whereby another
person shall be defrauded or damaged.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Prohibited generally.
      (1)   No person shall purposely deface or damage any public or private
building or appurtenances thereof, or any fence, street, bridge, sidewalk,
driveway or public work.
      (2)   No person shall:
         (a)   Destroy, injure, deface, damage or molest any structure,
building, work or other property, real or personal, belonging to another;
         (b)   Use such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or
other person entitled to its use; or
         (c)   Interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its
owner or any other person entitled to its use.
   (B)   Private property.
      (1)   No person shall willfully, unlawfully or maliciously take and carry
or cause to be taken and carried away any part of a house, barn, fence, gate or
other structure, or maliciously break, tear down or destroy any part of a
house, barn or other structure not his or her own.
      (2)   No person shall willfully and wantonly damage or destroy the
personal property of another.
   (C)   Destroying trees and shrubs.
      (1)   Private property. No person shall willfully, maliciously and
without lawful authority cut down, uproot, sever, injure or destroy any fruit
tree, shade or ornamental tree, cultivated root or plant, grape or strawberry
vine, shrub or plant whatsoever standing on or attached to the land of another,
or pick, destroy, carry away therefrom or in any way interfere therewith any of
the fruit thereof.
      (2)   Public property. No person shall willfully or without lawful
authority cut down, destroy, uproot or in any manner injure any fruit, shade or
ornamental tree, shrub or vine planted or growing on any street, land, avenue,
alley or other public ground of the city.
   (D)   Property damage exceeding $1,000. If the property damage exceeds
$1,000, enforcement is through the district court.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.04 TAKING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, shall, with intent and without right to do so, injure or
tamper with any vehicle or in any other manner damage any part or portion of
the vehicle or any accessories, appurtenances or attachments thereto.
   (B)   No person, other than a peace officer in the performance of his or her
official duties, shall, without right to do so and with intent to commit a
crime, climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest,
attempt to manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other
mechanism or device of the vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended,
or set in motion any vehicle while the vehicle is at rest and unattended.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.05 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING UTILITIES.
   (A)   Wires, pipes and poles. No person shall alter, remove, tamper with,
molest, damage or injure any wires, cable, appurtenance, structure, pipes or
equipment of any utility of the city, or any public utility, or connect or
tamper with the wires, cables or pipes of any electric, water, sewer, cable
television or gas utility or of the city without consent of the utility or city
having been first obtained.
   (B)   Manholes. It is unlawful to open up any manhole or opening to a sewer
unless authorized by the city, or to leave a manhole or other opening so opened
without replacing the fixture or appliances thereto in their proper place and
position.
   (C)   Fire hydrants.
      (1)   No person, except a member of the Fire Department or a person
acting on lawful order or permit issued by the city, shall open or use water
from any fire hydrant or take off the caps or damage the same.
      (2)   No person may block the approach or access to a fire hydrant or
attach, fasten, stand or brace anything against or on the hydrant.
   (D)   Intercepting service.
      (1)   No person shall, in any manner whatsoever:
         (a)   Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables or pipes of
any electric, water, cable television or gas utility or of the city for the
purpose of fraudulently taking therefrom electric current, water, transmissions
or gas;
         (b)   Cut into, attach to or intercept the wires, cables or pipes for
the purpose of conducting around any meter electric current, water or gas in
order to prevent the current, water or gas from being measured by the meter, or
in such other manner so as to consume or use the utility or cable service so as
to evade payment therefor, with the unlawful intent to defraud the company or
city of the value of the service; or
         (c)   By any device or manipulation whatsoever to cause current,
transmissions, water or gas used upon any premises to be fraudulently conveyed
upon any premises for the purposes of use thereof, and with the intent to
defraud and cheat the utility or city from payment thereof.
      (2)   Each day that any person maintains any such fraudulent connection
with any wires, cables or pipes, or fraudulently takes from any such wires,
cables or pipes, either electric current, transmissions, water or gas shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.06 TRESPASSING AND RELATED OFFENSES.
   (A)   Trespassing.
      (1)   Definition. TRESPASS shall include each and every actual entry upon
the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises
without the express consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
TRESPASS shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other
person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the
owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner or other person in lawful
possession of the premises. TRESPASS shall also mean the act of entering upon
or remaining on private property when such is plainly forbidden by signs,
markings or otherwise, by verbal command of the owner, his or her agent or
employee or after having been directed to do so by a police officer, although
this sentence shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence
upon the premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful
possession of such premises. TRESPASS shall also include the act of returning
to private property after having been directed to vacate the premises by the
owner, his or her agent or employee or police officer under the terms of this
division (A).
      (2)   Prohibition. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to commit
a trespass within the city upon either public or private property.
      (3)   Violations.
         (a)   Any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed a
violation of this division (A):
            1.   The doing of an injury or misfeasance to the person of
another;
            2.   The doing of any injury or misfeasance to the property of
another when done with force and violence, either actual or implied;
            3.   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or
person in possession of real property, whether the property is public or
private, without the owner’s or occupant’s consent, express or implied;
            4.   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in
violation of a notice exhibited thereon prohibiting entry at specified times;
            5.   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or other lawful occupant thereof;
            6.   An entry upon any public property, including parks or parking
areas, in violation of a notice exhibited prohibiting entry at specified times;
            7.   An entry upon any public property in violation of any notice,
warning or protest given orally or in writing by a city official;
            8.   If, on the property of another or upon public property
lawfully, a failure or refusal to depart in case of being requested to so
depart orally or written, by any owner, lawful occupant or by a city official;
            9.   An entry upon any portion of a public park where the entry
involves the use of any vehicle, equipment or device where such use is
specifically prohibited;
            10.   An entry of any public building except for the purpose of
dispatching business with the public corporation or consent is obtained from
the City Council or other public official which is lawfully authorized to give
consent; or
            11.   Remaining on public or private property at any time other
than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to
vacate such premises by a police officer. The provisions of this division (A)
(3)(a) shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon
such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of
such premises; nor shall the provisions of this division (A)(3)(a) apply unless
hours of business operation are posted upon such premises. Trespass also
includes the act of returning to private property before the posted time of
opening for business operation on the next business day after having been
directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this division (A).
         (b)   For purposes of constituting a violation of this division (A),
the exhibited notice required under divisions (A)(3)(a)4., (A)(3)(a)5., A)(3)
(a)6., (A)(3)(a)7. and (A)(3)(a)9. above shall meet the following criteria.
            1.   The notice shall be plainly posted in a place or places
conspicuous to those who would enter the property.
            2.   The notice shall be legible so as to afford reasonable warning
prior to the commission of a trespass.
            3.   If upon property to which the public is invited at least some
part of the day, the notice shall clearly specify the days and times of day
entry is prohibited, and further specify that entry at such times constitutes a
punishable offense under this code.
   (B)   Intrusion on land or structures.
      (1)   No person shall intrude or remain upon any lot or piece of land or
in any building within the city without license or authority from the owner
thereof, or erect or occupy thereon any structure whatever without such license
or authority.
      (2)   No person shall place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any
street, alley or avenue of the city any structure whatsoever unless such person
is granted a license by the city to do so.
   (C)   Congregating, parking on premises.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (C), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AFTER BUSINESS HOURS. The doors of the business which are open to the
public during business hours are closed and locked, and the business is no
longer admitting customers. The term applies to places of business which are
vacant or permanently or temporarily closed or otherwise unoccupied.
         PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any private property upon which a building, house
or other structure is used for commercial or public purposes, e.g., without
limitation, restaurants, gas stations, shopping malls or centers, theaters,
convenience stores, grocery stores, drugstores or pharmacies, recreational
facilities, wholesale or retail sales activities, offices, banks or other
financial institutions, manufacturing and professional services (medical,
legal, accounting, insurance, consulting).
      (2)   Prohibitions.
         (a)   No person shall stand, walk, sit, lie, congregate or otherwise
occupy or remain upon the premises of any place or business within the city
after business hours without consent of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee or
employee thereof.
         (b)   No person shall stop, stand, park, leave or place any motor
vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any public or private property without
the consent of the owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof, except where
such property is provided for public parking and the use for such parking is
not restricted by proper notice. In addition to fine or other punishment for a
violation of this division (C), the vehicle so parked, left or placed shall be
subject to impoundment upon complaint of the property owner or lawful occupant.
The person violating this division (C) shall be wholly responsible for payment
of towage and storage charges.
      (3)   Sign posted. No person may be charged under this division (C),
unless the premises in question is posted with a conspicuous sign which states,
substantially, that the premises is posted, and that any person congregating,
occupying or remaining upon the premises or parking or leaving a motor vehicle
thereon is subject to prosecution pursuant to this code.
      (4)   Presumption. There is a rebuttable presumption that any person or
motor vehicle upon the premises of a place of business that is properly posted
pursuant to this division (C) after such time as the front door or other such
door that admits members of the public is closed and locked is on the premises
of such business unlawfully under this division (C); however, this presumption
shall not be applied within 30 minutes of any opening or closing times posted
by such place of business. This presumption may only be rebutted by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that any person held by the municipal judge to be
subject to this rebuttable presumption was on the premises in question with
permission of the lawful owner, occupant, lessee or employee thereof.
      (5)   Prima facie proof. If a motor vehicle is alleged to be unlawfully
parked or left under this division (C), it shall be rebuttably presumed that
the person in whose name the motor vehicle was last registered was the person
who parked or left the motor vehicle.
      (6)   Violation; penalty.
         (a)   The parking or leaving of a motor vehicle as set forth herein
shall constitute the offense of unlawful parking or leaving a motor vehicle
after business hours, punishable as provided in §
10.99.
         (b)   If a person violates division (C)(2)(a) above, it shall
constitute the offense of unlawful presence on property after business hours or
congregating after business hours and is punishable as provided in §
10.99.
      (7)   Provisions cumulative. The provisions of this division (C) are
cumulative of other applicable offenses enacted in this code or state law.
   (D)   Sleeping on public or private property. It is unlawful for any person,
without lawful reason, to sleep on any street, in any other public place or on
any property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or
person in charge of such place.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.07 THROWING OR SHOOTING OBJECTS.
   No person shall throw or shoot any object in any place where he or she is
likely to hit another person wrongfully or injure property.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.08 THROWING LIGHTED MATERIALS.
   No person shall throw, drop, deposit or otherwise place in, upon or within
the limits of any street, avenue, public ground, public waterway or city-owned
property or waterway any lighted cigarette, cigar or other flaming or glowing
substances, or any substance or thing which may cause a fire.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.09 LITTERING; UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS.
   It is unlawful to throw, deposit or discharge any item or waste material,
liquid or solid, on any street or public place in the city or upon the property
of another without express authority to do so.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.10 POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall place upon any building any advertising matter of any
kind, nor print or exhibit printing on a building or any part thereof, in
words, signs or characters, except with the express consent of the owner,
lessee or authorized agent of the owner of the building.
   (B)   No person shall place, post, paint, mark, write, print or put any
sign, poster, picture, announcement, writing, device, advertisement or other
marking upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, post,
automobile or vehicle or property of another without the consent of the owner
or person in charge thereof.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to place any advertising matter of any
kind on any utility pole, or to place any advertising on the streets or
sidewalks of the city, or to place any advertising on any signs or banners
stretched over the streets or sidewalks of the city. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent any permanently located commercial or business
establishment in the city from erecting and maintaining business or commercial
signs in accordance with the ordinances of the city, nor to prohibit the
granting of permission by the city to religious, charitable, patriotic or civic
bodies to use banners across the streets of the city in such places as may be
designated by the Mayor for the observance of holidays, charitable drives and
the commemoration and celebration of other public or civic occasions.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.11 INTERFERENCE WITH WIRELESS RECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person, or any officer or employee of any person, to
operate or use any citizen band radio, ham radio or other electrical apparatus
or machine which materially and unduly interferes with radio, television or
telephone reception of others.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.12 ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect, install or maintain any electrically
charged fence within the city; except that the building official may issue a
permit for an electrically charged fence to retain animals upon proof that the
fence will not be hazardous to life and upon proof that the electric charge is
regulated by a controlling device.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.13 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, FIREWORKS shall have the
same meaning as in state law, 68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   The discharge, firing or use of fireworks is prohibited except when
authorized by the City Council in city parks when the same is supervised by a
city official or when authorized by the Mayor for public display or displays in
accordance with the city fire code.
      (2)   The sale, purchase, possession, discharge, firing or use of
fireworks is prohibited except as authorized by this section.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.14 NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet
or sanction a nuisance on or about any premises or premises owned by him or her
or under his or her control at any place within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6-5B-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALITY
Section
Offenses Against Decency and Morality
   
133.01   False representation of physical disabilities
   
133.02   False representation of age
   
133.03   Window peeping
   
133.04   Obscene, threatening, harassing communications
   
133.05   Disorderly house
   
133.06   Gambling and related offenses
   
133.07   Prostitution and related offenses
   
133.08   Conduct near schools
Offenses Involving Liquor and Drugs
   
133.20   Public intoxication
   
133.21   Marijuana
   
133.22   Drug paraphernalia
   
133.23   Sniffing glue, paint and other substances
 
   
133.99   Penalty
OFFENSES AGAINST DECENCY AND MORALITY
§ 133.01 FALSE REPRESENTATION OF PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.
   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as blind, deaf,
crippled or physically disabled for the purpose of obtaining money or other
things of value, or to secure aid or assistance on account of such false
representation.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-1) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 FALSE REPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   No person shall, for the purpose of violating any statutes of the state or
any ordinances of the city, willfully and knowingly misrepresent his or her age
by presenting a false document purporting to state his or her true age or by
presenting a document not his or her own.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-2) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 WINDOW PEEPING.
   No person shall hide, wait or otherwise loiter in the vicinity of any
private dwelling house, apartment building, any other place of residence or in
the vicinity of any locker room, dressing room, restroom or any other place
where a person has a right to a reasonable expectation of privacy, with the
unlawful and willful intent to watch, gaze or look upon any person in a
clandestine manner.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-3) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 OBSCENE, THREATENING, HARASSING COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who, by means of a telecommunication
or other electronic communication device, willfully either:
      (1)   Makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is
obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent;
      (2)   Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication with
intent to terrify, intimidate or harass, or threaten to inflict injury or
physical harm to any person or property of that person;
      (3)   Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication,
whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to put the party called in fear
of physical harm or death;
      (4)   Makes a telecommunication or other electronic communication,
whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing the identity of the
person making the call or communication and with intent to annoy, abuse,
threaten or harass any person at the called number;
      (5)   Knowingly permits any telecommunication or other electronic
communication under the control of the person to be used for any purpose
prohibited by this section; and
      (6)   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes
repeated calls or electronic communications or simultaneous calls or electronic
communications solely to harass any person at the called number(s).
   (B)   As used in this section, TELECOMMUNICATION and ELECTRONIC
COMMUNICATION mean any type of telephonic, electronic or radio communications,
or transmission of signs, signals, data, writings, images and sounds or
intelligence of any nature by telephone, including cellular telephones, wire,
cable, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photo-optical system, or the
creation, display, management, storage, processing, transmission or
distribution of images, text, voice, video or data by wire, cable or wireless
means, including the internet. The terms include:
      (1)   A communication initiated by electronic mail, instant message,
network call or facsimile machine; and
      (2)   A communication made to a pager.
   (C)   Use of a telephone or other electronic communications facility under
this section shall include all use made of such a facility between the points
of origin and reception. Any offense under this section is a continuing offense
and shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place of origin or the
place of reception.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-4) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.05 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   Definition. A DISORDERLY HOUSE means any structure or vehicle by which
the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by
reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following
acts:
      (1)   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      (2)   The violation of any of the ordinances of the city or statutes of
this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages and low-point beer as defined by law;
      (3)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state
statute or city ordinance, including, but not limited to, soliciting for
purposes of prostitution; or
      (4)   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall keep or maintain or aid, abet or assist in keeping
and maintaining a disorderly house.
      (2)   No owner, lessee, lessor or other person, partnership or
corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle,
mobile home or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or
otherwise permit the use of the same for the purpose of keeping therein any
disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building,
structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home or recreational vehicle is so occupied as
a disorderly house. No persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to
grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into or remain in a
disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city
shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not
by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or
officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-5) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 GAMBLING AND RELATED OFFENSES.
   (A)   Gambling. It is unlawful for any person to play any prohibited game
described in this section.
   (B)   Frequenting gambling premises. It is unlawful for any person to be
about in the immediate vicinity where a person or persons are gambling, whether
by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device or otherwise.
   (C)   Gambling devices.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to exhibit or expose to view in any
building, or in any part of or room in any building, any table, cards, dice,
roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for or used for gambling
purposes.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, operate, use or conduct
or cause to be kept, operated, used or conducted, either as owner, manager,
dealer, clerk or employee, and whether for hire or not, any punchboard,
machine, cards, game, parlay card or any other device or paraphernalia wherein
or whereby any money or property, or any representative of either, or other
valuable thing may be played, bet, staked, wagered or hazarded, won, lost or
obtained upon any change, combination of numbers, emblems or any uncertain or
contingent event or condition, or sports contest.
      (3)   The apparatus and paraphernalia used in the conduct of any of the
gambling games prohibited by this section are declared to be a public nuisance
and subject to seizure and suppression by any officer, and shall be abated,
forfeited and destroyed upon the order and decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (D)   Preventing access to gambling house. It is unlawful for any person to
bar or barricade any building, or any part of or room in any building, in order
to render the same difficult to access or ingress by the police officers of the
city, in which building, or any part of or room in any such building, any
table, cards, dice, roulette wheel or other article or apparatus designed for
or being used for gambling purposes is exhibited or exposed to view.
   (E)   Exemptions from provisions. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent the sponsoring and operation of bingo games by nonprofit
religious, fraternal, charitable or educational organizations; provided the
organizations are properly licensed and operated in accordance with law.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-6) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.07 PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      KNOWN PROSTITUTE or PROCURER. A person who, within one year prior to the
date of the suspected violation of this section, has, with the knowledge of the
arresting officer, been convicted of a violation of this section or has been
convicted of violating any statute or ordinance of any jurisdiction which makes
prostitution or soliciting for the purpose of prostitution unlawful.
      PROSTITUTION.
         (a)   The giving or receiving of the body for sexual intercourse,
fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, anal intercourse or lewdness with any
person not his or her spouse, in exchange for money or any other thing of
value; or
         (b)   The making of any appointment or engagement for sexual
intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, anal intercourse or lewdness
with any person not his or her spouse, in exchange for money or any other thing
of value.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   It is unlawful:
         (a)   To engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation;
         (b)   To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act
of lewdness, assignation or prostitution; or
         (c)   To aid, abet or participate in the doing of any of the acts
herein prohibited.
      (2)   No person shall, in any way or manner whatsoever, keep, harbor or
house any prostitute.
      (3)   No person shall entice or attempt to entice any person into a house
of prostitution, or have illicit sexual intercourse with any person under 18
years of age.
      (4)   No person shall keep or maintain a house of prostitution or house
of assignation.
      (5)   No person shall lease, let or furnish any building, room, tent or
structure of any kind, or any conveyance used or to be used as a place of
prostitution or assignation within the city, or knowingly permit the same to be
so used.
      (6)   No person shall knowingly accept, receive, levy or appropriate any
money or other thing of value without consideration from a prostitute or from
the proceeds of any person engaged in prostitution.
      (7)   No person shall offer or offer to secure another for the purpose of
prostitution or for any other lewd or indecent act.
      (8)   No person shall direct, take or transport or offer or agree to take
or transport or aid or assist in transporting, any person to any house, place,
building or other structure, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance, or to any
other person with knowledge or having reasonable cause to believe that the
purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or
assignation.
      (9)   For a person to be present in a public place in a manner and under
circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or
procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. Among the circumstances
which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested
are: that such person is a known prostitute or procurer; that such person
repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop or engage passersby in
conversation; or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators
by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made
for a violation of this division (B) unless the arresting officer first affords
such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be
convicted of violating this division (B) if it appears at trial that the
explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-7) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.08 CONDUCT NEAR SCHOOLS.
   No person shall engage in any of the conduct or acts hereinafter set forth
around, in or near any school or school grounds or streets and alleys adjacent
to any school:
   (A)   Any conduct that would disturb the orderly conduct of the school;
   (B)   Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school;
   (C)   Lewd or wanton conduct in, near or around any school or school grounds
or streets and alleys adjacent to any school;
   (D)   Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any school for the
purpose of annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; or
   (E)   Any other act or conduct calculated to or likely to annoy or molest
any student or employee of any school.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-8) Penalty, see §
133.99
OFFENSES INVOLVING LIQUOR AND DRUGS
§ 133.20 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   No person shall be in any public place in a state of intoxication. A STATE
OF INTOXICATION means the condition in which a person is under the influence of
drugs, alcoholic beverages or low-point beer to such an extent as to deprive
the person of his or her full mental or physical power or be unable to exercise
care for his or her own safety or the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 6-5D-1) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.21 MARIJUANA.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, MARIJUANA means all parts
of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
rosin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or rosin, but
shall not include the mature stalks of such plant; fiber produced from such
stalks; oil or cake made from the derivative, mixture or preparation of such
mature stalks (except rosin extracted therefrom); fiber; oil or cake; or the
sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   (B)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or
other public place while under the influence of marijuana;
      (2)   To use, have or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley,
place of business or other public place within the city; and
      (3)   To be about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished illegally.
(Prior Code, § 6-5D-2) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.22 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means
all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the State Uniform Controlled
Dangerous Substances Act, 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq., hereinafter referred to as
“the Act”, and adopted by reference herein. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body; and
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; or
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (B)   Determining drug paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is
drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to
all other logically relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of
the object under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the Act;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intended to use the object to facilitate a violation
of the Act. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of the Act, shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written; provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Use. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent
to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Act.
      (2)   Sale. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent
to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Act.
      (3)   Advertising. It is unlawful for any person to place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of
the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(Prior Code, § 6-5D-3) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.23 SNIFFING GLUE, PAINT AND OTHER SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall sniff or inhale paint, glue, gasoline or other volatile
substances for purposes of intoxication.
(Prior Code, § 6-5D-4) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
133.06 is guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-5C-6)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
134.01   Escape, attempt to escape
   
134.02   Aid in escape
   
134.03   Communicating with, delivering articles to prisoners
   
134.04   Resisting, assaulting public officials
   
134.05   Obedience to police and fire personnel
   
134.06   Eluding police
   
134.07   Duty to assist police
   
134.08   Use of siren or whistle
   
134.09   Impersonating an officer or employee
   
134.10   False statements, reports or complaints
   
134.11   False alarms
   
134.12   Duties of public at fires and emergencies
   
134.13   Signs and equipment
   
134.14   Interfering with police dog
   
134.15   Destroying, tampering with evidence
§ 134.01 ESCAPE, ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE.
   No person lawfully in custody or confined in jail, before or after
conviction for any violation of the ordinances of the city, or held in custody
going to jail, or working upon the streets or other public grounds of the city
or in custody of any officer of the city shall break or attempt to break a jail
or custody and escape or attempt to escape therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.02 AID IN ESCAPE.
   (A)   No person shall convey into jail any disguised instrument or anything
proper or useful to facilitate the escape of any prisoner lawfully committed to
or detained in jail for any violation of the city ordinances, or for any
criminal offense, or lawfully detained or imprisoned therein, whether such
escape is effected or attempted or not.
   (B)   No person shall in any way aid, remove or assist any person to resist
or escape from the custody of any police officer or from any lawful
confinement.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.03 COMMUNICATING WITH, DELIVERING ARTICLES TO PRISONERS.
   (A)   No person shall remain in or around the sidewalks, rights-of-way,
alleys or streets in front of, beside or behind the county jail for the purpose
of conversing or communicating or attempting to converse or communicate with
any persons inside the jail.
   (B)   No person shall deliver any article or thing to any person under
arrest without the consent of the officer having charge and custody of the
prisoner.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.04 RESISTING, ASSAULTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OBSTRUCTION OF. In addition to its common meaning, includes:
         (a)   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him or her and after notice is given that he or she is under
arrest;
         (b)   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and
before he or she is under arrest; or
         (c)   Refusal by the arrested party to give his or her name and make
his or her identity known to the arresting officer.
      RESISTING AN OFFICER. The intentional opposition or resistance to, or
obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity, and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to
know that the person arresting, seizing property or serving process is acting
in his or her official capacity.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
         (a)   Resist, oppose or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his or her official duties;
         (b)   Obstruct, threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to
intimidate any officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official
duties; or
         (c)   Assault, beat, revile, abuse, be disrespectful to or use abusive
or indecent language toward or about any officer or employee while such officer
or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
      (2)   It is unlawful to resist, oppose, assault, prevent, fail to
cooperate with or in any way interfere with a police officer or any person duly
authorized to act as such while the officer or person is discharging or
attempting to discharge his or her official duties within the limits of the
city.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to
assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an
arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or
in front of an approaching officer.
      (4)   No person shall knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault
and battery on any city official or police officer or firefighter while in the
performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.05 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE PERSONNEL.
   No person shall fail to heed a reasonable order of a police officer or
firefighter while such officer is in the discharge of an official duty in
maintaining the public safety or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.06 ELUDING POLICE.
   No operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal,
a red light or a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle, showing
the same to be an official police, Sheriff or highway patrol or state game
ranger car directing the operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, shall
willfully increase his or her speed or extinguish his or her lights to elude or
attempt to elude such police officer, or attempt in any other manner to elude
the police officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.07 DUTY TO ASSIST POLICE.
   It is the duty of all persons in the city, when called upon by any police
officer, to promptly aid and assist him or her in the execution of his or her
duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.08 USE OF SIREN OR WHISTLE.
   (A)   No person shall use any police whistle or any other instrument used by
a police officer to give signals or imitate any signal given by one police
officer to another or any special signal used by police officers for the
purpose of improperly or causelessly attracting the attention of the police.
   (B)   No person, except members of Police Department, Fire Department or
other emergency services, shall ring, use or otherwise sound any gong, siren,
whistle or any other device for making similar noise.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.09 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   No person, other than police officers of the city, shall wear or carry
the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of
office like or similar to or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or
carried by the police officers of the city.
   (B)   No person shall do or attempt any act to impersonate a police officer.
   (C)   It is unlawful to falsely impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, or falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee of
the city, by any kind of representation, pretense, insignia, sound, clothing or
conduct, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or
powers of an officer or employee of the city without being authorized to do so.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.10 FALSE STATEMENTS, REPORTS OR COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or file or cause to be made or filed a
false or misleading report or misrepresentation, allegation or complaint with
the Police Department or any officer or employee of the city or on any official
application, or commit perjury before any tribunal of the city.
   (B)   No person shall willfully and without probable cause make a false
report to any person of any crime, violation of city ordinances or
circumstances indicating the possibility of crime or violation having been
committed, including, but not limited to, the unlawful taking of personal
property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police or other
official action or investigation.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.11 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in
any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department, Police
Department or any other emergency personnel, or summon any officer or employee
thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other
emergency, or knowingly cause the Fire Department or Police Department or its
officers or employees to make a useless or unnecessary run to any part of the
city or outside the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.12 DUTIES OF PUBLIC AT FIRES AND EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   All persons at fires or other emergencies or accidents shall conduct
themselves in an orderly and lawful manner and shall assist in maintaining law
and order.
   (B)   No person at or near any fire or emergency shall conduct himself or
herself in a disorderly manner or neglect or refuse to promptly obey any order
of the Fire Chief or his or her assistants relative to such fire; and no person
shall resist, obstruct, hinder or abuse any officer of the Fire Department or
any firefighter in the proper discharge of his or her duty.
   (C)   Every police officer present at a fire shall keep all persons who are
in the way or impeding the work of the Fire Department away from the location
and, so far as possible, protect all property from loss or injury and cooperate
with and assist the Fire Department in every way possible while at the fire.
The Fire Chief or an assistant Fire Chief or any police officer shall have the
power to designate persons to guard any goods.
   (D)   No person shall follow or block the way of any emergency vehicle
engaged in an emergency run or knowingly interfere with officers at the
location of any fire or emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.13 SIGNS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Tampering with signs and equipment. It is unlawful for any person to
tamper with any signs, signal equipment or other device placed, operated and
maintained by the city in connection with the administration of its code
provisions, ordinances, regulations, services, functions or performance of
duties thereto.
   (B)   Removal of barricades. It is unlawful for any person, except by proper
authority, to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the
city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
   (C)   Public works construction.
      (1)   Any person who removes, destroys, disturbs or in any manner injures
any grade stake, stone or other mark or monument set by or under authority of
the city to designate or mark grades, lines, corners or benchmarks on any
public work in the city prior to the completion and acceptance of the contract
for which such stakes or monuments are set, without lawful authority, is guilty
of an offense.
      (2)   Any contractor or other person constructing any public work in the
city shall protect such work by barriers or obstructions. It is unlawful for
any person to cross the barriers or to remove them until the work has been
completed and opened by authority of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.14 INTERFERING WITH POLICE DOG.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to interfere with, tease,
meddle with, throw objects at or toward, torture, torment, injure, beat,
strike, kick, mutilate, disable or kill any dog used by the City Police
Department, or any member thereof, in the performance of the functions or
duties of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.15 DESTROYING, TAMPERING WITH EVIDENCE.
   It is unlawful to destroy, alter, conceal or disguise physical evidence;
plant false evidence; or furnish false information to an officer which impedes
that or another officer in the performance of his or her duties, or which is
intended to prevent the apprehension or to obstruct the prosecution or defense
of any person.
(Prior Code, § 6-5E-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
Section
General Provisions
   
135.01   Exposing minors to sexual, obscene, harmful materials
   
135.02   Gatherings where minors may consume alcoholic beverages
   
135.03   Contributing to delinquency of minor
Juvenile Crime Act
   
135.15   Purpose
   
135.16   Definitions
   
135.17   Original jurisdiction of municipal court
   
135.18   Allowing or encouraging minor to commit an offense
   
135.19   Permitting offenses or disorderliness on premises
   
135.20   Commission of an offense in the presence of minors
   
135.21   Curfew regulations
   
135.22   Truancy
   
135.23   Parental responsibility
Youth Access to Tobacco
   
135.35   Title and authority
   
135.36   Purpose
   
135.37   Definitions
   
135.38   Furnishing or selling tobacco products to minors
   
135.39   Receipt of tobacco products by minors
   
135.40   Distribution of samples
   
135.41   Sale in original, sealed package only
   
135.42   Public access to tobacco
   
135.43   Access to vending machines
   
135.44   Providing tobacco paraphernalia to minors
   
135.45   Signs posted
   
135.46   Notice to retail employees
   
135.47   Restrictions on enforcement
   
135.48   Increase of fines; fee schedule
 
   
135.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 135.01 EXPOSING MINORS TO SEXUAL, OBSCENE, HARMFUL MATERIALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS.
         (a)   The quality of any description, exhibition, presentation or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement
or sadomasochistic abuse when the material or performance, taken as a whole,
has the following characteristics:
            1.   The average person 18 years of age or older applying
contemporary community standards would find that the material or performance
has a predominant tendency to appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors;
            2.   The average person 18 years of age or older applying
contemporary community standards would find that the material or performance
depicts or describes nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse in a manner that is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community with respect to what is suitable for minors;
and
            3.   The material or performance lacks serious literary,
scientific, medical, artistic or political value for minors.
         (b)   Any description, exhibition, presentation or representation, in
whatever form, of inappropriate violence.
      KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
         (a)   The character and content of any material or performance which
is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and
         (b)   The age of the minor. However, an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor.
      MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording
tape or videotape.
      MINOR. Any unmarried person under the age of 18 years.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttock, with less than full opaque covering; the showing of the female breast
with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of
the nipple; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, film, videotape, played record,
phonograph or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance or other
exhibition performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with
or without consideration.
      REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT. An attempt to ascertain the true age of the
minor by requiring production of a driver’s license, marriage license, birth
certificate or other governmental or education identification card or paper and
not relying solely on the oral allegations of apparent age of the minor.
      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so
clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse
or physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or, if such person is a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   Prohibitions. No person having custody, control or supervision of any
commercial establishment shall knowingly:
      (1)   Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that
minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view such
material; however, a person shall be deemed not to have “displayed” materials
harmful to minors if the material is kept behind sales counters and behind
devices commonly known as “binder racks” so that the lower two-thirds of the
material is not exposed to view;
      (2)   Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view or otherwise
disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is
harmful to minors; or
      (3)   Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a minor, with or
without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a minor.
   (C)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
hereunder that the material or performance involved was displayed, presented or
disseminated to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum,
medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency or quasi-
governmental agency by persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents
of the above, and which person, organization or institution displays, presents
or disseminates such material or performance for a bona fide governmental,
educational or scientific purpose.
(Prior Code, § 6-6C-1) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.02 GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS MAY CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
This term includes intoxicating beverages and “low-point beer”, as defined
herein.
      GATHERING. A party, gathering or event, where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
      INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. Includes beverages containing more than 3.2%
alcohol by weight.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
the court.
      LOW-POINT BEER. Beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume,
and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer
or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
      MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent
or stepparent of another person.
      PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
      RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire
or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding
to, remaining at or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributable to such response(s);
         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering;
         (c)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged and
the cost of the use of any such equipment in responding to, remaining at or
leaving the scene of a gathering; and
         (d)   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
   (B)   Consumption by minors. Except as permitted by state law, it is
unlawful for any minor to:
      (1)   Consume any alcoholic beverage at any public place or any place
open to the public; or
      (2)   Consume any alcoholic beverage at any place not open to the public,
unless, in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage, that
minor is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   Hosting, permitting or allowing gatherings where alcohol is present.
      (1)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises, to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering
by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government issued identification cards
to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in division (C)(1) above.
   (D)   Exemptions.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her
parent or legal guardian.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state
to dispense alcoholic beverages.
   (E)   Inapplicability of provisions. This section shall not apply where
prohibited or preempted by state or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 6-6C-2) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-7-2008) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF MINOR.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANY PERSON. Any human being, without regard to the legal or natural
relationship to a minor, as well as legal or corporate entities.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
   (B)   Prohibition. Any person who shall knowingly or willfully cause, aid,
abet or encourage a minor to be, to remain or to become a delinquent child or a
runaway child, as said terms are defined by state law, shall be guilty of an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6C-3) Penalty, see §
135.99
JUVENILE CRIME ACT
§ 135.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to curb the increasing problem of juvenile
crime, to educate and reform juvenile offenders, to punish juvenile offenders
and to create an environment whereby adults and juveniles take responsibility
for the actions of juveniles. It is intended to hold neglectful or careless
parents to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through
an objective test. It shall not be a defense to the commission of any offense
that a parent, guardian or any other person whose responsibility it is to
exercise control over a minor was completely unaware or indifferent to the
activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-1) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999)
§ 135.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory
and not merely directory. The word “may” is always directory and not mandatory.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years, or in equivalent phrasing, any
person of the age of 17 years or younger. The term MINOR shall be synonymous
with the term JUVENILE.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor:
      (1)   As a natural or adoptive parent;
      (2)   As a legal guardian;
      (3)   As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
      (4)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a
court.
   PUBLIC PLACE IN PUBLIC VIEW. Any public street, highway, road, alley,
parking lot, park, playground, public building, parkway, sidewalk, vacant lot,
yard, driveway, automobile or cycle in public view.
   REMAIN. To stay behind; to tarry and stay unnecessarily upon a public place
in public view.
   TIME OF NIGHT. The prevailing local standard of time at the date in
question, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, as
observed by the public. The time maintained by the City Police Department shall
be prima facie evidence of the time of day for continued implementation of this
subchapter.
   YEARS OF AGE. The time from one birthday, such as seventeenth, to the next,
but not including the day of the next birthday. Thus, upon a person’s
eighteenth birthday, he or she will cease to be a minor regulated by this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-2) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999)
§ 135.17 ORIGINAL JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
   (A)   Certain juvenile cases. The municipal court may elect to have and
possess original jurisdiction to hear and determine any offenses committed by
persons under the age of 18 years and penalize juveniles found guilty as
allowed by 10A O.S. § 2-2-102(E).
   (B)   Traffic cases. The municipal court may elect to have and possess
original jurisdiction to hear and determine any violations of traffic
ordinances by any person of any age, including minors.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-3) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999)
§ 135.18 ALLOWING OR ENCOURAGING MINOR TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully aid, abet,
allow, encourage or, by omission of a duty, encourage or assist a minor to
commit any municipal, state or federal offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-4) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.19 PERMITTING OFFENSES OR DISORDERLINESS ON PREMISES.
   No owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall
permit minors who have congregated on the premises to commit any offense, or to
carouse, make unnecessary noises, disturb, disrupt or annoy the people residing
or carrying on business in the immediate neighborhood or so as to disturb the
peace.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-5) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.20 COMMISSION OF AN OFFENSE IN THE PRESENCE OF MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any municipal, state or
federal offense in the presence of any person under 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-6) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.21 CURFEW REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Age and hour restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person 17
years old or younger to be or remain in or upon any public place in public view
within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through
Thursday, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight, Friday and Saturday, and 6:
00 a.m. the following day.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section is intended as a clear general guide for minors, their
parents and enforcement officials. In the following exceptional cases, a minor
in or upon any public place in public view shall not be deemed in violation of
this section:
         (a)   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent;
         (b)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the rights of assembly. It shall be deemed a bona fide exercise of such
rights if the assembly, whether parade or demonstration, has been permitted by
the city or other bona fide religious, social or school activities involving
the right to assemble;
         (c)   When engaged in performing an errand or other legitimate
business at the direction of a parent, including travels to and from such
location by a direct route; and/or
         (d)   When the minor is engaged in employment activities, such as, but
not restricted to, newspaper delivery.
      (2)   All of the exceptions cited in division (B)(1) above include travel
to and from such activity by a direct route, and this section is in no way to
be construed as a limitation upon normal travel by a minor engaged in
interstate movement.
      (3)   Each of the exceptions set out in division (B)(1) above are
severable, and in addition, other possible exceptions may be added hereto in
the future as warranted by experience as illuminated by the views of student
government associations, school personnel, citizens, neighborhood
spokespersons, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned positively
with minors as well as juvenile delinquency.
   (C)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent knowingly
to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow a minor to be or remain in any
public place in public view other than for the exceptions set forth in division
(B) above during curfew hours. The term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge which a
parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a
minor. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if a
responsible parent has no knowledge of a minor’s whereabouts during the hours
of curfew established by this section.
   (D)   Police procedures.
      (1)   A city police officer, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor in prima facie violation of this section, may take the minor to the
city police station, where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for
such minor, whereupon the parent may be questioned. This is intended to permit
ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to
centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for accurate,
effective, fair impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording, thus making
available experienced supervisory personnel, the best of facilities and access
to information and records. In the absence of convincing evidence, such as a
certificate or driver’s license, a police officer on the street shall use his
or her best judgment in determining age.
      (2)   Police procedure shall constantly be refined in light of experience
and may provide that the police officer may deliver a minor to a parent
thereof, under appropriate circumstances.
      (3)   In any event, such police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a
written report with the Chief of Police, or shall participate to the extent of
the information for which he or she is responsible. Said report shall be
treated, for purposes of juvenile records, in accordance with state statutes.
      (4)   When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be
released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located or
fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor may be released to the
juvenile authorities, except to the extent that, in accordance with police
regulations approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may
temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will, on
behalf of a parent, assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of a parent. However, the Police Department shall
have the discretion to refuse to turn the child over to persons other than
natural parents or legal guardians if circumstances warrant such refusal in its
opinion.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-7) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.22 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Truancy prohibited; exemptions. It shall be unlawful for any minor who
is over the age of six and who has not finished four years of high school work,
to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public,
private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full
term the schools of the district in which the minor attends are in session;
provided that this section shall not apply if:
      (1)   Any such minor is prevented from attending school by reason of
mental or physical disability, as determined by the Board of Education of the
district, upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician
or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing
physician;
      (2)   Any such minor is excused from attendance at school, due to an
emergency, by the principal of the school in which the minor is enrolled, at
the request of the parent of the minor;
      (3)   Any such minor is excused from attending school by:
         (a)   The administrator of the school or district where the minor
attends school; and
         (b)   The parent of the minor. Provided further that no minor shall be
excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school
administrator and the parent of the minor unless and until it has been
determined that such action is in the best interest of the minor and/or the
community, and that said minor shall thereafter be under the supervision of the
parent until the minor has reached the age of 18 years.
      (4)   Any such minor is observing religious holy days and, prior to the
absence, the parent of the minor submits a written request for the absence.
   (B)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor
who is over the age of six years and under the age of 18 years to neglect or
refuse to cause or compel such minor to attend and comply with the rules of a
public, private or other school of the parent’s choosing in which the minor is
enrolled.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-8) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999)
§ 135.23 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent to fail to control a minor that is under
the parent’s supervision by, after notification of a prior offense committed by
the minor, failing to prevent the minor from committing the same offense or
more than one other offense within one year of the date the minor committed the
first offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-9) (Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999) Penalty, see §
135.99
YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
§ 135.35 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “New Cordell Prevention of Youth
Access to Tobacco Ordinance” and is enacted pursuant to the municipal powers
granted by the Oklahoma Constitution and 11 O.S. § 14-101.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-1) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 135.36 PURPOSE.
   Tobacco use by minors is a dangerous activity. The purpose of this
subchapter is to protect the public health and welfare by preventing youth
access to tobacco.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-2) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 135.37 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, license for identification only or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18
years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the
individual and appears on its face to be valid.
   SAMPLE. A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost
for the purpose of promoting the product.
   SAMPLING. The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
   TRANSACTION SCAN. The process by which a seller checks, by means of a
transaction scan device, the validity of a driver’s license or other government
issued photo identification.
   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Any commercial device or combination of devices
used at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s license or other government issued photo identification.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-3) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 135.38 FURNISHING OR SELLING TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS.
   (A)   Prohibited; exemptions. It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or
furnish in any manner any tobacco product to another person who is under 18
years of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any
such person; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for an employee
under the age of 18 years to handle tobacco products when required in the
performance of the employee’s duties.
   (B)   Identification requirements.
      (1)   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products
shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an
ordinary person would conclude, on the basis of appearance, that the
prospective purchaser might be less than 18 years of age.
      (2)   If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco
products has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient
who is not less than 18 years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof
of age shall not constitute a violation of division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-4) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.39 RECEIPT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful for a person who is less than 18 years of age to purchase,
receive or accept receipt of, or have in his or her possession, a tobacco
product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which
is false or fraudulent, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco
product. It shall not be unlawful for an employee who is less than 18 years of
age to handle such tobacco products when required in the performance of the
employee’s duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-5) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.40 DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute tobacco
products or product samples to any person under 18 years of age.
   (B)   No person shall distribute tobacco products or product samples in or
on any public street, sidewalk or park that is within 300 feet of any
playground, school or other facility when the facility is being used primarily
by persons under 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-6) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.41 SALE IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGE ONLY.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original,
sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-7) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.42 PUBLIC ACCESS TO TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for sale
tobacco products in any manner that allows public access to the tobacco product
without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco product or an
employee or the owner of the store. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to retail stores which do not admit into the store persons under 18 years
of age.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-8) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.43 ACCESS TO VENDING MACHINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell tobacco products through a
vending machine unless the vending machine is located:
   (A)   In areas of factories, businesses, offices or other places that are
not open to the public; and
   (B)   In places that are open to the public, but to which persons under 18
years of age are not admitted.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-9) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.44 PROVIDING TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA TO MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner to
another person who is under 18 years of age any material or device used in the
smoking, chewing or other method of consumption of tobacco, including cigarette
papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types and other items
designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-10) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.45 SIGNS POSTED.
   Every person who sells or displays tobacco products at retail shall post
conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign, as specified
by the ABLE Commission, stating the following: “It’s The Law. We Do Not Sell
Tobacco Products To Persons Under 18 Years Of Age.” The sign shall also provide
the toll-free number operated by the ABLE Commission for the purpose of
reporting violations of this chapter. The notice required by this section shall
be the only notice required to be posted or maintained in any store that sells
tobacco products at retail.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-11) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.46 NOTICE TO RETAIL EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products at a
retail store shall notify each individual employed by that person as a retail
salesclerk that state and local law:
      (1)   Prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products to any
person under 18 years of age and the purchase or receipt of tobacco products by
any person under 18 years of age; and
      (2)   Requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser
or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude, on the basis of appearance,
that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be less than 18 years of age.
   (B)   This notice shall be provided before the individual commences work as
a retail salesclerk. The individual shall signify that he or she has received
the requisite notice by reading and signing a notice stating the following:
I understand that state law prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco
products to persons less than eighteen (18) years of age and out-of-package
sales, and requires proof of age of purchaser or recipient if an ordinary
person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser
or recipient may be under eighteen (18) years of age. I promise, as a condition
of my employment, to obey the law. I understand that violations by me may be
punishable by fines, suspension or nonissuance of my driver license. In
addition, I understand that violations by me may subject the store owner to
fines or license suspension.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-12) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.47 RESTRICTIONS ON ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any conviction for a violation of any section of this chapter and any
negative results from compliance checks performed by a police officer pursuant
to division (C) above shall be reported in writing to the ABLE Commission
within 30 days of such conviction or compliance check. Such reports shall be
compiled in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining second or subsequent violations, both
the offenses penalized by the ABLE Commission as administrative fines and the
offenses penalized by the city and reported to the ABLE Commission shall be
considered together in such determination.
   (C)   Persons under 18 years of age may be enlisted by the city to assist in
conducting compliance checks and enforcement; provided such persons may be used
to test compliance only if written parental consent has been provided and the
testing is conducted under the direct supervision of the ABLE Commission or
conducted by another law enforcement agency if such agency has given written
notice to the ABLE Commission in the manner prescribed by said Commission. This
division (C) shall not apply to the use of persons under 18 years of age to
test compliance if the test is being conducted by or on behalf of a “retailer”
of cigarettes, as defined in 68 O.S. § 301, at any location the retailer of
cigarettes is authorized to sell cigarettes. Use of persons under 18 years of
age to test compliance shall be unlawful and punishable by assessment of an
administrative fine of $100.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-13) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 135.48 INCREASE OF FINES; FEE SCHEDULE.
   All fines set forth in this subchapter may be increased, to the extent
allowed by state law, by resolution. It is not necessary to amend this
subchapter each time the city deems it timely to increase fines and fees. A
resolution may be adopted by the City Council and filed accordingly. The Chief
of Police shall maintain a current schedule of all fees allowed under this
subchapter in the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-14) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Gathering where minors may consume alcoholic beverages.
      (1)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
135.02 shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable for violation of a Class A offense,
with fine as provided in §
10.99, plus all court costs and statutory penalties.
      (2)   Reservation of legal options. Violations of §
135.02 may be prosecuted by the city criminally, civilly and/or
administratively as provided by this code. The city may seek administrative
fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section through all
remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance or law. Section 135.02
shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make
arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this
section, nor shall they limit the city’s ability to initiate and prosecute any
criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the
application of this section.
(Prior Code, § 6-6C-2)
   (C)   Allowing or encouraging minor to commit an offense. Any person
convicted of violating any provision of §
135.18 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-4)
   (D)   Permitting offenses or disorderliness on premises. Any person
convicted of violating any provision of §
135.19 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 and not more than
$200, plus costs.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-5)
   (E)   Commission of an offense in the presence of minors. Any person
convicted of violating any provision of §
135.20 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-6)
   (F)   Curfew.
      (1)   If a parent violates §
135.21(C), this shall be treated as an offense by the parent. The penalty, upon
a plea of guilty, nolo contendere or finding of a guilt, shall be a fine of not
less than $50 and not more than $200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and/or parental
counseling classes; and/or community service; and/or restitution when damages
are a result of or are involved in the violation.
      (2)   Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of §
135.21 more than one time may be reported to the district juvenile court for
the treatment, supervision and rehabilitation of such minor.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-7)
   (G)   Truancy.
      (1)   Adults. Any adult person convicted of violating any provision of §
135.22 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   Minors. Any minor convicted of violating any provision of §
135.22 shall be punishable on the first offense by a fine of not more than $50,
on the second offense by a fine of not more than $100 and on every subsequent
offense by a fine of not more than $200, plus costs. Each separate day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-8)
   (H)   Parental responsibility. Any person convicted of violating any
provision in §
135.23 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$200, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 6-6A-9)
   (I)   Furnishing or selling tobacco products to minors.
      (1)   Violation; penalties.
         (a)   When a person violates §
135.38(A) or (B), he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine as follows:
            1.   Not to exceed $100 for the first offense;
            2.   Not to exceed $200 for the second offense within a two-year
period following the first offense;
            3.   Not to exceed $300 for a third offense within a two-year
period following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty, the
store’s license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for a period not
exceeding 30 days; or
            4.   Not to exceed $300 for a fourth or subsequent offense within a
two-year period following the first offense. In addition to any other penalty,
the store’s license to sell tobacco products may be suspended for a period not
exceeding 60 days.
         (b)   Pursuant to state law, when it has been determined by the
municipal court that a penalty shall include a license suspension, the
Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE) Commission will notify the State Tax
Commission and the Tax Commission will suspend the store’s license to sell
tobacco products at the location where the offense occurred for the period of
time prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
      (2)   Defense.
         (a)   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and reasonably
relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to §
135.38. A person cited for violating §
135.38 shall be deemed to have reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such
person shall not be found guilty of such violation if such person proves that:
            1.   The individual who purchased or received the tobacco product
presented a driver’s license or other government issued photo identification
purporting to establish that such individual was 18 years of age or older; and
            2.   The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of
the driver’s license or other government issued photo identification presented
by such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction
scan device.
         (b)   Provided that this defense shall not relieve from liability any
person cited for a violation of §
135.38 if such person failed to exercise reasonable diligence to determine
whether the physical description and picture appearing on the driver’s license
or other government issued photo identification was that of the individual who
presented it. The availability of the defense described in this division (D)
does not affect the availability of any other defense under any other provision
of law.
      (3)   Responsibility for violations. If the sale is made by an employee
of the owner of a store at which tobacco products are sold at retail, the
employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine.
Each violation by any employee of an owner of a store licensed to sell tobacco
products shall be deemed a violation against the owner for purposes of a
license suspension pursuant to division (C) above. An owner of a store licensed
to sell tobacco products shall not be deemed to be in violation of this section
for any acts constituting a violation by any person, when the violation occurs
prior to actual employment of the person by the store owner or the violation
occurs at a location other than the owner’s retail store. For purposes of
determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or business
operations in multiple locations, for any violations of divisions (A) or (B)
above, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a
separate entity.
      (4)   Failure to pay fine. Upon failure to pay fines within 90 days of
the assessment of such fine, the following actions shall occur.
         (a)   Employee. Upon failure of the employee to pay the fine within 90
days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the municipal court clerk shall
notify the Department of Public Safety, and the Department will, pursuant to
state law, suspend or not issue a driver’s license to the employee until proof
of payment has been furnished to said Department.
         (b)   Business owner. Upon failure of a store owner to pay the
administrative fine within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the
municipal court clerk shall notify the State Tax Commission, and the Tax
Commission shall suspend the store’s license to sell tobacco products until
proof of payment has been furnished to said Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-4)
   (J)   Receipt of tobacco products by minors.
      (1)   Violation; penalties. When a person violates §
135.39, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine of:
         (a)   Not to exceed $100 for a first offense; and
         (b)   Not to exceed $200 for a second or subsequent offense within a
one year period following the first offense.
      (2)   Failure to pay fine. Upon failure of the individual to pay such
fine within 90 days of the day of the fine, the municipal court clerk shall
notify the Department of Public Safety, and by operation of state law, the
Department shall suspend or not issue a driver’s license to the individual
until proof of payment has been furnished to said Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-5)
   (K)   Distribution of samples.
      (1)   Violation; penalties. When a person violates any provision of §
135.40, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine of:
         (a)   Not to exceed $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not to exceed $200 for the second offense; and
         (c)   Not to exceed $300 for a third or subsequent offense.
      (2)   Failure to pay fine. Upon failure of any individual to pay an
administrative fine within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the
municipal court clerk shall notify the Department of Public Safety, and the
Department, pursuant to state law, shall suspend or not issue a driver’s
license to the individual until proof of payment has been furnished to said
Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-6)
   (L)   Sale in original, sealed package only. When a person violates §
135.41, the municipal court clerk shall assess such person an administrative
fine of not to exceed $200 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-7)
   (M)   Public access to tobacco. When a person violates §
135.42, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine of not to exceed $200 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-8)
   (N)   Providing tobacco paraphernalia to minors. When a person violates §
135.44, an administrative fine of not to exceed $100 for each offense may be
imposed upon the person.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-10)
   (O)   Signs posted. When a person violates §
135.45, he or she shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine of not to exceed $50 for each day a violation occurs. Each
day a violation is continuing shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-6B-11)
(Ord. 99-2, passed 4-1999; Ord. 2008-02, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2012-01, passed
4-16-2012)
CHAPTER 136: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
136.01   Purposes
   
136.02   Prohibited acts
   
136.03   Exemptions
   
136.04   Fair Housing Board
   
136.05   Complaint procedure
   
136.06   Method of serving notices
 
   
136.99   Penalty
§ 136.01 PURPOSES.
   The general purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods;
and
   (B)   To preserve the public safety, health and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-1)
§ 136.02 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, real estate broker, real estate salesperson
or corporation:
   (A)   To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title
or other interest in any housing, or real property upon which residential
housing is to be constructed, to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or
conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit,
because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender, familial status
or disabilities;
   (B)   To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental or leasing
of any residential property, or to represent that such property is not
available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, because of such person’s race, color, religion, national origin,
age, gender, familial status or disabilities;
   (C)   To solicit or induce or attempt to solicit or induce any person owning
any interest in any residential housing to sell, rent or lease, or not to sell,
rent or lease, such housing to any person on the grounds of loss of value due
to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or
persons of another race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender,
familial status or disabilities, either by direct solicitation or inducement or
by the purchase of other property in the neighborhood for the purpose of such
inducement, or to distribute or cause to be distributed material or making
statements designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his
or her property due to such change in neighborhood; or
   (D)   To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with
knowledge that such complaint is false in any material respect, or to file such
complaint for the sole purpose of harassment.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-2)
§ 136.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing herein shall apply to any religious organization, association,
society or private club; a religious nonprofit organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from limiting the sale or rental of dwelling units owned
and operated for other than a commercial purpose.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses and was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale
with the exception granted to one such sale within a 24-month period; provided
further that such owner does not own or retain in his or her behalf title to a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-
family houses at any one time; provided further that such sale or rental of
such single-family house shall be excepted if such house is sold or rented
without the use in any manner of a sale or rental facility or employee thereof;
or
      (2)   Any dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, and
the owner actually occupies one such living quarter as his or her residence.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-3)
§ 136.04 FAIR HOUSING BOARD.
   (A)   Board created. There is created a fair housing board of the city,
hereinafter referred to as “Board”, composed of the Mayor and members of the
City Council.
   (B)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
      (1)   Initiate, receive and investigate complaints charging unlawful
housing practices;
      (2)   Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings
of fact and publish its findings of fact; and
      (3)   Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary within the
limits of this chapter, and carry out the purposes and provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-4)
§ 136.05 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Complaint filed. Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice
prohibited by this chapter may file with the Fair Housing Board a complaint in
writing, under oath. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be
aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have
violated the provisions of this chapter, and shall further set forth the
particulars of the violation, and may include such other information as may be
required by the Board. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within
30 days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within the time shall
be considered a waiver of the application of this chapter. The Board may issue
a complaint on its own initiative at any time it is within the knowledge of the
Board that a person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Investigation. The Board shall investigate each complaint filed
therewith and shall attempt an adjustment of the complaint by means of
conference and conciliation. Sixty days shall be allowed for the purpose of
investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint
is not well founded, the Board shall dismiss the complaint and notify the
complainant and respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the Board takes no
action within 90 days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be considered as
dismissed.
   (C)   Notice of complaint. If conference or conciliation does not result in
compliance with this chapter, the Board shall cause to be issued and served, in
the name of the city, a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint,
requiring the person named in the complaint, hereinafter referred to as
respondent, to answer charges of the complaint at a hearing before the Board at
a time and place to be specified in the notice.
   (D)   Hearing. At the hearing provided for in division (C) above, the
complaint shall be heard by the Board. At the hearing, the complainant or
person aggrieved may appear in person or by counsel, and the respondent may
file a written answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by legal
counsel. The Board, when conducting any hearing pursuant to this section, may
permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the
hearing shall be under oath, and shall be transcribed at the request of either
party or at the direction of the Board. If the Board finds at the hearing that
the respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice or practices
prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall so
certify the matter to the City Attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution
shall be brought under this chapter except upon such certification. If the
Board, upon hearing, finds that the respondent has not engaged in any
discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact and shall issue
and file an order dismissing the complaint.
   (E)   Rules and regulations. The Board shall establish rules and regulations
to govern and expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure and shall
maintain the files provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-5)
§ 136.06 METHOD OF SERVING NOTICES.
   Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be
served upon any person may be served personally on such person or by mailing a
copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, to
the most current business or residence address of such person.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-6)
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   It is unlawful and constitutes an offense for any person to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter. Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and is subject,
upon conviction, to punishment as provided in §
10.99, plus costs.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-7)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND SUBDIVISIONS; NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILERS
      
152.   HISTORIC RESOURCES PLANNING AND PRESERVATION
      
153.   FLOOD CONTROL
      
154.   DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
      
155.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
156.   TREES
      
157.   ZONING
      
158.   SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Codes
   
150.001   Codes adopted
   
150.002   Additional Fire Code provisions
Building Regulations
   
150.015   General building contractors
   
150.016   Permit requirements
   
150.017   Fire limits
   
150.018   Street names and building numbers
   
150.019   Carports
Plumbing Regulations
   
150.030   Plumbing contractors
   
150.031   Permit requirements
   
150.032   Inspections
   
150.033   Payment of fees
   
150.034   Sewer backup relief device
Electrical Regulations
   
150.045   Electrical contractors
   
150.046   Permit requirements
   
150.047   Inspections
   
150.048   Payment of fees
Mechanical Regulations
   
150.060   Mechanical contractors
   
150.061   Permit requirements
   
150.062   Payment of fees
Gas Piping Regulations
   
150.075   Gas fitters
   
150.076   Permit requirements for single-family dwellings
   
150.077   Permit fees
Oil and Gas Regulations
   
150.090   Regulations adopted
 
   
150.999   Penalty
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.001 CODES ADOPTED.
   The following codes, one copy of each being on file in the office of the
city building inspector, are adopted as the codes of the city for regulating
and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition
of such structures as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said codes on file in the city
office are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section:
   (A)   International Building Code, current edition;
   (B)   International Residential Code, current edition;
   (C)   International Fire Code, current edition;
   (D)   International Plumbing Code, current edition;
   (E)   International Mechanical Code, current edition;
   (F)   International Fuel Gas Code, current edition;
   (G)   International Existing Building Code, current edition;
   (H)   International Energy Conservation Code, current edition;
   (I)   International Property Maintenance Code, current edition; and
   (J)   National Electrical Code, current edition.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-1) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 150.002 ADDITIONAL FIRE CODE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Amendments to code. The name of the city shall be inserted in the fire
code adopted in §
150.001 where applicable.
   (B)   Interpretation.
      (1)   The provisions of the fire code adopted in §
150.001, in their interpretation and application, shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety and general
welfare.
      (2)   Wherever any of the provisions or requirements of the fire code
adopted in §
150.001 are inconsistent with the provisions of the city code or state statutes
presently existing or enacted in the future, the provisions or the requirements
containing the most restrictive regulation shall apply and govern.
   (C)   New materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits. The
building official, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Mayor shall act as
a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire code
adopted in §
150.001. The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his or
her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
   (D)   Authority to modify. The Fire Chief, with the approval of the Mayor
and City Council, shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the
fire code adopted in §
150.001 upon application, in writing, by the building owner or lessee, or his
or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of said fire code; provided that the spirit
of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted, shall be entered
upon the records of the Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant.
   (E)   Appeals. Whenever the Fire Chief or his or her designee shall
disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit or license applied for,
or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code adopted in §
150.001 do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal to the City
Council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed from.
   (F)   Enforcement. The fire code adopted in §
150.001 shall be enforced by the Division of Fire Prevention in the Fire
Department, which is established and which shall be operated under the
supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-2)
BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 150.015 GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Registration required. No person shall practice or engage in the
business, trade or occupation of a general contractor or general building
contractor within the city limits, unless he or she has first registered as
such with the city building inspector.
   (B)   Registration fee. The registration fee to be paid to the City Clerk
shall be as set by the City Council by motion or resolution, and payment of the
fee shall be made with the application.
   (C)   Bond and insurance requirements. Bond and insurance requirements of
general contractors shall be satisfactory to the city and shall meet all
requirements established by state law prior to the issuance of a license or
registration.
   (D)   Expiration of registration. All registrations shall expire on June 30
of each year.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-1) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.016 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General building contractors.
      (1)   Permit required. No general contracting work or construction,
unless excepted by division (B) below, shall be undertaken prior to the
issuance of a permit therefor by the building inspector.
      (2)   Inspections.
         (a)   Upon completion of the general contractor’s work, it shall be
the duty of the person, firm or corporation acting as such general contractor
to notify the building inspector, and the inspector shall inspect the work
within 24 hours or as soon as is practically possible after the notice is
given.
         (b)   If, upon inspection, it is found that any part of the work does
not comply with §§
150.001 and
150.002, the building inspector shall give notice in writing of the violation
to the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit is issued.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings. Any permit required by this section may be
issued to any person to do any work required by §§
150.001 and
150.002 in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such
buildings; provided the person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling and that
the same will be occupied by the owner and that the owner shall personally
purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection therewith. The
building inspector must inspect the work to see that it complies with §§
150.001 and
150.002, and the owner shall pay the regular fees for permits as set out in the
fee schedule.
   (C)   Application for permit; fee. Application for a permit under this
section shall be made on suitable forms provided by the building inspector. The
application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule set by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-2) (Ord. 2001-7, passed 10-2001) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.017 FIRE LIMITS.
   The boundaries of the fire limits of the city shall be as established by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-3)
§ 150.018 STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS.
   (A)   Numbers required; designation. All buildings and houses in the city
shall be numbered. It shall be the duty of the owner of any house or building
in the city to have such house or building numbered in accordance with this
section. The Mayor is responsible for designating the proper numbers for houses
and buildings.
   (B)   Baselines.
      (1)   The north and south baseline shall be Church Street. All buildings
east of the baseline shall be known and numbered as east, and all buildings
west of the baseline shall be known and numbered as west.
      (2)   The east and west baseline shall be Main Street. All buildings
north of this line shall be known and numbered as north, and all buildings
south of this baseline shall be known and numbered as south.
   (C)   Determination of numbers.
      (1)   There shall be 100 numbers applicable to each block, commencing
with one on the odd side and two on the even side of the street. Each 25 feet
of frontage on each block shall be entitled to a separate number. The first
block from the baseline in either direction shall be given numbers from one to
100, and the second block shall be given numbers from 100 to 200, and so on in
consecutive order by 100 to each block in succession.
      (2)   The even numbers shall be on the east sides of the streets
extending north and south, and on the south sides of the streets extending east
and west. The odd numbers shall be on the opposite sides of such streets.
      (3)   The affix one-half shall be added to the last preceding number in
designating stairways or garage apartments.
   (D)   Amendments. In situations where the plat or pattern of the area does
not fit this numbering system, the Planning Commission shall study the area and
recommend to the City Council for adoption of an appropriate amendment to this
section.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-4)
§ 150.019 CARPORTS.
   (A)   Defined. A CARPORT is defined as a roofed shed with open sides used
primarily as a shelter for cars.
   (B)   Provisions and standards regarding carports. Carports constructed and
used within the city shall be subject to and conform to the following
provisions and standards.
      (1)   A building permit is required for the construction of a carport
within the city.
      (2)   A carport shall be located only over an existing driveway if the
carport is located in the front yard setback area of a residence.
      (3)   A carport shall not exceed the width of the driveway over which it
is erected, plus an additional two feet. All roof width measurements shall be
taken from the eave line.
      (4)   A carport shall be kept in good repair and in a safe and sanitary
condition.
      (5)   A carport shall be constructed, erected or installed in strict
conformity with all building requirements, including, but not limited to, the
materials used in the construction of the carport as contained and set forth in
the city building code.
      (6)   Carports extending into the front yard setback area shall not be
more than ten feet in height or be less than six feet in height as measured
from the ground to the eave line. A carport shall not exceed 24 feet in total
length.
      (7)   (a)   A carport shall be at least ten feet from the right-of-way
line and the side yard at least two and one-half feet from the right-of-way or
boundary line; provided, however, no carport shall be erected that impairs or
obstructs sight line as set out in division (B)(7)(b) below. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to provide diagrams and/or drawings
showing compliance with the sight line requirements.
         (b)   On any corner lot on which a front and side yard exists or is
required, no carport which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet
six inches and six feet above any portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway
shall be allowed.
      (8)   No carport shall be used for the storage of materials, equipment
and goods, or for the parking and/or storage of any inoperable or junk
vehicles; provided, however, garbage and/or recycling containers provided by
the city may be placed under the carport.
      (9)   Currently existing carports shall not be subject to the provisions
of this section. However, should an existing carport be destroyed or torn down
for any reason, this section shall apply to new construction.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-5) (Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-15-2018) Penalty, see §
150.999
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
§ 150.030 PLUMBING CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Registration required. No person shall practice or engage in the
business, trade or occupation of a plumbing contractor, a journeyperson plumber
or a plumber’s apprentice unless he or she is registered as such with the
plumbing inspector of the city as required in the city’s plumbing code.
   (B)   Registration fees required. The registration fee to be paid to the
City Clerk is required for plumbing contractors and shall accompany the
application.
   (C)   Bond and insurance requirements. Bond and insurance requirements of
plumbing contractors shall be satisfactory to the city and shall meet the
requirements established by state law prior to the issuance of a certificate of
registration.
   (D)   Expiration of registration. All registration certificates shall expire
on June 30 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.031 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Plumbing contractors. No plumbing work, unless excepted in this
section, shall be undertaken prior to the issuance of a permit therefor by the
plumbing inspector. A permit shall be issued to a registered plumbing
contractor only, except as provided in this section.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings. Any permit required by this section may be
issued to any person to do any work required by this chapter and §§
150.001 and
150.002 in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such
buildings; provided the person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling, and
that the same will be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall
personally purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection
therewith. The plumbing inspector must inspect the work to see that it complies
with this chapter and §§
150.001 and
150.002, and the owner shall pay the regular fees for permits as set out in the
fee schedule.
   (C)   Application for permit; fee. Application for a permit for plumbing
work shall be made on suitable forms provided by the plumbing inspector. The
application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule set by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-2) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.032 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Upon the completion of the installation of any plumbing device or
equipment, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation installing
same to notify the plumbing inspector, and the inspector shall inspect the
installation within 24 hours or as soon as is practically possible after notice
is given.
   (B)   If, upon inspection, it is found that any part of the installation
does not comply with the provisions of this chapter and §§
150.001 and
150.002, the inspector shall give notice in writing of the violation to the
person, firm or corporation to whom the permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-3) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.033 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   All fees provided in this chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk for
deposit to the account of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-4)
§ 150.034 SEWER BACKUP RELIEF DEVICE.
   A sewer backup relief device (as approved by the building inspector) shall
be installed in all sewer cleanouts for all new construction and for all repair
or replacement of existing drainage pipe cleanouts. An example will be on file
in the building inspector’s office.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-5) (Ord. 2005-02, passed 5-2-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.045 ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   State license and city registration required. No person shall practice
or engage in the business, trade or occupation of an electrical contractor,
journeyperson electrician or electrician’s apprentice, unless he or she holds a
current license obtained from the state and is registered as such with the
electrical inspector of the city as required in the State Electrical License
Law, being 59 O.S. §§ 1680 et seq.
   (B)   Registration fee required. The registration fee for electrical
contractors shall be set by the city and shall accompany the application.
   (C)   Bond and insurance requirements. Bond and insurance requirements for
electrical contractors shall be satisfactory to the city and shall meet the
requirements established by state law prior to the issuance of a certificate of
registration.
   (D)   Expiration of registration. All registration certificates shall expire
on June 30 of each year.
   (E)   Nontransferability of registration. No registration issued in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be transferable. Any
holder of a license who shall permit or allow same to be used by any other
party to obtain a permit to do electrical work as specified in this chapter and
§§
150.001 and
150.002 shall be subject to having such license revoked by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-1) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.046 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Electrical contractors. Before any electrical wiring, device or
equipment, subject to the provisions of §§
150.001 and
150.002, is altered or repaired, a permit therefor must be obtained from the
electrical inspector. The permit shall state the location of the work to be
done, a description of the work and whether it will consist of a new
installation, or addition or repair or alteration of an old installation, and
the name of the owner or occupant of the building or premises. Unless the
permit is for work exempted in this section, the permit shall be issued only in
the name of a licensed electrical contractor upon the presentation of an
application by the contractor in person. An agent or employee of the contractor
shall not be allowed to act on behalf of the contractor. The permit, when
issued, shall be for such installation as described in the application, and no
deviation shall be made from the installation so described without the written
approval of the electrical inspector.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings. Any permit required by this section may be
issued to any person to do any work required by §§
150.001 and
150.002 in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such
buildings; provided the person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling, and
that the same will be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall
personally purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection
therewith. The electrical inspector must inspect the work to see that it
complies with §§
150.001 and
150.002, and the owner shall pay the regular fees for permits set out in the
fee schedule.
   (C)   Permit fees. Before any permit is granted for the installation,
alteration or repair of any electrical wiring, device or equipment, the person,
firm or corporation making application for such permit shall pay to the city a
fee in the amount set by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-2) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.047 INSPECTIONS.
   If, upon inspection, it is found that any part of the installation does not
comply with the provisions of §§
150.001 and
150.002, the inspector shall give notice in writing of the violation to the
person, firm or corporation to whom the permit was issued.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-3)
§ 150.048 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   All fees provided for in this chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk for
deposit to the account of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-4)
MECHANICAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.060 MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Registration required. No person shall practice or engage in the
business, trade or occupation of a mechanical contractor, a mechanical
journeyperson or a mechanical apprentice, unless he or she is registered as
such with the city as required in the city mechanical code.
   (B)   Registration fee required. The registration fee to be paid to the City
Clerk is required for mechanical contractors and shall accompany the
application.
   (C)   Bond and insurance requirements. Bond and insurance requirements of
mechanical contractors shall be satisfactory to the City Council and shall meet
the requirements established by state law prior to the issuance of a
certificate of registration.
   (D)   Expiration of registration. All registration certificates shall expire
on June 30 of each year.
   (E)   Nontransferability of registration. No registration issued in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be transferable. Any
holder of a registration who shall permit or allow same to be used by any other
party to obtain a permit to do mechanical work, as specified in §§
150.001 and
150.002, shall be subject to having such registration revoked by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-1) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.061 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Mechanical contractors. It is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to install, alter or repair any mechanical device or equipment,
subject to the provisions of §
150.001 and
150.002, without first securing a permit therefor from the city, stating the
location of the work to be done; a description of the work and whether it will
consist of a new installation, or addition thereto; and the name of the owner
or occupant of the building or premises. The permit, when issued, shall be to
such person. The permits, when issued, shall be for such installation as
described in the application, and no deviation shall be made from the
installation as described without the written approval of the city.
   (B)   Single-family dwellings. Any permit required by this section may be
issued to any person to do any work required by §§
150.001 and
150.002 in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such
buildings; provided the person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling, and
that the same will be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall
personally purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection
therewith. The mechanical inspector must inspect the work to see that it
complies with §§
150.001 and
150.002, and the owner shall pay the regular fees for permits set out in the
fee schedule.
   (C)   Permit fees. Before any permit is granted for the installation,
alteration or repair of any mechanical device or equipment, the person, firm or
corporation making application for such permit shall pay to the city a fee as
set by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-2) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.062 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   All fees provided for in this chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk for
deposit to the account of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-3)
GAS PIPING REGULATIONS
§ 150.075 GAS FITTERS.
   No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or occupation of a
gas fitter unless he or she holds a current state plumbing contractor’s license
or a current state mechanical contractor’s license and obtains from the City
Clerk a gas fitter’s registration certificate. The fee for such registration or
renewal is the same provided for the plumbing contractor or mechanical
contractor pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-1) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.076 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any person to do any
work required by §§
150.001 and
150.002 in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes,
including the usual accessory building and quarters in connection with such
buildings; provided the person is a bona fide owner of such dwelling and that
the same will be occupied by the owner, and that the owner shall personally
purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection therewith. The
plumbing inspector must inspect the work to see that it complies with §§
150.001 and
150.002, and the owner shall pay the regular fees for permits as set out in the
fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-2)
§ 150.077 PERMIT FEES.
   Before a permit shall be issued by the plumbing or mechanical inspector for
new installation of gas piping, repair or replacement of existing piping or the
installation of gas fired equipment, fees as set by the city shall be paid to
the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-3)
OIL AND GAS REGULATIONS
§ 150.090 REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The city’s oil and gas regulations, and any amendments thereto, are adopted
and incorporated herein by reference. A copy of the regulations is on file with
the City Clerk. Any violation of the regulations is punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-1)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   General building contractors. A violation of §
150.015 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of §
150.015 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-1)
   (C)   Permit requirements. A violation of §
150.016 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of §
150.016 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-2)
   (D)   Carports. Violation of §
150.019(B) above shall be punishable by fine for each day the violation is
allowed to continue and may result in the removal of the carport upon
conviction by the city municipal court.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-5)
   (E)   Plumbing regulations. A violation of §§
150.030 through
150.034 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of §§
150.030 through
150.034 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-6)
   (F)   Electrical regulations. A violation of §§
150.045 through
150.048 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. Any
person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
150.045 through
150.048 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-5)
   (G)   Mechanical regulations. A violation of §§
150.060 through
150.062 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of §§
150.060 through
150.062 shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-4)
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-15-2018)
   (H)   Gas piping regulations. Any person who shall do any act prohibited by
§§
150.075 through
150.077 or fail or refuse to comply therewith or fail or refuse to obey a
lawful order of the inspector shall be punishable by a fine as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-4)
(Ord. 2001-7, passed 10-2001)
CHAPTER 151: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND SUBDIVISIONS;
NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILERS
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Permitted placement
   
151.03   Construction specifications
   
151.04   Permitted uses in zoning districts
   
151.05   Installation standards
   
151.06   Nonconforming homes
   
151.07   Structural additions or alterations
   
151.08   Manufactured home subdivisions
   
151.09   Nonresidential mobile trailers
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADD A ROOM UNIT. A unit of manufactured housing, not designated as a part of
the original structure, which may have less occupied space than a manufactured
housing section.
   ANCHORING SYSTEM. An approved system of straps, cables, turnbuckles, chains,
ties or other approved material used to secure a manufactured or mobile home.
   ANSI/NFPA 501. A standard for installation of (manufactured) mobile homes.
The term ANSI/NFPA 501: A STANDARD FOR INSTALLATION OF (MANUFACTURED) MOBILE
HOMES shall mean those model mobile (manufactured) homes as adopted and
copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association and the Manufactured
Housing Institute.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to the appropriate authority having jurisdiction, by
reason of investigation, accepted principles or tests by nationally recognized
organizations.
   BUILDING CODE. The officially adopted building code in effect within the
city.
   EXPANDO UNIT. An expandable manufactured housing unit.
   FOUNDATION CODE. The”Model Manufactured Home Installation Standards”
codified in 24 C.F.R. pt. 3285.
   FOUNDATION SIDING/SKIRTING. A type of wainscoting constructed of fire and
weather resistant material, such as aluminum, cement, board, treated wood or
other approved material, enclosing the entire undercarriage of the manufactured
or mobile home.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The legally designated health authority of the city (or his
or her authorized representative), or the authorized representative of the
County Health Department, the State Department of Health or the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
   INSPECTION OFFICER. The building official of the city or his or her
authorized agent.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in
an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building
site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code. The three types of
MANUFACTURED HOMES (Type I, Type II and Type III) are defined as meeting all of
the requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel of land platted for subdivision
according to all requirements of the comprehensive plan, designed or intended
for lots to be conveyed by deed to individual owners for residential occupancy
primarily by manufactured homes.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARD CODE. Title VI of the
1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.), as
amended (previously known as the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Act), rules and regulations adopted thereunder (including information provided
by the home manufacturer which has been stamped and approved by a design
approval inspection agency, an agent of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development pursuant to HUD rules), which became effective for
mobile/manufactured homes constructed on June 15, 1976.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure larger than 320 square feet, designed
to be used as a year-round residential dwelling, and built prior to the
enactment of the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974, which
became effective for all mobile home construction June 15, 1976.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land on which two or more manufactured or
mobile homes are occupied as residences.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for
the accommodation of one mobile home and not located on a mobile home sales
lot.
   NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILER. Any vehicle having the basic characteristics
of a mobile home travel trailer, but which is used for purposes other than
residential and is not being offered for sale as indicated by a clearly
displayed sign on or near the trailer.
   OCCUPIED SPACE. The total area of earth horizontally covered by the
structure, excluding accessory structures, such as, but not limited to,
garages, patios and porches.
   PARK. A mobile home park and/or recreational vehicle park.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. Any structure system for transporting loads from a
structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost line without
exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
   PERMANENT PERIMETER ENCLOSURE. A permanent perimeter system completely
enclosing the space between the floor joists of the home and the ground.
   PUBLIC WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM. Any system built and owned by, or dedicated to
and accepted by, the city or the New Cordell Utility Authority. All other
systems shall be deemed private systems.
   RURAL AREA. Any area within the existing corporate boundaries of the city,
which is zoned agriculturally. This shall not include areas zoned for low
density residential estate type uses.
   SECTION. A unit of a manufactured home at least ten body feet in width and
30 body feet in length.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT. A device for permitting a use within a district
other than a principally permitted use.
   SUPPORT SYSTEM. A pad or a combination of footings, piers, caps, plates and
shims which, when properly installed, support the manufactured or mobile home.
   URBAN. All areas within the existing or future corporate boundaries of the
city, zoned for urban intensity development.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-1) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002)
§ 151.02 PERMITTED PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Type I manufactured homes. The establishment, location and use of Type
I manufactured homes as permanent residences shall be permitted in any zone
permitting installation of a dwelling unit, subject to the requirements and
limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district, and
provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations.
      (1)   The dwelling shall meet the appropriate exterior appearance
standards, as hereinafter set forth.
      (2)   The dwelling shall be sited in a district where such use is
permitted in §
151.04.
      (3)   The dwelling shall receive all required permits and conform to the
comprehensive plan and other ordinances of the city, if applicable.
   (B)   Types II and III manufactured homes; special exception permit
requirements.
      (1)   The establishment, location and use of Type II or Type III
manufactured homes as permanent residences may be allowed by special exception
permit in the specified areas (as Appendix 1 attached to the ordinance codified
herein), subject to the requirements and limitations applying generally to such
residential use in the district, and provided such homes shall meet the
following requirements and limitations.
         (a)   The dwelling shall meet the appropriate exterior appearance
standards, as hereinafter set forth.
         (b)   The dwelling shall be sited in a district where such use is
permitted in §
151.04.
         (c)   The dwelling shall receive all required permits and conform to
the comprehensive plan and other ordinances of the city.
      (2)   (a)   Application for a special exception permit to place a Type II
or Type III manufactured home in specified areas shall be made, in writing, by
the property owner to the City Planning Commission.
         (b)   Applications shall include the following:
            1.   Name and address of the applicant;
            2.   Location and legal description of the property for which the
special exception permit is being requested;
            3.   Description, line drawing or photograph of the proposed
manufactured home; and
            4.   Plot plan showing the location of all current and proposed
structures on the property, property lines, easements and measured setbacks
from property lines.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a special exception
permit, permit fees and publication costs, the City Administrator or designee
will:
         (a)   Review application for completeness and compliance with this
chapter, zoning codes and setback requirements;
         (b)   Cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, a notice of public hearing for the special exception permit; and
         (c)   Schedule the aforementioned public hearing before the Planning
Commission during the Commission’s next scheduled meeting, but not less than
ten days after publication of the notice of public hearing.
      (4)   After conducting a public hearing, the Planning Commission will
determine the appropriateness of the application and take action to approve or
deny the special exception permit.
      (5)   The applicant must pay a permit fee of $25, plus the cost of
publishing a one-time notice of public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-2) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Type I manufactured home. Type I manufactured homes shall:
      (1)   Have more than 950 square feet of occupied space in a typically
double section or larger multi-section unit;
      (2)   Be placed on a permanent foundation;
      (3)   Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure in accordance with approved
installation standards, as specified in this chapter;
      (4)   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with the city’s codes and
the manufacturer’s specifications;
      (5)   Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
      (6)   Have utilities connected in accordance with the local codes and
manufacturer’s specifications;
      (7)   Have siding material of a type customarily used on site constructed
residences;
      (8)   Have a roofing material of a type customarily used on site
constructed residences; and
      (9)   Have an open, covered and/or enclosed parking structure that is
compatible with other housing in the immediate area, and all parking surfaces
shall be hard surfaced.
   (B)   Type II manufactured homes. Type II manufactured homes shall:
      (1)   Have more than 720 square feet of occupied space in a single,
double, expando or multi-section unit (including those with add a room units);
      (2)   Be placed on a permanent foundation;
      (3)   Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure in accordance with approved
installation standards, as specified in this chapter;
      (4)   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with the city’s codes and
the manufacturer’s specifications;
      (5)   Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
      (6)   Have utilities connected in accordance with the local codes and
manufacturer’s specifications;
      (7)   Have siding material of a type customarily used on site constructed
residences;
      (8)   Have a roofing material of a type customarily used on site
constructed residences; and
      (9)   Have an open, covered and/or enclosed parking structure that is
compatible with other housing in the immediate area, and all parking surfaces
shall be hard surfaced.
   (C)   Type III manufactured homes. Type III manufactured homes shall:
      (1)   Have more than 400 square feet of occupied space in a single,
double, expando or multi-section unit (including those with add a room units);
      (2)   Be placed on a support system, in accordance with approved
installation standards, as specified in this chapter;
      (3)   Be enclosed with foundation siding/skirting in accordance with
approved installation standards, as specified in this chapter;
      (4)   Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with manufacturer’s
specifications and local codes; and
      (5)   Have utilities connected in accordance with the local codes and
manufacturer’s specifications.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-3) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 PERMITTED USES IN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Manufactured homes are permitted uses, as follows.
   (A)   General Agricultural District (A-G). Permitted uses in the A-
G District are Types I, II and III manufactured homes. Mobile homes may be
permitted with a special exception permit.
   (B)   Single-Family Residential District (R-S). Permitted uses in the R-
S District are Type I manufactured homes. Type II and Type III manufactured
homes may be permitted with a special exception permit only in specified areas
as indicated in Appendix 1 attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   (C)   General Residential District (R-G). Permitted uses in the R-G District
are Type I manufactured homes. Type II and Type III manufactured homes may be
permitted with a special exception permit only in specified areas as indicated
in Appendix 1 attached to the ordinance codified herein. Mobile homes are
prohibited.
   (D)   Convenience Commercial District (C-C). The C-C District allows no
permitted uses. Types I, II and III manufactured homes are not encouraged but
may be permitted with a special exception permit only in specified areas as
indicated in Appendix 1 attached to the ordinance codified herein. Mobile homes
are prohibited.
   (E)   Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District (C-A/R). The
C-A/R District allows no permitted uses. Types I, II and III manufactured homes
are not encouraged but may be permitted with a special exception permit only in
specified areas as indicated in Appendix 1 attached to the ordinance codified
herein. Mobile homes are prohibited.
   (F)   General Commercial District (C-G). The C-G Districts allows no
permitted uses. Types I, II and III manufactured homes are not encouraged but
may be permitted with a special exception permit only in specified areas as
indicated in Appendix 1 attached to the ordinance codified herein. Mobile homes
are prohibited.
   (G)   Light Industrial District (I-L). The I-L District allows no permitted
uses, and all uses are prohibited.
   (H)   Heavy Industrial District (I-H). The I-H District allows no permitted
uses, and all uses are prohibited.
   (I)   Manufactured Home Subdivision (MHS). Permitted uses in a manufactured
home subdivision are Type I and Type II manufactured homes. Type III
manufactured homes and mobile homes are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-4) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002)
§ 151.05 INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
   Manufactured and mobile home installation standards are as follows.
   (A)   Permanent perimeter enclosure. Those manufactured homes designated in
this chapter as requiring permanent perimeter enclosure must be set on an
excavated footing, with a permanent perimeter enclosure. Foundations, footings
and crawl space or basement walls must be constructed in accordance with the
terms of the foundation code. Except for required openings, the space between
the floor joists of the home and the underfloor grade shall be completely
enclosed with the permanent perimeter enclosure.
   (B)   Foundation siding/skirting. All manufactured homes without a permanent
perimeter enclosure shall have an approved foundation siding/skirting enclosing
the entire perimeter of the home. Foundation siding/skirting and backup framing
shall be weather resistant, noncombustible or self-extinguishing materials
which blend with the exterior siding of the home. Below grade level and at
least six inches above finish grade, the materials shall be unaffected by decay
or oxidation. The siding shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s
recommendations or approved equal standards. The siding shall be ventilated by
openings, which shall have a net area of not less than one and one-half square
feet for each 25 linear feet of exterior perimeter. The openings shall be
covered with corrosion resistant wire mesh not less than one-half inch in any
dimension. The underfloor area shall be provided with an 18-inch by 24-inch
minimum size access crawl hole which shall not be blocked by pipes, ducts or
other construction interfering with the accessibility of the underfloor space
or other approved access mechanism.
   (C)   Support system. All HUD Code Type I and Type II manufactured home load
bearing foundations shall be installed in conformance with the regulations in
the foundation code and with the manufacturer’s installation specifications.
All HUD Code Type III manufactured homes and all mobile homes not placed on a
permanent foundation shall be installed on a support system in conformance with
the manufacturer’s installation specifications or with the foundation code.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-5) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 NONCONFORMING HOMES.
   A manufactured or mobile home placed and maintained on a tract of land and
deemed to be a legal nonconforming use prior to the effective date hereof shall
continue to be a legal nonconforming use. If the nonconforming use is
discontinued, the land thereafter must be used in conformity with all
provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-6) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 STRUCTURAL ADDITIONS OR ALTERATIONS.
   Due to its integral design, the building inspector or other authorized
administrative official of the city must approve any structural alteration or
modification of a manufactured or mobile home after it is placed on the site.
All structural additions shall comply with the city’s building codes.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-7) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with city regulations. Manufactured home subdivisions shall
comply with the adopted subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance of the
city, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Minimum size. The minimum size of a manufactured home subdivision
shall be ten acres.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. Type III manufactured homes and mobile homes are not
permitted in manufactured home subdivisions.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-8) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILERS.
   (A)   Approval and license required. No nonresidential mobile trailer shall
be permitted in the city, unless the City Planning Commission approves its
operation and a license is issued.
   (B)   Ineligibility for license. No license shall be issued for a use that
would violate any local, state or federal ordinances, laws or regulations.
   (C)   License fee. An annual fee of $25 shall be charged for each
nonresidential mobile trailer license; provided that no governmental or
nonprofit agency shall be charged such a fee.
   (D)   Contents of license. The license shall specify the permitted use of
the nonresidential mobile trailer, the location of such operation and the
termination date of the license.
   (E)   Construction contractors. Operation of nonresidential trailers by
contractors for construction projects for which building permits have been
issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units is permitted
without issuance of a license during the term of construction.
   (F)   Permanent location prohibited. This section shall not be construed as
permitting or authorizing the permanent location of any nonresidential mobile
trailer within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-9) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable
by fine and costs as provided in §
10.99. Each day upon which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-10) (Ord. 2002-02, passed 3-4-2002)
CHAPTER 152: HISTORIC RESOURCES PLANNING AND PRESERVATION
Section
   
152.01   Purposes
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Preservation Review Commission
   
152.04   Criteria for designation
   
152.05   Procedures for designation
   
152.06   Criteria for evaluation
   
152.07   Certificate of appropriateness
   
152.08   Voluntary restrictive covenants
   
152.09   Maintenance and repair; dangerous conditions
   
152.10   General review policies
   
152.11   Historic review criteria
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 PURPOSES.
   (A)   This chapter is designed to allow for designation of and to
subsequently protect properties which have been determined architecturally,
archaeologically, culturally or historically significant to the city, and to
allow interested parties the opportunity to arrange for the preservation of
such properties.
   (B)   The purposes of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Promote the designation of historic properties and landmarks and
the creation of historic districts for the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the public;
      (2)   Safeguard the city’s cultural and architectural heritage;
      (3)   Preserve and enhance the environmental quality of neighborhoods;
      (4)   Strengthen the city’s economic base by stimulation of structural
and district conservation, reuse and revitalization;
      (5)   Stabilize and preserve property values; and
      (6)   Promote harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of
the community, through the integration of the preservation and comprehensive
planning processes within the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-1)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The approval issued by the City Preservation
Review Commission for:
      (1)   Alterations of historic properties designated under this chapter or
the city zoning ordinance;
      (2)   Demolition of such properties;
      (3)   New construction in a district designated under ordinances as
historic; or
      (4)   Projects that may impact upon a designated historic property or
district.
   CERTIFICATION AGREEMENT. The executed document between a certified local
government (CLG) and the state historic preservation officer (SHPO) for
participation in the CLG program.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG). A local government that has been certified
to carry out the purposes of the National Historic Preservation Act, being 54
U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq., as amended, in accordance with the procedures and
guidelines set forth in “Certified Local Governments (CLG) Program for
Oklahoma”, as approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT FUND. The portion of the state historic
preservation officer’s annual allocation from the Historic Preservation Fund
set aside for certified local governments.
   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAM AGREEMENT. The contract between the
certified local government (CLG) and the state historic preservation officer
for transfer of a share of the Certified Local Government Fund.
   CHIEF ELECTED LOCAL OFFICIAL. The Mayor of the city.
   DECERTIFICATION. The Secretary of the Interior’s revocation of certified
local government (CLG) status, in accordance with the requirements of the
certified local governments program for the state.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A geographically definable area with a concentration or
linkage of significant sites, buildings, structures or monuments that are
unified historically, architecturally, archaeologically or culturally.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND. The monies accrued under the Outer Continental
Shelf Lands Act, being 43 U.S.C. Chapter 29, Subchapter III, as amended, to
support the program of matching grants in aid to the states for historic
preservation programs and projects, as authorized by § 101(d)(1) of the
National Historic Preservation Act, as amended.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY. An individual structure, building, site or monument which
contributes to the historical, architectural, archeological or cultural
heritage of the city.
   LOCAL LEGISLATION. The city’s code, statute, ordinance and the like, which
creates the Preservation Review Commission and sets forth its functions,
responsibilities, membership and other provisions.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The national list of districts, sites,
buildings, structures and objects significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture, maintained by the Secretary
of the Interior under authority of § 101(a)(1)(A) of the National Historic
Preservation Act, being 54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq., as amended.
   NATIONAL REGISTER PROGRAM MANUAL. The manual that sets forth National Park
Service administrative procedures and guidelines for activities concerning the
federally related historic preservation programs of the national trust for
historic preservation, the states and local governments. The manual includes
guidelines and procedures for the administration of the historic preservation
grants in aid program and supersedes the HPF Grants Management Manual.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. Any work not requiring a building permit or
certificate of appropriateness, where the purpose is to stabilize and not
noticeably alter the property’s exterior appearance. Any work not satisfying
the requirements in this definition shall not be considered ORDINARY
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR (i.e., painting previously unpainted brick).
   PRESERVATION. Any or all of the following:
      (1)   Adaptive use: restrained alteration to accommodate uses for which
the property was not originally constructed, but in such a way as to maintain
the general significant characteristics;
      (2)   Conservation: sustained use and appearance essentially in the
property’s existing state;
      (3)   Protection: security of a property as it exists through the
establishment of the mechanisms of this chapter;
      (4)   Reconstruction: process of recreation or reproduction by new
construction, all or part of the form and detail of a vanished resource, as it
appeared at a specific period in time;
      (5)   Rehabilitation: process of returning a property to a state of
efficiency or soundness by repair or alteration, designed to encourage its
continued use but without noticeably changing its exterior;
      (6)   Restoration: process of accurately recovering all or part of the
form and detail of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular
period of time, by means of removal or altering of work and replacement of
earlier work; and
      (7)   Stabilization: process of applying measures designated to halt
deterioration and to establish the structural soundness of an unsafe or
deteriorated property, while maintaining the essential form as it presently
exists, without noticeably changing the exterior appearance.
   PRESERVATION REVIEW COMMISSION. The City Preservation Review Commission
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, with the powers
and duties established in this chapter, particularly §
152.03(E).
   SIGNIFICANT CHARACTERISTICS. Any or all of the following:
      (1)   Cultural:
         (a)   Has noteworthy character, interest or value as part of the
development of the locality, state or nation;
         (b)   Is associated with a noteworthy personality or past development;
or
         (c)   Is the site of a noteworthy social, economic or political event.
      (2)   Architectural:
         (a)   Exemplifies a distinctive artistic style or engineering
specimen;
         (b)   Represents the work of a particular designer, architect or
contractor whose work has influenced the community or nation;
         (c)   Contains elements of design, detail, style or craftsmanship
unique to the past;
         (d)   Is a distinctive part of or related to a park or other
distinctive area that should be preserved; or
         (e)   Represents a visual and established feature of a neighborhood,
community or skyline due to its location or physical features.
      (3)   Archaeological:
         (a)   Has yielded information or is likely to yield information (based
on physical evidence) important to history or prehistory; or
         (b)   Is part of, or related to, a distinctive geographical area which
should be developed or preserved according to a plan based on a cultural,
historical or architectural motif.
      (4)   Historical: Represents events of the past, important to the
development of the area, community, state or nation.
   STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER (SHPO). The official within the state
who has been delegated and appointed by the governor to administer the historic
preservation program in the state.
   STATE REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The state list of districts, sites,
buildings, structures and objects significant in state history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering and culture, maintained by the state historic
preservation officer, under the authority of 53 O.S. §§ 351 to 355.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-2)
§ 152.03 PRESERVATION REVIEW COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commission created; composition; qualifications. There is created the
city preservation review commission. The Commission shall consist of six
members, appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council. All of
the six members shall have a demonstrated interest in historic preservation. At
least two of the six members shall be professionals with preservation related
experience (in such fields as architecture, history, archaeology, planning
design, landscape architecture or law). The professional members may reside
outside the city and may be selected from among university faculties or
professional preservation or planning organizations. The City Planning
Commission and the Preservation Review Commission shall coordinate their
respective efforts. In the event of a conflict, the decision of the
Preservation Review Commission shall govern any historic property or historic
district.
   (B)   Term of office; vacancies. The six members of the Commission shall
serve staggered three-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor within
60 days.
   (C)   Organization.
      (1)   Rules of procedure. The Preservation Review Commission shall adopt
rules of procedure.
      (2)   Meetings. The Preservation Review Commission shall meet at least
four times per year, in public and open meetings, with written minutes kept.
   (D)   Quorum. The Commission may conduct a meeting with four of its six
members present as a quorum.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   To develop appropriate criteria and standards for identifying and
evaluating neighborhoods, places, structures and improvements which might be
classified as landmarks, historic sites or historic districts;
      (2)   To designate landmarks, historic sites or historic districts within
the city limits. Once designated by the Commission, such landmarks, historic
sites and historic districts shall be subject to all the provisions of this
chapter as well as any other specifically appropriate zoning ordinance
provisions;
      (3)   To compile a list of structures which would be eligible for
designated landmark or historic structure status. Such structures may be within
or outside of a historic district. The Commission may negotiate with the owners
of such structures for an agreement binding the owner and property. Such
agreement may be for a specified period of time and shall be binding on
subsequent owners until the end of the time specified;
      (4)   To acquire a fee or lesser interest, including “preservation
easements”, in historic properties by donation, bequest or with the approval of
the City Council, by purchase;
      (5)   To cooperate with federal, state, local and other agencies in
pursuing the objectives of historic preservation;
      (6)   To develop and recommend ordinances, legislation and programs, and
otherwise provide information on historic preservation to the City Council;
      (7)   To design appropriate markers for designated landmarks, historic
sites and historic districts;
      (8)   To take all steps necessary, including the taking, preparation and
collection of photographs, measured drawings, descriptions, recorded
interviews, written dates and documentation to permanently record the origin,
development, use and historical significance of each landmark, site or
district;
      (9)   To promote public education, interest and support for the
preservation and enhancement of such landmarks, historic sites and historic
districts;
      (10)   To review, subject to this chapter, applications for new or
existing building or demolition permits, and to work on a voluntary basis with
the owners of landmarks, historic sites or structures within a historic
district, advising them on the benefits, problems and techniques of
preservation and encouraging their participation in preservation activities,
and to issue or deny “certificates of appropriateness” for the work.
         (a)   All requests for building permits for structures within a
historic district and for those designated as landmarks or historic sites shall
be referred to the Preservation Review Commission, which shall have a specified
period of time to review each request. The Commission may use such time to
discuss the proposed changes with the owner of the structure in question and
may permit the building inspector to issue the building permit before such
period has expired. Following the review, the Commission shall issue or deny
issuance of a “certificate of appropriateness” for the reviewed work.
         (b)   This shall not prohibit the granting of a building permit by the
building inspector after such period has expired.
      (11)   To make recommendations regarding the proposed demolition of
designated landmarks or historic structures, including public demolition
procedures initiated through statutory “nuisance abatement” processes, as well
as other publicly or privately initiated demolition processes. No permit to
demolish all or part of such landmarks or structures shall be granted by the
building inspector, except as follows.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided, no person, including an agent of
the city in charge of a landmark or historic site improvement in a historic
district, shall be granted a permit or permission to demolish, partially or in
total, such property without the written approval of the Preservation Review
Commission.
         (b)   Upon the filing of an application with the Preservation Review
Commission, the Commission shall determine whether the proposed change would
destroy or adversely affect the historical features of the landmark, historic
site or historic district property.
         (c)   If the Preservation Review Commission determines that the
landmark, historic site or property within a historic district would be
adversely affected by the proposed change, it may withhold its consent to the
granting of permission or of the permit. The Commission shall make its decision
within 30 days after the filing of the application, and shall state, in
writing, the reasons for withholding consent, mailing the same to the
applicant.
         (d)   If the Preservation Review Commission refuses to grant
permission or approve issuance of a demolition permit, it shall cooperate with
the applicant to arrive at a mutually agreeable plan to avoid demolition,
maintain historic integrity and achieve the applicant’s objectives. If no plan
is agreed upon within six months of the filing of the application, the building
inspector may issue the permit to demolish the subject property or the
municipal agent may proceed without the approval of the Commission.
      (12)   To rescind designation of landmarks, historic sites or historical
districts;
      (13)   To review requests for exceptions for uses within any historic
district;
      (14)   To accept or raise funds from public and private sources; and
      (15)   To make an annual report to the City Council regarding its
activities.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-3) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 152.04 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION.
   A landmark, historic site or historic district designation may be placed on
any natural or improved site or on any area of particular historic,
architectural or cultural significance which:
   (A)   Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or
social history of the nation, state or community;
   (B)   Is identified with historic persons or with important events in
national, state or local history;
   (C)   Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type
inherently valuable for the study of a period, style or method of construction
or of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or
   (D)   Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or
architect whose work influenced his or her age or development in the nation,
state, region or local area.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-4)
§ 152.05 PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The Preservation Review Commission shall, by registered or certified
mail, contact all owners of real property (excluding mineral rights) within the
area of the proposed historic district or within 300 feet of any affected
historic property or site, in order to inform them of the subject area, time,
date and place of the public hearings at which the historic designation will be
discussed. The notice shall be mailed not less than 20 days prior to the
hearing of the Preservation Review Commission, and shall also contain the time,
date and place of the subsequent City Council meeting at which final action
will be taken.
   (B)   A legal notice, indicating the nature of the hearing, the area
involved and the time, date and place of the hearing, shall be published one
time in a newspaper of general circulation, at least 15 days prior to the
Preservation Review Commission’s public hearing. The notice shall also contain
the time, date and place of the subsequent City Council meeting at which final
action will take place.
   (C)   Upon mailing of notification to the property owners within a proposed
historic district or involving a historic structure or landmark, no building
permits will be issued nor will any use changes be granted until after the City
Council approves or rejects the designation proposal for the affected area or
site.
   (D)   A quorum of the Preservation Review Commission shall conduct the
hearing. All interested parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
express their opinions regarding the proposed designations. The Commission may
establish reasonable limits on the length of individual presentations. A record
of the hearing shall be made. The Preservation Review Commission’s records may
include the name and address of each speaker; the organization or person he or
she represents, if any, whether or not he or she is an owner or holder of some
interest in the affected property or represents such owner or holder; and a
summary of the relevant portions of each statement.
   (E)   Within 15 days after the hearing, the Preservation Review Commission
shall act upon the proposed designation. The Commission may approve, reject or
modify any proposal without instituting a new designation process. If the
Commission fails to act within 15 days, the designation proposal shall be
forwarded to the City Council for final action.
   (F)   Upon receipt of the proposal by the City Council, it may designate the
recommended area as a historic district, historic structure or landmark;
reject; or modify the proposal.
   (G)   Approval by the City Council shall be manifested by approval of an
ordinance officially designating the site, landmark or district as historic. If
a district is to be designated, the ordinance shall be an amendment (overlay
zone) to the zoning ordinance in accordance therewith.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-5)
§ 152.06 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION.
   The following criteria shall be used in the evaluation of proposed
landmarks, historic sites or historic districts:
   (A)   Character, interest or value as a part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the city, state or nation or other societies;
   (B)   Location of the site of a notable historical event;
   (C)   Identification with a person or persons who contributed notably to the
culture and development of the city, state, nation or society;
   (D)   Relationship to properties which are significant and preserved, or
which are eligible for preservation;
   (E)   Embodiment of distinctive elements of architectural design, detail,
materials or craftsmanship related to a uniqueness to the area, or the related
distinctiveness of a craftsman, master builder or architect, or a style or
innovation;
   (F)   Archaeological value, in the sense that the site has, has produced or
can be expected to yield, based on physical evidence, information affecting
knowledge of history or prehistory;
   (G)   Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride; or
   (H)   An established familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community
or skyline owing to its unique location or singular physical characteristics.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-6)
§ 152.07 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of issuing the certificate of appropriateness is
to make all concerned parties aware that all required submittals and approvals
have been completed and that the proper permit may be issued for the start of
work.
   (B)   Certificate required. The certificate of appropriateness is required,
before a permit is issued, for any of the following to occur in a historic
district or on a designated historic landmark or site:
      (1)   Demolition of property;
      (2)   Moving of property;
      (3)   Material changes such as exterior reconstruction, alteration or
color changes other than those approved in the original application; or
      (4)   Building of new structures or property.
   (C)   Procedures. The following procedures shall be used for applications.
      (1)   There will be a filing fee as set by the Council.
      (2)   The applicant shall submit for review any sketches, plans,
drawings, photos or other information which would clearly show the Preservation
Review Commission what changes will be made.
      (3)   The application shall be filed with the City Clerk.
      (4)   The certification of appropriateness shall be reviewed by the
Preservation Review Commission in the same manner as a rezoning application and
request.
      (5)   If work authorized by a certificate of appropriateness is not begun
within 60 days, the certificate of appropriateness shall expire and
reapplication must be made, unless a 30-day extension is granted by the
Preservation Review Committee. No more than two extensions may be permitted on
one project.
   (D)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the Commission may be made to the
City Council. Such appeals must be in writing and must be filed with the City
Clerk within 15 days of notification of the decision of the Commission. The
City Council shall hold a hearing on each appeal as herein submitted. The City
Council shall either approve the decision as submitted by the Commission, or
approve the decision subject to modification, or deny the decision, or return
the decision to the Commission for further study.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-7)
§ 152.08 VOLUNTARY RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   The owner of any landmark or historic site may, at any time following such
designation of his or her property, enter into a restrictive covenant on the
subject property after negotiation with the Preservation Review Commission. The
Commission may assist the owner in preparing such covenant in the interest of
preserving the landmark or landmark site, and the owner shall record such
covenant in the office of the County Register of Deeds and shall notify the
City Clerk of such covenant and the conditions thereof. If the covenant
involves any assumption of responsibility by the city, the City Council shall
first review and approve the document.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-8)
§ 152.09 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Maintenance and repairs required. Every person in charge of an
improvement on a historic site or in a historic district shall keep in good
repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement and all interior
portions which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend to cause the exterior
portions of such improvement to fall into a state of disrepair. This division
(A) shall be in addition to all other provisions of law or local ordinance or
code requiring buildings or structures to be well-maintained.
   (B)   Variances from building code. Insofar as they are applicable to a
landmark, historic site or improvement in a historic district, any provision of
the building code may be varied or waived, on application, by the building
inspector; provided such variance or waiver does not endanger public health or
safety.
   (C)   Dangerous conditions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit
the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any improvement
on a historic site or in a historic district, pursuant to written order of any
federal or state agency or pursuant to any court judgment to remedy conditions
determined to be dangerous to life or health. In such case, no approval from
the Preservation Review Commission shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-9) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.10 GENERAL REVIEW POLICIES.
   The Preservation Review Commission shall be charged with the responsibility
for reviewing requests for building and demolition permits for designated
historic structures or within any area designated as a historic district and
issuing or denying certificates of appropriateness for applicable types of such
requests. It is the purpose of this section to specify for Commission members
policies and criteria that they shall follow in reaching decisions or matters
relative to such changes.
   (A)   Review criteria, procedural policies and consequences of decisions
will extend beyond the tenure of any Commission members. It is essential that
policies be based on consistency and basic preservation guidelines. Highest
priority should go to the preservation and restoration of significant
structures (historically and architecturally) and sites that express the unique
characteristics of the particular periods in which they were built.
   (B)   Noncontributing structures should be controlled by this chapter only
to the degree necessary to increase or retain compatibility with the general
atmosphere of any historic district and to keep the degree of nonconformance or
incompatibility from worsening.
   (C)   (1)   The Preservation Review Commission shall utilize, in addition to
those criteria in §
152.11, the Secretary of the Interior’s standards for rehabilitation.
      (2)   Said standards are as follows.
         (a)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible
use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure
or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose.
         (b)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a
building, structure or site and its environment should not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic materials or distinctive architectural
features should be avoided when possible.
         (c)   All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have a historical basis and which
seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
         (d)   Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or site and
its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own
right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
         (e)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
         (f)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the
new material should match the materials being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
         (g)   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
         (h)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
         (i)   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the
property, neighborhood or environment.
         (j)   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures
shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be
removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would
be unimpaired.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-10) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.11 HISTORIC REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   The purpose of historic/architectural design review is to protect
property values and to promote the general welfare by promoting new
construction and rehabilitation or alteration of buildings which is in proper
proportion and in general and reasonable harmony with the existing buildings in
the surrounding area. A supplemental purpose is to encourage architecture which
is compatible with the city’s historic architecture.
   (B)   In such instances where historic/architectural design review is
required, the procedure for such review will commence following the application
for a building permit. Upon receipt of the application, under conditions as set
forth in this chapter or for a particular zoning district, the applicant will
submit to the building inspector plans indicating accurate elevations of each
facade, and sufficient detailing to indicate materials, colors, textures, light
reflecting characteristics and special features intended for the building. This
may be supplemented by sketches as deemed necessary by the applicant to present
the intended design. Submission of actual samples of building materials is also
encouraged.
   (C)   The Preservation Review Commission shall utilize the following
specific criteria (in addition to the Secretary of the Interior’s standards for
rehabilitation) in reaching decisions on proposals presented for review. These
criteria permit the use of modern fabrics, but do not encourage imitation or
fake facades. They encourage the designer of new buildings or alterations to
existing structures to consider the relationship of the proposal to that of the
total character of the streetscape or of any district. If the proposal involves
an established historic zoning district, provisions and procedures of the
appropriate zoning district must also be met and followed.
      (1)   Height. As a general rule, new buildings or modifications to
existing ones should be to a height within 10% of the average height of
existing adjacent buildings.
      (2)   Proportion of building’s front facades. Consideration shall be
given to the relationship between the width to height of the front elevation of
the building.
      (3)   Proportion of openings within facility. Consideration shall be
given to the relationship of width to height of windows and doors.
      (4)   Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. Consideration shall be
given to an ordered, recurrent alternation of strong/weak architectural
elements to ensure appropriate rhythm of mass of openings.
      (5)   Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. Consideration shall be
given to a rhythm of recurrent building masses to spaces between buildings or
structures.
      (6)   Rhythm of entrance or porch projections. Consideration shall be
given to entrances to sidewalks so as to provide rhythm of entrances, porches
or other projections at an intimate scale.
      (7)   Relationship of materials. Consideration shall be given to the
predominant material utilized, such as brick, stone, stucco or wood siding, on
other adjacent or surrounding structures.
      (8)   Relationship of textures. Consideration shall be given to the
predominant textures. These may be smooth (such as smooth stucco) or rough
(such as brick with tooled joints, or horizontal wood siding or other
textures).
      (9)   Relationship of color. Consideration shall be given to a
predominant color or scheme that may be of a natural material or a patina
colored by time.
      (10)   Relationship of architectural details. Consideration shall be
given to architectural details and their relationship to the structure in
question and adjacent ones, including, but not limited to, cornices, lintels,
arches, quoins, balustrades, ironwork, chimneys and the like.
      (11)   Relationship of roof shapes. Consideration shall be given so that
buildings shall have compatible roof shapes.
      (12)   Walls of continuity. Consideration shall be given to physical
ingredients such as brick walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape
masses, building facades or combinations of these so that continuous cohesive
walls of enclosure are provided along the street.
      (13)   Relationship of landscaping. Consideration shall be given to the
predominance of a quality and quantity of landscaping, although emphasis herein
shall be with the amounts and continuity of landscaping.
      (14)   Ground cover. Consideration shall be given so that there will be a
predominance in the use of brick pavers, cobblestones, granite blocks or other
materials.
      (15)   Scale. Consideration shall be given to scale, so that the size of
units of construction and architectural detail relate to the size of a human.
In rendering this consideration, consideration shall also be given to building
mass and how it relates to open space. The predominant element of scale may be
brick or stone units, windows or door openings, porches and balconies and the
like.
      (16)   Directional expression of front elevation. Consideration shall be
given to structural shape, placing of openings and architectural detail that
may provide a predominantly vertical, horizontal or nondirectional character to
the buildings’ front facades.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-11)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in §
10.99. A violation exists whenever there is a performance of an act which is
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, or a failure to perform an act
which is required by this chapter. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, externally
reconstructed, externally altered, added to or demolished in violation of this
chapter, the city or any person may institute an appropriate action or
proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, addition or
demolition, and the violating party shall pay all court costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorneys’ fees, if the court should find in favor of the
city or persons suing on behalf of the city to enforce this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-12)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD CONTROL
Section
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Findings of fact
   
153.03   Purpose
   
153.04   Methods of accomplishing purpose
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Application; interpretation; compliance
   
153.07   Floodplain Administrator
   
153.08   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
153.09   Development permit
   
153.10   Provisions for flood hazard reduction
   
153.11   Variances
   
153.12   Fee schedule
   
153.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in 82 O.S. §§ 1601 through 1620.1, as
amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
ordinances designed to minimize flood losses.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-1) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards;
disruption of commerce and governmental services; and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-2) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.03 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-3) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.04 METHODS OF ACCOMPLISHING PURPOSE.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-4) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within the city,
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BFE. Base flood elevation.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or 1% chance flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Floodplain Administrator
which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with
this chapter.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building
in zones AE, A and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones AE, A and X, ELEVATED
BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of floodwaters.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FIRM. Flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. An official map of the city on which FEMA has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the city.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA for the city,
which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as
well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within city subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of
associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers,
dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are
those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by
the City Council to administer and implement laws, ordinances and regulations
relating to the management of floodplains.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations
and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control regulations and
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See definition of FLOOD or FLOODING.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A FLOODWAY is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in §
153.08. A FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose,
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; and
      (3)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by
the State Historic Preservation Office of the State Historical Society.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on the city’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date hereof and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date hereof.
   OWRB. The State Water Resources Board.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law No. 97-348)
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued; provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the City Council to a person from the terms
of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
A VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements, see 44 C.F.R. §
60.6.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-5) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.06 APPLICATION; INTERPRETATION; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Application of provisions. This chapter shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (B)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the City Council; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (C)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and any other ordinance, easement,
covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (D)   Compliance required. No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-6) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.07 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Director of Emergency Management serve as. The City Council designates
the Director of the City Emergency Management Department as the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and
other appropriate sections of the national flood insurance program regulations
in 44 C.F.R. pertaining to floodplain management.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities. Duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601
through 1620.1, as amended;
      (2)   Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
      (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by this chapter;
      (4)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required;
      (5)   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions);
      (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to FEMA;
      (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      (8)   Require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the base
flood elevation on a FEMA elevation certificate as well as other data as
required in order to administer the provisions of §
153.10;
      (9)   When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zone AE as
delineated on the county FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the city;
      (10)   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and
manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial
improvement requirement;
      (11)   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the City Council; and
      (12)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-7) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.08 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Washita County,
Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas”, dated April 3, 2012, as it may be amended
from time to time, with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM), are
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-8) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.09 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. A development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Application for permit.
      (1)   An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
      (2)   Additionally, the following information is required:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
         (b)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
   (C)   Approval or denial of permit. Approval or denial of a development
permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions
of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   (D)   Developments in certain flood hazard areas. The Floodplain
Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may approve certain development
in zones A or AE delineated on the county FIRM which increases the water
surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot; provided that the
applicant for the development permit in that case first complies with 44 C.F.R.
§ 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-9) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.10 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (A)   General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements.
      (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      (4)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters.
      (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (B)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the
following provisions are required.
      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
division (B)(1) is satisfied.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot
above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect
or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator
that the standard of this division (B)(2) is satisfied.
      (3)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria.
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. Require that all manufactured homes to be
placed anywhere within the city in flood zones A and/or AE on the county FIRM
shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and
have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least one foot above the base flood
elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be
elevated and anchored to a permanent foundation to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The home shall be
installed by a licensed installer according to state law, and compliance
herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said
installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A and AE on the county FIRM either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements of §
153.09, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
division (B)(4) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
      (6)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within zones A and AE on the county FIRM shall comply with the following.
         (a)   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
         (b)   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited
storage.
         (c)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living,
cooking or restroom use.
         (d)   Service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment,
must be elevated to or above the BFE.
         (e)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         (f)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential and constructed with flood resistance materials.
         (g)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
         (h)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
         (i)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE.
         (j)   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures.
   (C)   Standards for subdivisions.
      (1)   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located
in zones A and AE which is 51 or more lots or greater than five acres shall
generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
      (2)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      (3)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
   (D)   Floodways. The following provisions shall apply to floodways.
      (1)   Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited
within the adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If division (D)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      (3)   The city may permit encroachments within the adopted floodway that
would result in an increase in base flood elevations; provided that the
applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-10) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.11 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   (a)   The City Council may grant variances for uses which do not
satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management Act, being 82
O.S. §§ 1601 et seq., or this chapter, if the applicant for the variance
presents adequate proof that:
            1.   Compliance with this chapter will result in an arbitrary and
unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to the
people; and
            2.   Satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section.
         (b)   However, no variance shall be granted where the effect of the
variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition which unreasonably
creates flooding hazards.
      (2)   Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma Floodplain
Management Act, being 82 O.S. §§ 1601 et seq., or by other laws of the state.
      (3)   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than 20
years.
      (4)   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the City
Council, accompanied by a filing fee of $25.
      (5)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level; provided the relevant factors in §
153.09(C) and the provisions of this section have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
      (6)   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the Mayor which states that:
         (a)   The cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than
the base flood elevation; and
         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
      (7)   At such time as the City Council deems the petition ready for
notification to the public, the City Council shall schedule a hearing and
direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
      (8)   The City Council shall conduct the hearing and make determinations
in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. The City Council
shall exercise wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the
advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when
determining whether the variance shall be granted.
      (9)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances; and
         (d)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (10)   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives stated in §
153.03.
      (11)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and a copy of any
variance issued by the City Council shall be sent by the Floodplain
Administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within 15 days after issuance of the
variance.
   (B)   Certain variances permitted; conditions.
      (1)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (3)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided that:
         (a)   The criteria of divisions (A)(5), (A)(9), (B)(2) and (B)(3)
above are met; and
         (b)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-11) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.12 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The City Council establishes the following fee schedule not to exceed $500
for any one service:
   (A)   Notice of intent fee: $25 maximum;
   (B)   Floodplain development permit application review: $100;
   (C)   Floodplain development permit fee: $25; and
   (D)   Inspection fee, per inspection: $25.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-12) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-13) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate or other certifications required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 for each violation or
spend not more than 30 days in jail and, in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
Council or the City Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-14) (Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
CHAPTER 154: DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
Section
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Report of dilapidated building
   
154.03   Condemnation and abatement procedures
   
154.04   Restoration of premises
   
154.05   Permit to tear down; failure to obtain
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. As defined in §
91.055.
   CLEANING or CLEANED. The removal of trash or weeds from the premises.
   DILAPIDATED BUILDING.
      (1)   A structure which, through neglect or injury, lacks necessary
repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent
that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public;
      (2)   A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of
necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the health,
safety and welfare of the general public;
      (3)   A structure within which acts which result in a felony conviction
under the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, being 63 O.S.
§§ 2-101 et seq., were performed repeatedly; or
      (4)   A structure declared by the City Council to constitute a public
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1)
§ 154.02 REPORT OF DILAPIDATED BUILDING.
   Any officer or employee of the city who discovers or receives a report of a
dilapidated building which has become detrimental to the health, benefit and
welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger
of property shall report such conditions to the administrative officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-2)
§ 154.03 CONDEMNATION AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
   The administrative officer may cause dilapidated buildings within the city
limits to be torn down and removed in accordance with the following procedure.
   (A)   Notices. At least ten days’ notice shall be given to the owner of the
property before the city takes action or holds a hearing as provided herein. A
copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition,
a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the property owner at the address
shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the office of the County Treasurer.
Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the
records in the office of the County Clerk to the last known address of the
mortgagee. At the time of mailing of notice to any property owner or mortgage
holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of
the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor mortgage holder can be
located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property,
or by publication, as defined by 11 O.S. § 1-102. Such notice may be published
once not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action to be taken pursuant
to this section.
   (B)   Hearing. A hearing shall be held by the City Council to determine
whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the
health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community, or creates a fire
hazard to the danger of property.
   (C)   Decision and action. If the City Council finds that the condition of
the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard, and that the property would
be benefitted by the removal of such conditions, the City Council may cause the
dilapidated building to be torn down and removed and shall fix reasonable dates
for the commencement and completion of the work. The City Clerk shall
immediately file a notice of lien with the County Clerk describing the
property, the findings of the City Council at the hearing and stating that the
city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs and
that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and
after the date of filing of the notice.
   (D)   Appeal. The property owner shall have a right to appeal an order of
the administrative officer to the City Council. The appeal shall be filed in
writing with the City Clerk within ten days after the administrative order is
rendered.
   (E)   Methods of abatement. If the work is not performed by the property
owner within the dates fixed by the City Council, the administrative officer
shall direct the tearing down and removal be done by one of the following
methods:
      (1)   By the city; and
      (2)   On a private contract basis, in which case, it shall be awarded to
the lowest and best bidder.
   (F)   Costs; lien provisions.
      (1)   After the building has been torn down and removed, the
administrative officer shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and
removal of dilapidated buildings and any other expenses as may be necessary in
conjunction therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall forward a statement of such actual cost
attributable to the dismantling and removal and a demand for payment by mail to
the property owner at the address specified in division (A) above. In addition,
a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address
specified in division (A) above.
      (3)   At the time of mailing of the statement of costs to any property
owner or mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the
postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name
and address of the mailee.
      (4)   If payment is not made within six months from the date of the
mailing of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer. The city shall have a lien on
the property for such costs, together with interest thereon, and the lien shall
continue until the cost shall be fully paid.
      (5)   When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city shall
file a release of lien or part thereof.
   (G)   Additional authority of city. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the city from otherwise abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or
otherwise exercising its police power to protect the public health, safety or
welfare.
   (H)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
property zoned and used for agricultural purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-3)
§ 154.04 RESTORATION OF PREMISES.
   In all cases in which:
   (A)   A house or building has been removed before the effective date hereof;
or
   (B)   A house or building is torn down or demolished pursuant to order of
the State Fire Marshal or one of his or her assistants or the County Sheriff or
the Chief of the Fire Department as provided by state law or as provided in
this chapter, and in which any of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The premises has not been cleaned up;
      (2)   The premises is cleaned up, and all lumber, brick, concrete,
cement, plaster, nails, wire and other material have not been removed;
      (3)   The materials have been removed but the cellar space and
excavations have not been filled;
      (4)   A cistern or well has not been filled or safely and securely
closed, and all openings to sanitary sewer have not been plugged to meet the
requirements of the city plumbing code and securely closed; and
      (5) The lot or lots have not been leveled and left entirely free from
trash or the same was not immediately done, then the owner or owners of the lot
or lots and the person, firm or corporation who tore down the house or building
shall immediately comply with the provisions of this chapter by having all of
the things done.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-4)
§ 154.05 PERMIT TO TEAR DOWN; FAILURE TO OBTAIN.
   Any person who shall tear down or begin the tearing down of any house or
building within the city limits without having first procured permit therefor
shall be guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-5)
CHAPTER 155: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Obstructing public ways
   
155.02   Display or sale of goods and merchandise
   
155.03   Projections into, overhanging public ways
   
155.04   Mud and water drainage
   
155.05   Hazardous sidewalks
   
155.06   Playing on streets
   
155.07   Injury to trees and shrubs
Excavations
   
155.20   Street cuts
   
155.21   Curb cuts
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   Obstructions prohibited.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public way by leaving or permitting to remain thereon
or therein any vehicle, object, material, structure, fence or other obstruction
of any kind.
      (2)   (a)   It is unlawful to:
            1.   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to
hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians; or
            2.   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
         (b)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions
enumerated in division (A)(2)(a) above, a police officer or any law enforcement
officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions
and to move on or disburse, or to remove any obstructions. Any person who fails
or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this division
(A)(2).
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to place any object, vehicle or
structure on or so near to any street right -of-way such that same constitutes
a traffic or safety hazard for either pedestrians or vehicular traffic
traveling on or onto the street.
      (4)   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to erect, construct,
locate, maintain or allow to remain on his or her property any sign, fence or
structure within an area known as the “sight triangle”, which is defined as
that area formed by measuring from the point of intersection of two lot lines a
distance of 30 feet along each lot line and connecting the points so
established to create a triangle with sides abutting the street right-of-way.
Any sign, fence or structure placed or located in the area is determined to be
a public nuisance, and the city is authorized to cause the structure, fence or
sign to be removed.
   (B)   Elimination of obstructions.
      (1)   The owner of every lot or parcel of land in the city upon which any
trees, shrubs or plants are growing, or upon which any obstruction has been
placed, shall remove such trees, shrubs, plants or obstruction, or parts
thereof, if they are so situated as to constitute a traffic hazard by
obstructing the view of any driver of any vehicle on the streets of the city to
the extent that the driver is unable to observe the approach of other vehicles
on streets and alleys and at intersections.
      (2)   (a)   The owner of any premises abutting on any street shall trim
all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking, between the sidewalks and the
roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of
the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley in such manner
that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage, sight and travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys. If premises
are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the
trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinbefore required of the owner.
Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or
foliage shall not be lower than ten feet above the roadway of a street or alley
nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk.
         (b)   Any owner or occupant who fails, refuses or neglects to trim
trees and shrubbery, as provided in this division (B), after receiving five
days’ notice from the city to do so, is guilty of an offense against the city.
In addition to any fine or punishment as an offense, the city may act to abate
the nuisance. Every day that the owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects
to trim such trees or shrubbery after the expiration of the five days’ notice
shall be a separate offense.
   (C)   Definition. The definition of STREETS, SIDEWALKS and PUBLIC WAYS shall
mean streets, sidewalks and public ways owned by the city. All references in §§
155.01 through
155.07 to streets, sidewalks and public ways shall be to city-owned streets,
city-owned sidewalks and city-owned public ways.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-1) (Ord. 2019-12, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.02 DISPLAY OR SALE OF GOODS AND MERCHANDISE.
   (A)   Prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful
for any person to display any goods, wares or merchandise for sale, or to sell
the same, on any street, alley or sidewalk owned by the city, or from parking
any vehicle thereon, in the corporate limits of the city. Each separate sale or
offer to sell in violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Sales from vehicles. Any vehicle parked on the streets, alleys or
sidewalks owned by the city for the purpose of making merchandise available for
sale by the methods prohibited by this section shall be promptly moved by the
driver upon order of the City Police Department, and if not promptly moved, the
same shall be towed from such location upon order of the Police Department, and
the driver or custodian of the vehicle shall also be deemed guilty of an
offense and subject to fine.
   (C)   Separate offenses. In each instance where an individual is guilty of
an offense under the provisions of this section, the person or company for whom
such individual is acting in the capacity of an agent or employee shall be
guilty of a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2) (Ord. 2019-12, passed 11-4-2019) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.03 PROJECTIONS INTO, OVERHANGING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   Prohibited generally; permit required when permitted. It is unlawful
for any person to erect or construct or cause to be erected or constructed any
cellar or basement way, stairway, door, awning post, canopy or any other kind
of structure projecting into, upon or over, and adjoining any street or
sidewalk within the city; except that the building official may, in his or her
discretion, authorize the same to be done, where the public health, safety and
necessity demand, by granting a permit therefor.
   (B)   Conditions of permit; nonliability of city. Upon the granting of a
permit under this section, conditions as to the erection of the structure
through, upon or over any street or sidewalk may be fixed by the city, and a
contract shall be entered into as to the maintenance of the structure and as an
indemnifying agreement secured, indemnifying and saving the city harmless from
any loss, costs or damage by reason of the structure projecting into, upon or
over, and adjoining any street or sidewalk within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.04 MUD AND WATER DRAINAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to wash or drain into any street, alley or
other public place in the city any water from his or her house or premises or
to allow any filth or water to escape from his or her premises upon any of the
places above mentioned or upon property contiguous thereto. No auto or other
vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city where the water, dirt or
other substances removed therefrom will drain into any street or sidewalk of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-4) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.05 HAZARDOUS SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Hazardous conditions generally. It is unlawful for the owner or
occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the
sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to
persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
   (B)   Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to allow any obstruction
of any kind to accumulate in the sidewalk in front of his or her premises. All
owners and occupants of property are required to keep their premises and the
sidewalks, gutters, streets and alleys adjacent thereto free from weeds, trash
and all obstructions and to remove such weeds, trash and obstructions from such
places.
   (C)   Refuse deposits. It is unlawful to deposit, throw or sweep into or
upon a street, alley, parking or sidewalk of the city any trash, weeds, tree
trimmings, dirt or any other refuse of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-5) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.06 PLAYING ON STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any sport, game or amusement or
to play in, on or across the main traveled portion of any sidewalk, street,
avenue or alley of the city except as may be authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-6) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.07 INJURY TO TREES AND SHRUBS.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or
alley in the city. This section shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care
and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-7) Penalty, see §
155.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 155.20 STREET CUTS.
   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to cut the pavement or
curb in or on any of the streets, sidewalks, avenues or alleys in the city for
the purpose of laying pipe or other connections for utilities, or to cut or
otherwise injure the pavement or curb on any of the streets, sidewalks, avenues
or alleys for any purpose whatsoever without a permit therefor as provided by
this section.
   (B)   Application for permit. Every person who desires to lay pipes or lines
for the purpose of making and preparing any connections to utilities which will
require the cutting of the pavement to make such connections shall make
application for and procure from the city a written permit to cut such pavement
or curb and make such installations for the proposed purpose or otherwise. No
person shall have any right or authority to construct or install any pipes or
lines or otherwise cut the pavement or curbs without first having secured such
permit.
   (C)   Permit fee. Any person desiring to cut the pavement or other hard
surface on any street or sidewalk in the city shall pay a fee for the permit.
The fee shall be in such amount as set by the City Council by motion or
resolution.
   (D)   Notification of completion of work. All permittees, when they have
completed the work for which such cut has been made, shall notify the city of
the completion of such work in order that the same may be inspected and
approved.
   (E)   Timely completion. Any permittee cutting pavement by virtue of a
permit as authorized herein shall perform the excavation or other work without
delay or interruption.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-1) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.21 CURB CUTS.
   (A)   Permit and compliance required. It is unlawful for any person to cut,
break, tear out or remove the curbing or any part thereof along the streets in
the city for any purpose except in accordance with this section. Any person
desiring to cut any curbing in the city shall first obtain a permit from the
city before doing so.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application for such permit shall be in
writing to the city and shall state the time and place that the applicant
desires to break the curbing. The application shall contain such other
information as is required by the city.
   (C)   Permit fee. A fee as set by the City Council by motion or resolution
shall be paid to the city prior to obtaining the permit required in this
section.
   (D)   Denial of permit. The city may, in its discretion, refuse to approve
any permit to cut any curbing along the streets of the city when the cutting of
the curbing shall constitute a traffic hazard, or interfere in any way with the
safety of the public in the use of the street or adjacent sidewalk, or in any
way deteriorate or damage the street or interfere with the use thereof by the
public.
   (E)   Restrictions. Only such portions of any curbing may be cut or removed
as, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, may be consistent with and
not detrimental to the general public welfare.
   (F)   Inspection. The removing of such curbing, the construction of the
driveway and all other parts of the work in connection therewith shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-2) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
155.01 through
155.07 is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99. Each day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-8)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
155.20 and
155.21 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-3)
CHAPTER 156: TREES
Section
Urban Forests Conservation and Management
   
156.01   Community background, need and vision
   
156.02   Mission and policy
   
156.03   Description
   
156.04   Definitions
   
156.05   Urban Forest Commission
   
156.06   Urban forest conservation and management plan
   
156.07   Wildlife sanctuary designation
   
156.08   Duties of city officials and employees
   
156.09   Management regulations for public lands
   
156.10   Protection regulations for publicly- and privately-owned trees and
shrubs
   
156.11   Conflicting provisions
 
   
156.99   Penalty
URBAN FORESTS CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
§ 156.01 COMMUNITY BACKGROUND, NEED AND VISION.
   (A)   Community background.
      (1)   The city is an environmental jewel in the semi-arid farmlands of
western Oklahoma. Built along Cordell Creek in the late 1800s, this small city,
with a population of about 2,900, is one of a few western Oklahoma
municipalities having an abundance of natural and community resources. Many of
its neighborhoods are nestled among native hardwood bottomlands along Cordell
Creek. Many well-maintained yards, public areas and native wildflower gardens
provide natural beauty and support a diverse wildlife community.
      (2)   Community forested areas and park lands largely help define a
community’s character. If a community is progressive enough to provide for the
total quality of life for its citizens, it will also foster economic and
personal growth. The evidence from nationwide surveys and studies shows that
investment by a community in park lands and public places is a necessary
element of a community’s program to attract and keep people. The reasons for
this phenomenon are many, but the basic reason is that park lands and public
areas help define a community’s character as follows.
         (a)   The vast majority of the American public use local parks and
recreation facilities. Parks and recreation use continues through the lives of
most people. Recreation participation declines with age, but park use does not.
People between the ages of 65 and 74 use local park lands more than any other
group older than the age of 15. People who do not use local park lands perceive
that they are beneficial to them and to the community as a whole.
         (b)   Open spaces and public areas contribute to the quality of life
for the residents of the area. They provide exercise, fitness, fun and
entertainment, learning, education and relaxation.
         (c)   Open spaces and public areas provide economic benefits to the
local community. The economy of the local area is enhanced because of the
affordability of the local park lands. Special park lands and recreation
facilities attract visitors who generate income to local business. Those who
are considering relocation usually look at all aspects of the target community,
including the living environment.
         (d)   Open spaces and public areas provide environmental benefits to
individuals and to the community as a whole. Local park lands and facilities
provide fresh air, the opportunity to commune with nature and a place to be
outdoors.
         (e)   Local recreation facilities provide benefits to the residents of
the area. Some of these benefits include having instructional classes, the joy
of recreating with others, a place to go, a workout area, exposure to the arts,
opportunity to do crafts and places to watch or participate in organized
sports.
         (f)   Local park lands and recreation facilities are associated with a
sense of community. Community benefits are considered by most Americans to be
more important than either individual or household benefits. About 75% of
Americans believe that the local recreation and parks services are worth $45 or
more to each member of their household each year. In a 1999 to 2002 national
survey on recreation and environment, 97% of the United States population 16
years of age and older participate in outdoor recreation. If facilities are not
available to enable residents to participate in desired activities, an obvious
dissatisfaction results.
         (g)   Nonusers believe local park lands and recreation facilities are
beneficial. These nonusers believe they keep youth off the streets and
occupied; provide a sense of community; give youth a place to recreate; provide
exercise, fitness and condition; provide a place to go for all ages; and are
good for people. Nonusers also believe that park lands provide aesthetic values
which they can enjoy by just driving by them and by knowing that they exist.
      (3)   The citizens of the city have an interest in using available
recreation venues. A 1995 to 1996 survey of city households revealed the
following information about their use of four city recreation facilities:
         (a)   Forty three percent used the Cordell Municipal Swimming Pool;
         (b)   Thirty three percent used the Cordell Senior Citizens Center;
         (c)   Sixty one percent used the city park lands; and
         (d)   Eight percent used the city lake.
      (4)   The city’s park lands and the Cordell Adams Lake conservation and
public use area, and the grounds surrounding the Cordell Municipal Swimming
Pool serve as environments for most of the city’s public forests. However, many
wooded areas exist on private property, and most trees are becoming old.
Therefore, the application of sound urban forest management and conservation
practices are necessary to ensure that the city maintains its natural beauty
and ecological diversity.
   (B)   Community needs.
      (1)   Out migration of the human population and businesses is perhaps the
most serious economic and cultural issues facing western Oklahoma. Since 1970,
the population of the city has decreased about 12%. With the loss of its people
came reduced revenues, depressed economies and the general dissipation of
living conditions. Therefore, the city needs to maximize the use of all of its
assets to turn the tide from out migration to positive, desirable human and
economic growth. Cordell woodlands, park lands and public areas are among the
city’s assets that have the potential for assisting to stimulate economic
revitalization.
      (2)   If the city’s future is to become a small city of human and
economic growth, it must create suitable economic and people environments.
People want and need trees and wooded areas, open places, parks and programs
that foster their personal growth and development. Younger people and retirees
will not relocate to areas that do not meet their expectations.
      (3)   In the case of the city, with its out migration of people and
businesses, improved public spaces are essential to rebuilding the area’s
population and economic vitality. Many of the city’s residents leave their
hometown for jobs and professions in other places. Older former residents of
retirement age do not return here because of the lack of recreation facilities.
      (4)   Therefore, the citizens of the city must initiate an aggressive
innovative strategy for the development and marketing of its park lands and
public places. The citizens of the city are fortunate to have beautiful
forested neighborhoods, parks and public places. However, ownership of parks
and public places does not guarantee that people will relocate here to raise
families and to retire. The following things must be available for a
community’s parks and public areas to yield the desired economic and population
growth results.
         (a)   Personal benefits. Families are interested in well-maintained
and modern parks and public places that promote family-oriented fun, wellness,
learning and connections with family and friends.
         (b)   Social benefits. In this day of increasing crime and
lawlessness, families desire to have a community where they are welcome. A
welcoming community means that new citizens can be involved in things of
interest to themselves. Their involvement is in an environment of safe family
places, a strong community and partnerships with members of the society.
         (c)   Environmental benefits. More than ever before, people choose
communities based on the quality of life, conservation, city identity and
education opportunities. The tendency of people today is, whenever possible, to
locate their families or to retire in areas that meet their needs and provide
job opportunities for them.
         (d)   Economic benefits. People nowadays are mobile and have
expectations for their communities that did not exist a few decades ago. Young
families and most retirees are mobile enough to select areas that welcome them.
In order to feel welcome, a community must promote its assets: productivity,
tourism, jobs and recreation benefits.
   (C)   Community vision.
      (1)   The city can attract new people and businesses in proportion to the
efforts it makes to provide for the personal, social, environmental and
economic benefits of its existing and new citizenry. Therefore, a reasonable
and attainable vision for the city is for it to become a desirable place for
families, retirees and businesses to live and locate because the city welcomes
them as evidenced by the city’s provision for personal, social, environmental
and economic growth and well-being of its existing and prospective citizens.
This vision is attainable to the extent that people of the city accept the
responsibility for working together to improve and enhance their city.
      (2)   The enactment of the spirit and letter of this chapter and the
urban forest management plan will make a significant contribution to attaining
the city’s vision of becoming a desirable place for families, retirees and
businesses to live and locate in the city because the city welcomes them as
evidenced by the city’s provision for opportunities for personal, social,
environmental and economic growth and well-being of its existing and
prospective citizens. As a result, ex-western Oklahoma citizens and others will
return home for retirement because they know that they are welcome as evidenced
by the area’s natural beauty, scope and quality of services, recreation
opportunities and businesses. Other people will relocate here because of the
quality of life, businesses will increase, the economy will flourish and local
government revenues will provide for infrastructure maintenance and
improvement.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-1) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.02 MISSION AND POLICY.
   (A)   Mission. The mission of the city urban forestry program is to promote
the planting, management and preservation of forest resources in the city
neighborhoods and public places to enhance the city’s environmental, social and
economic climate.
   (B)   City policy. The Mayor and City Council recognize the importance of
the city’s urban forests and woodlands to the quality of life within the city
and do declare it to be a policy of the city that the following apply.
      (1)   The city shall have an active city urban forest commission composed
of local individuals that have the expertise and interest in enhancing the
natural beauty, environmental diversity and human environment of the city’s
urban forests and woodlands.
      (2)   The city shall have as its goal the conservation and management of
the trees and forests and their environments on its public streets, alleyways,
park lands, public places and public easements to maintain and enhance the
natural beauty, environmental diversity and the human environment of the city
forests and woodlands.
      (3)   (a)   The city, in concert with the City Urban Forest Commission,
the State Department of Agriculture, the United States Department of
Agriculture other federal agencies, other state agencies, private grantors and
cooperators, local government and business interests and citizens of the city,
shall implement an urban forestry conservation and management program having
the following elements:
            1.   Survey of the urban forestry assets of the city;
            2.   Preparation of plans for the conservation, management and
development of these resources;
            3.   Conduct urban forest and tree selection, planting and care
seminars;
            4.   Manage and landscape the city’s urban public urban forests to
enhance environmental diversity, human environment and the natural beauty of
the city;
            5.   Protect public owned forests and trees from illegal
encroachment and destruction;
            6.   Protect private forests and trees from illegal encroachment
and destruction;
            7.   Properly manage all city street easements, alleyways, park
lands, public places and other public easements to reduce or eliminate public
hazards posed by unwise growth of trees and shrubs;
            8.   Enhance the public and private forest environments and public
understanding of the benefits of well-maintained urban forests through public
information and education programs; and
            9.   Landscape city property to enhance the natural beauty of the
city.
         (b)   The City Council, in consultation with the City Urban Forest
Commission, shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such rules,
regulations, use fees, use conditions and other requirements as it deems
necessary or expedient in connection with the conservation and management of
its urban forest resources and their public use.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-2) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.03 DESCRIPTION.
   All of the city’s urban forests and woodlands that are found in the city
limits are included in this chapter. These include, but are not limited to,
public utility easements, street easements, alleyways, park lands, public
places and other public easements. Also included in the regulatory sections of
this chapter are private forests and trees that may be subject to the
destruction or damage by the actions of other public or private interests, or
may pose a hazard or potential hazard to city electrical, water, wastewater,
airport, streets, parks, public places, alleyways and any other public
easements.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-3) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFIED TREE SERVICEPERSON. Those private tree service individuals and
organizations that have been certified by the New Cordell Urban Forestry
Commission as meeting the Urban Forestry Commission’s professional, safety and
accountability requirements for providing tree services within the city. All
other candidate tree servicepeople/businesses must apply for and receive a
permit from the city before they can perform tree services within the city.
   CITY. The City of New Cordell in Washita County, Oklahoma.
   CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangle formed by the curb lines of two
intersecting rights-of-way and a third line connecting a full view zone at
corners of streets, alleys and highways.
   CREW. One or more persons engaged in servicing trees at any one location,
whether residence or business.
   CUSTODIAN. A private property owner whose property is adjoined or infringe
upon by a city easement or alleyway. CUSTODIANS have the authority, in
consultation with the city and the New Cordell Urban Forestry Commission, to
maintain trees and shrubs located within their street and utility easements and
alleyways.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The city official who is in charge of the enforcement
of rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter.
   FORESTRY PROGRAM. A comprehensive annual plan, including maintenance,
inventory, new planting and budget, with projections for annual and long range
implementation.
   PERSON. A person, firm, association or corporation.
   PRIVATE TREES AND SHRUBS. All trees and shrubs located in or upon private
property.
   PUBLIC AREAS. Include all public parks and other lands owned, controlled or
leased by the city.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason of its
condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with a plant
disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is injurious to public
improvements or endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or
property.
   PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS. All trees and shrubs located or to be planted in or
upon public areas.
   SHRUB. A woody plant with more than one stem or trunk at the ground level.
   TO TOP A TREE. TOPPING is defined as a severe cutback of leaders and main
scaffold branches to stubs within the tree so as to remove the normal canopy
and disfigure the tree.
   TREE. A woody perennial plant that has a single trunk or stem.
   TREE SERVICE. Work performed on shade or ornamental trees including tree
removals and shade and ornamental tree trimming and cavity work.
   TREE SERVICEPERSON. Any person servicing trees other than one working on his
or her own property.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-4) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.05 URBAN FOREST COMMISSION.
   (A)   Appointment and purpose. The Mayor of the city, with the approval of a
majority of the City Council members present at a regularly scheduled public
meeting, shall appoint a four member City Urban Forest Commission. This
Commission shall be responsible to provide planning assistance and advice on
the conservation, management and public use of the city’s urban forest
resources.
   (B)   Composition and qualifications. The Urban Forest Commission shall be
composed of four voting members as follows: one member representing the local
United States Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resource Conservation Agency,
one member representing the County OSU Extension Service Office, one member
representing the city government and one member having farming, urban wildscape
or tree stewardship related education and/or experience. Each member of the
Urban Forestry Commission shall have a demonstrated interest, knowledge and
experience in the conservation and management of urban forests.
   (C)   Term and compensation. Each Commission member shall serve a five-year
term. Noncity employees shall serve without special compensation from the city.
   (D)   Organization. Members shall select a chair and vice chair at their
initial meeting. The Chair may appoint subcommittees. Meetings shall be at the
discretion of the Chair, except meetings must be convened at least quarterly
four times per year.
   (E)   Annual report. At least annually, the Commission Chair, or designee,
shall provide a report of activities and recommendations to the City Council at
one of its regularly scheduled public meetings.
   (F)   Commission regulated. All activities of the Urban Forest Commission
shall be governed by the provisions of §§
156.01 and
156.02.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-5) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-
16-2019) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.06 URBAN FOREST CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The Urban Forest Commission shall prepare a city urban forest conservation
and management plan. The Commission shall update the plan, from time to time,
as necessary to govern the management of the city’s urban forest assets. All
plans and plan modifications prepared by the Urban Forest Commission shall be
presented to the City Council for approval at one of its regularly scheduled
public meetings before the provisions of the plan or plan modification may be
implemented. This plan shall include, annually, a certification of individual
tree servicepeople and tree service firms meeting the requirements of this
chapter and the City Urban Forest Commission for performing tree service on
public and private property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-6) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.07 WILDLIFE SANCTUARY DESIGNATION.
   All of the forest and other terrestrial, wetland and aquatic ecosystems
within the city limits are classified as a wildlife sanctuary. Except as
permitted in this chapter and related provisions of this code, hunting and
trapping of wild mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians is prohibited in all
public or private lands, except by authorized local, county, state or federal
officials as required for protection of humans and their habitations and
natural resources. Recreational fishing, in compliance with the regulations of
the State Department of Wildlife Conservation and special City Council
regulations, is allowed in Cordell Creek and the Cordell Reservoir.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-7) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.08 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The City Administrator shall implement the provisions of this chapter
and coordinate urban forest planning and management activities and programs as
recommended by the City Urban Forestry Commission and approved by the City
Council.
   (B)   Other city employee responsibilities are:
      (1)   Code enforcement officer: is responsible for the enforcement of all
requirements promulgated under this chapter;
      (2)   City inspector: is responsible for applying the requirements
promulgated under this chapter to the city building code enforcement and
related construction permits;
      (3)   Parks manager, airport manager and street manager: in consultation
with the City Administrator, are responsible for applying the requirements of
this chapter to their management of public park lands and public easements;
      (4)   Street manager: is responsible for assisting the assigned city
staff to implement tree conservation and management measures on public streets
and public rights-of-way, including alleyways and street easements;
      (5)   Grant manager: is responsible for working with the assigned city
staff to identify grantor fundable tree management and conservation needs, and
seeking funding to satisfy these city forest needs;
      (6)   City Clerk: in consultation with the code enforcement officer and
the city inspector, is responsible for issuing permits and collecting permit
fees; and
      (7)   All other city employees: are responsible for complying with all
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-8) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.09 MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC LANDS.
   The following regulations are in effect for the conservation and management
of trees on city public lands. These include, but are not limited to, public
utility easements, street easements, alleyways, park lands, public places and
other public easements. Other federal, state and local government entities in
the city shall be encouraged to apply these principles to the management of
their trees.
   (A)   Preservation, management and removal of trees and shrubs.
      (1)   The City Administrator shall plant, trim, spray, preserve, renew
and remove public trees and shrubs or cause such work to be performed by the
city, its cooperators or contractors as may be necessary to ensure the public
safety, preserve the beauty of public areas, establish and maintain
environmental diversity and stability in its urban forests, mitigate tree or
animal disease outbreaks, remove noxious birdlife habitat and protect public
property, sewer lines, water lines, electrical lines, roadways, easements and
alleyways from damage or injury.
      (2)   The City Administrator may enter into agreements with custodians,
individuals, businesses, government agencies, not for profit organizations and
industry whereby they provide funding and/or services to plant, trim, spray,
preserve, renew, remove and conserve trees on public lands and easements to
ensure the public safety, preserve the beauty of public areas, establish and
maintain environmental diversity and stability in its urban forests, mitigate
tree or animal disease outbreaks, remove noxious birdlife habitat and protect
public property, sewer lines, water lines, electrical lines, roadways,
easements and alleyways from damage or injury.
   (B)   Managing trees and shrubs on easements, alleyways and public property.
The City Administrator, in consultation with the adjoining property owners
(custodians) and the City Urban Forestry Commission, shall ensure that all
trees and shrubs planted on city utility easements, alleyways, park lands and
public areas meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Generally, the trees on city property, alleyways and easements
shall be managed in accordance with general accepted tree care principles such
as those found in the International Society of Arboriculture “Best Management
Practices”.
      (2)   The city shall have the overall authority and responsibility for
ensuring that all trees and shrubs on city alleyways, easements and public park
lands are conserved and managed as specified in this division (B).
      (3)   Property owners within city alleyways and easements are custodians
of the trees and shrubs on the adjoining easements and alleyways. The city and
the City Urban Forestry Commission shall provide information and assistance
when necessary to these property owners (custodians) to assist them in the
selection and management of trees and shrubs on city easements and alleyways.
      (4)   No trees or shrubs shall be planted within 30 feet of any street
corner by either public agencies or private owners. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this division (B), no person shall maintain, plant or permit to
remain on any private or public premises situated at the intersection of two or
more streets or alleys in the city, any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth
which may obstruct the view of the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian
approaching such intersection. A clear sight triangle shall be maintained to a
minimum distance of 30 feet from the corner of two intersecting streets or
alleys.
      (5)   The owner of every lot or parcel of land in the city, including
private and public owners, upon which any trees, shrubs or plants are growing,
or upon which any obstruction has been placed, shall remove such trees, plants
or obstructions, or parts thereof, if they are so situated as to constitute a
traffic hazard by obstructing the view of any driver of any vehicle on the
streets of the city to the extent that the driver is unable to observe the
approach of other vehicles on streets and alleys and at intersections.
      (6)   The custodian of any premises abutting on any streets, public
utility easements, street easements, alleyways, park lands, public places and
other public easements shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing on the
property in such a manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct
free and convenient passage, sight and travel along the streets, sidewalks,
trailways, recreational sites and alleys. Such trees and shrubbery shall be
trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than ten feet
above the roadway of a street or alley nor lower than eight feet above the
sidewalk or trailway.
      (7)   Any custodian who fails, refuses or neglects to trim trees and
shrubbery from alleyways and easements as provided in this division (B), after
receiving five days’ written notice by the city to do so, is guilty of an
offense against the city. In addition to any fine or punishment for the
offense, the city may act to abate the nuisance. Every day that the owner or
occupant fails, refuses or neglects to trim such trees or shrubbery after the
expiration of the five days’ notice shall be a separate offense.
      (8)   The city, or its agents and contractors, may enter into public or
private property to trim trees and shrubs that pose a hazard to its electrical
service lines.
   (C)   Trimming and removal on easements, alleys and public property.
      (1)   The following species or cultivars of trees shall not be planted in
city public areas and easements by the city:
         (a)   American cottonwoods (Populus deltoides);
         (b)   American elm (Ulmus Americana);
         (c)   American sycamore (Platanus spp.);
         (d)   Tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima);
         (e)   Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila);
         (f)   Japanese elm (Ulmus davidiana var. japonica); and
         (g)   Mimosa tree (Albizia julibrissin).
      (2)   The size and genus, species and variety of trees and shrubs to be
planted on city easements and alleyways are a part of the city’s urban forestry
program. The local owners of the easements and alleyways (custodians) shall be
provided assistance and information necessary to plant trees having value for
natural beauty, hardiness and wildlife habitat, and for promoting the
ecological diversity of native hardwood bottomlands that were once prevalent in
the floodplains of western Oklahoma. However, after enactment of this chapter,
it shall be unlawful for any person to plant any restricted tree species or
cultivar in city easements or alleyways.
      (3)   The City Administrator, in consultation with city parks, street and
airport managers, and the City Urban Forestry Commission, shall prepare plans
for the reforestation of trees in city park lands and public properties. Trees
selected by the city for planting in its park lands and public places shall be
those trees that have value for natural beauty, hardiness, wildlife habitat and
usefulness in promoting the ecological diversity of native hardwood bottomlands
that were once prevalent in the floodplains of western Oklahoma.
      (4)   The City Administrator, in consultation with the adjoining property
owners (custodians), shall arrange for the removal and disposal of dead tree
limbs and dead, decrepit or diseased trees from public utility easements,
street easements, alleyways, park lands, public places and other city
easements.
   (D)   Commercial tree services.
      (1)   No person, for compensation, shall plant, prune, trim or remove any
tree or shrub from private property within the city limits without first
obtaining a permit from the city, or being certified by the City Urban Forestry
Commission.
      (2)   The basic professional tree care serviceperson principles that
shall be applied by the City Urban Forestry Commission in developing an annual
listing of certified tree care servicepeople that may perform tree services in
the city are as follows.
         (a)   Each applicant individual or business applying for accreditation
to perform tree services in the city shall demonstrate that he or she has the
practical training and experience in the care, pruning, removal and culture of
trees and shrubs. Certification by the Tree Care Industry Association is
preferred. However, this certification may be waived by the Urban Forestry
Commission if the applicant can demonstrate that he or she has comparable
responsible tree care knowledge and experience.
         (b)   Each applicant for certification or a city tree care permit
shall demonstrate that he or she will have a supervisor or foreperson meeting
the requirements of division (D)(2)(a) above in charge of each tree service
crew. Each crew of workers servicing trees shall have a person in charge who
shall be designated the foreperson who shall be properly licensed or certified
as a tree serviceperson. A foreperson shall supervise and direct the work of
his or her crew and shall be responsible for any violation or infraction of the
provisions of this chapter committed by him or her or any member of his or her
crew.
         (c)   The applicant is committed to obey all ordinances and rules and
regulations relative to the purpose for which the tree care accreditation or a
tree care permit is granted.
         (d)   The applicant is committed to obtain the necessary permission
and coordination from the city inspector and the city code enforcement officer
where it becomes necessary to erect barriers to prevent accidents or dangers in
consequence to the granting of the permit.
         (e)   The applicant agrees to hold the city and the City Urban
Forestry Commission harmless in case of any accident or on account of any
liability arising from the certification or permit.
         (f)   Every applicant for accreditation or permit under this division
(D) shall, before obtaining a certification by the Urban Forestry Commission or
a city tree service permit or any renewal of a certification or permit, be
required to maintain, at all times, in a stock or mutual casualty company
authorized to do business in the state; workers’ compensation insurance, if
required by law; and public liability insurance coverage of not less than
$25,000. The applicant shall be required to file proof with the City Clerk of a
certificate signed by a qualified agent of the stock or mutual casualty
insurance company stating that a policy has been issued to the applicant for:
employee liability insurance or workers’ compensation insurance, the minimum
limits of each, the policy number or numbers, the name of the company, the
effective date of such policies and the expiration date of such policies,
together with a statement and a copy of an endorsement placed on such policy or
policies, requiring ten days’ written notice to the City Clerk if it becomes
necessary to cancel the policy or policies for any reason. If the policy or
policies are canceled for any reason, the City Clerk shall revoke the permit or
authorization.
         (g)   Urban Forestry Commission authorizations and city tree service
permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and may be
annually renewed upon proof of continuing compliance with authorization and
permit requirements as established in this chapter.
      (3)   Any person not certified by the City Urban Forestry Commission
desiring to obtain such tree service permit shall make application in the
office of the City Clerk. Permits are free. The requirements for the issuing
annual commercial tree service permits are the same as that those outlined in
division (D)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-9) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.10 PROTECTION REGULATIONS FOR PUBLICLY- AND PRIVATELY-OWNED TREES AND
SHRUBS.
   (A)   Generally, the trees on city property, alleyways and easements shall
be managed in accordance with generally accepted tree care principles such as
those found in the International Society of Arboriculture “Best Management
Practices”.
   (B)   No person shall, without the consent of the owner of a publicly-owned
or privately-owned tree or shrub, do or cause to be done by others, any of the
following acts relating to trees or shrubs:
      (1)   Secure, fasten or run any rope, sign, unprotected electrical
installation or other device or material to, around or through a tree or shrub;
      (2)   Break, injure, mutilate, deface, cut, kill or destroy any tree or
shrub or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub;
      (3)   Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil, pesticide or any other
injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about any tree or
shrub, or place cement or other solid substance around the base of the same;
      (4)   Excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench or lay any drive within a
radius of four feet from any tree or shrub except those by public utilities
authorized by the city inspector under an annual agreement and/or an excavation
permit;
      (5)   Erect, alter, repair, raze or excavate without placing suitable
guards as approved by the city inspector around all public and private trees or
shrubs which may be injured by such operations;
      (6)   Remove any guard, stake or other device or material intended for
the protection of a public or private tree or shrub, or to close or obstruct
any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit
access or air, water and fertilizer;
      (7)   When a permit is obtained from the city to move over height and
over width structures or objects, the City Administrator or the city inspector
will assist in advising the carrier regarding trees and shrubs on routes. Any
damage done to trees and shrubs by the carrier en route, either publicly- or
privately-owned, shall be the liability of the carrier; and
      (8)   To top any tree. Trees damaged by storms when proper pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from the provisions of this division
(B)(8) by the City Administrator or the city inspector.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-10) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.11 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   Wherever the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with other
provisions of this chapter, these requirements shall supersede the requirements
of those other provisions.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-12) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 8-7-11) (Ord. 2007-06, passed 11-5-2007)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Title
   
157.002   Purpose
   
157.003   Scope
   
157.004   Minimum requirements; conflicting provisions
   
157.005   Rules of ward construction
   
157.006   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
157.020   Enforcement official
   
157.021   Board of Adjustment
   
157.022   Zoning clearance permit
   
157.023   Amendments
Zoning Districts and Maps
   
157.035   Districts established
   
157.036   Zoning map
   
157.037   Determination of district boundaries
   
157.038   Zoning of annexed land
General Zoning Regulations
   
157.050   Compliance with provisions; exceptions
   
157.051   Interpretation of provisions
   
157.052   Division of lots
   
157.053   Street frontage required
   
157.054   Yard encroachments
   
157.055   Screening walls and fences
   
157.056   Sewer service required
   
157.057   Trailers and commercial vehicles
   
157.058   Junk or salvage yards unlawful within the city limits
A-G General Agricultural District
   
157.070   Purposes
   
157.071   Permitted uses
   
157.072   Lot and height requirements
   
157.073   Signs
R-S Single-Family Residential District
   
157.085   Description, purpose and intent
   
157.086   Permitted uses
   
157.087   Permitted uses subject to additional requirements
   
157.088   Lot and height requirements
   
157.089   Signs and billboards
R-G General Residential District
   
157.100   Purposes
   
157.101   Permitted uses
   
157.102   Permitted uses subject to additional requirements
   
157.103   Lot and height restrictions
   
157.104   Signs and billboards
   
157.105   Mobile home parks
C-C Convenience Commercial District
   
157.120   Intent
   
157.121   Permitted uses
   
157.122   Lot and height requirements
   
157.123   Business signs
C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District
   
157.135   Intent
   
157.136   Permitted uses
   
157.137   Lot and height requirements
   
157.138   Business signs
C-G General Commercial District
   
157.150   Intent
   
157.151   Permitted uses
   
157.152   Lot and height requirements
   
157.153   Signs and billboards
I-L Light Industrial District
   
157.165   Purpose
   
157.166   Permitted uses
   
157.167   Lot and height requirements
   
157.168   Signs and billboards
   
157.169   Standards
I-H Heavy Industrial District
   
157.180   Purpose and intent
   
157.181   Permitted uses
   
157.182   Lot requirements
   
157.183   Signs and billboards
   
157.184   Standards
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
157.195   Intent and application
   
157.196   General parking requirements
   
157.197   Number of spaces required
Nonconformities
   
157.210   Preamble
   
157.211   Nonconforming lots of record
   
157.212   Nonconforming structures
   
157.213   Nonconforming uses of structures
   
157.214   Nonconforming uses of land
   
157.215   Changes in nonconformities
 
   
157.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the
“Zoning Regulations of the City of New Cordell, Oklahoma”.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-1)
§ 157.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community; lessening congestion in the
streets; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate
light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue
concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the community; and promoting the development of the community
in accordance with a comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-2)
§ 157.003 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-3)
§ 157.004 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. As concerns interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
   (B)   Conflicting provisions. Where this chapter impose a greater
restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other
rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
(Prior Code, § 11-1-4)
§ 157.005 RULES OF WARD CONSTRUCTION.
   Terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in §
157.006. Words used in the presenttense include the future; the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall mean
as well the word “structure”; the word “used” shall include “arranged”,
“designed”, “constructed”, “altered”, “converted”, “rented”, “leased” or
“intended to be used”; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory,
except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-1)
§ 157.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure customarily incidental,
appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the
principal use of land and which is located upon the same lot therewith.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes including farming,
dairying, pasturage, horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry and the
necessary accessory use for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided,
however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to
that of normal agricultural activities; and provided further that the above
uses shall not include the commercial feeding of swine or other animals,
stockyards or commercial feedlots for cattle.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use not more than 30 feet
wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used
for the display, sales or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in
operable condition and where no repair work is done.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision services, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle
steam cleaning.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental replacement of parts and motor service
to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons’ capacity.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OR FILLING STATION. Any area used for retail sale
of gasoline or oil fuels or automobile accessories, and incidental services,
including facilities for lubricating and washing and cleaning, but not
including, painting, major repair or the sale of butane or propane fuels.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH or AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A building or structure or chain
conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners and other mechanical devices used primarily
for the purpose of washing motor vehicles.
   BLOCK. In describing the boundaries of a district, the word BLOCK refers to
the legal description. In all other cases, the word BLOCK refers to the
property abutting on one side of the street between two intersecting streets or
between an intersecting street and a railroad right-of-way or between an
intersecting street and a watercourse.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board of Adjustment of the city, also referred to
as the BOARD.
   BOARDING HOUSE and ROOMING HOUSE. Where meals or lodging are provided for
persons other than the family or their relatives and excluding facilities for
transient persons, such as hotels, motels, inns and other such facilities.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or
property.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See definition of ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average line of the highest
and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the
highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or
the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   BUILDING LINE. A line established beyond which no part of a building shall
project, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building or buildings in which the principal use of
the building site is conducted. In any residential district, any dwelling shall
be deemed to be the PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the building site.
   BULLETIN BOARD. Any sign announcing the activities of an educational,
religious, institutional or similar use.
   CEMETERY. The land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human
dead and dedicated for cemetery purpose.
   CHILDCARE CENTER. Any place, home or institution which receives three or
more children under the age of 16 years for care apart from their natural
parents, legal guardians or custodians, and received for regular periods of
time for compensation; provided, however, this definition shall not include
public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of
this state, custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or
marriage within the third degree to the custodial person or churches or other
religious or public institutions caring for children within their institutional
building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or
meetings or classes and other church activities.
   CITY COUNCIL. The official governing body of the City of New Cordell.
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission, as established by
the statutes hereinbefore cited, also referred to as PLANNING COMMISSION. The
City Planning Commission shall also be the zoning commission for the city.
   CLINIC. A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing,
infirm and injured persons and those in need of surgical or medical attention
but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept overnight on
the premises.
   CLUB. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying
regular dues and organized for some common purpose, but not including a group
organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a
commercial enterprise.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The official city plan of the city; also refers to the
specific document, “Comprehensive Plan, New Cordell, Oklahoma”.
   COVERAGE. The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including
the area covered by all overhanging roofs.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence of
one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer coach, mobile
home, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units and designed for or used by three or more families; also
includes the word APARTMENTS.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing one dwelling unit and
designed for or used exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling units and designed
for or used exclusively by two families; also includes the word DUPLEX.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a
habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities for not more
than one family living independently of any other family.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories
thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
   FAMILY. A person living alone or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit, using a single
facility in a dwelling unit for culinary purposes, as distinguished from a
group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel, motel, fraternity house
or sorority house.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerlines of walls separating two buildings.
   FRONTAGE. The linear measurement of a lot boundary which is abutting a
street.
   GARAGE APARTMENT. A dwelling for one family erected as part of a private
garage.
   GARAGE, PARKING. Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of
four or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is
incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities
are not provided.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or a portion of the principal
building used or intended for use by the occupants of the premises for storage
of passenger vehicles or trailers.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. The structure or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repairing or refinishing of any
vehicles.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles.
   HEIGHT. The vertical measurement of any structure on any parcel of land
measured from the average elevation of the lot or parcel to the uppermost point
of the structure.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a
dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which
is conducted entirely within the main or accessory building; provided that no
trading and merchandising is carried on and in connection with which there is
no display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one nonilluminated
nameplate, not more than two square feet in area, attached to the main or
accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is
customarily used in purely domestic or household purposes. A tearoom,
restaurant, rest home, clinic, barbershop, beauty parlor, doctor’s or dentist’s
office, childcare center, tourist home, cabinet shop, metal shop, lawn mower
repair or auto repair garage shall not be deemed a HOME OCCUPATION.
   HOSPITAL. See definition of MEDICAL FACILITIES.
   HOTEL. A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six
or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged, with or without
meals, for compensation, but not including trailer parks or camps, hospitals,
asylums, orphanages or buildings where persons are housed under restraint.
   INDUSTRY. Storage, repair, manufacture, preparation or treatment of any
article, substance or commodity for commercial use.
   INSTITUTIONAL USES. Those uses organized, established, used or intended to
be used for the promotion of a public, religious, educational, charitable,
cultural, social or philanthropic activity and normally operated on a nonprofit
basis.
   JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvage materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, bailed, packed, disassembled or handled, including
all wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards
for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and
equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawnshops and
establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and
household equipment, used cars in operable condition or salvage material
incidental to manufacturing operations.
   KENNEL. Includes any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or
cats. KENNEL includes any place where more than one litter of puppies or
kittens, born to different female dogs or cats, are kept on any lot or premises
or kept in any structure whether or not for a business purpose. KENNEL also
includes any place where more than ten dogs, cats or combination of dogs and
cats are kept on any lot or premises or kept in any structure whether or not
for a business purpose.
   LOADING SPACE. A space on the same lot as the principal use, of at least ten
feet in width and 30 feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least
14 feet, designated for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOT. A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such
open spaces as required by this chapter, and having access on a public street.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting on a
street; provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides
is less than 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. Any boundary of a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where
the lot abuts more than one street, the owner may select the FRONT LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most
nearly parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT, WEDGE SHAPED. A lot situated so that the front is either wider or
narrower than the rear of the lot.
   LOTS OF RECORD. A separate and distinct parcel designated on a legally
recorded subdivision plat or a legally recorded deed filed in the records of
the county.
   MEAN LOT ELEVATION. The average elevation of a lot.
   MEDICAL FACILITIES.
      (1)   CONVALESCENT HOME. Also a nursing home; a rest home; or a home for
the aged, recuperating, chronically ill or incurable persons, in which two or
more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with
food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics
or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of
disease or injury.
      (2)   DENTAL OR DOCTOR’S OFFICE. The same as “dental or medical clinic”,
defined herein, including the various dental and medical specialties.
      (3)   DENTAL OR MEDICAL CLINIC. A building used for the examination and
treatment of the physically ill; provided that no facilities are provided for
patients remaining overnight except under emergency conditions and except as
provided in this code.
      (4)   HOSPITAL. An institution providing physical and mental health
services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or
injured, and including related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices
which are an integral part of the facilities.
      (5)   NURSING, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOMES. See definition of MEDICAL
FACILITIES: CONVALESCENT HOME.
      (6)   PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER. A facility primarily utilized by a health
unit for providing health services, including related facilities.
   MOBILE HOME. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for
transportation, after fabrication, on streets or highways, on its own wheels or
on flatbeds or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be
occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary or permanent foundations and connection to utilities.
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A portion of a mobile home park allocated to the exclusive
use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
planned and improved for placement of mobile homes to be occupied as
residences.
   MOTEL. An area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be
used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient persons.
   OPEN SPACE. An area included in any side, rear or front yard, or any other
unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for
the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches.
   PARCEL. See definition of LOT.
   PARKING SPACE. A permanently surfaced area of not less than 200 square feet,
either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access
drives, for the parking of motor vehicles.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. See definition of CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   ROOMING HOUSE. See definition of BOARDING HOUSE and ROOMING HOUSE.
   SIGN. Any word, lettering, part of letters, figures, numerals, phrases,
sentences, emblems, devices, designs, pictures, trade names or trademarks by
which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a
firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a service, a
commodity or a product which is visible from any public street or right-of-way
and designed to attract attention. “For Sale” and “For Rent” shall be deemed
SIGNS within the meaning of this definition, but the term SIGN shall not
include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other
political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event used for a public purpose
in the public interest.
   SIGN, DISPLAY SURFACE AREA. The net geometric area of the surface of the
sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated,
including the outward extremities of all letters, figures, characters and
delineations; provided that only one face of a double faced sign shall be
included in the computation of DISPLAY SURFACE AREA.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or
designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign erected on the face or outside wall of a building
which projects out at any angle therefrom.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign of temporary nature used to advertise the premises
for sale, rent or lease.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREET. A public right-of-way more than 30 feet in width which provides the
primary public means of access to abutting property and used primarily for
vehicular circulation.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. Any street designated on the thoroughfare plan as an
arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, major street and the like.
   STREET, MINOR. Any street not designated on the thoroughfare plan as an
arterial.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the structural members of a building,
such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location
on the ground (not including sidewalks, driveways and similar improvement
areas).
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of the comprehensive plan referring to
transportation development goals, principles and standards; also includes use
of the words “major street plan” and “trafficways plan”.
   TRAILER. A portable or mobile unit, other than a mobile home, used or
designed to carry or transport material or animals.
   YARD. A required space on a lot unobstructed except as expressly permitted.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of a lot from side lot
line to side lot line abutting on a street, into which a building may not
protrude.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured from side lot
line to side lot line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from front yard to the rear yard abutting the
side lot line, into which no building may protrude.
(Prior Code, § 11-2-2)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 157.020 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this chapter. If
the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter
are being violated, he or she shall notify, in writing, the persons responsible
for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other action as is
authorized by law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of said
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-1)
§ 157.021 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   There is created within and for the city a board of adjustment with the
powers and duties and membership as provided by state law and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-2) (Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-16-2019)
§ 157.022 ZONING CLEARANCE PERMIT.
   (A)   Definition. The “zoning clearance permit” is a permit issued by the
Zoning Administrator which states that a particular development meets all of
the requirements of this chapter. It is not a building permit and does not
authorize construction; it certifies that the land or structure is in
conformance with the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Permit required. No building or other structure shall be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered or repaired in such a manner as to prolong the
life of the building, nor shall the use of any land or building or other
structure be changed, without a zoning clearance permit being issued
authorizing such construction, alteration, repair or use changes as being in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No building permit shall be
issued for any construction not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit.
   (C)   Application for permit; grant or denial.
      (1)   An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator by the owner or proposed occupant of the building or land
to be occupied or used, and the application shall state the location and legal
description of the property and set out in detail the character and nature of
the use to be conducted thereon. Within a reasonable time frame set by policy,
the Zoning Administrator shall grant or deny the zoning clearance permit in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
      (2)   All applications for zoning clearance permits shall be accompanied
by a plan, on suitable paper, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the size and location of the building to be erected and/or such
other information as may be necessary to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter.
   (D)   Permit fee. Zoning clearance permits shall not be issued until a fee
as set by the City Council shall have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.023 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Planning Commission recommendation required. The regulations,
restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed and the districts created
may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed
by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the Planning Commission, after
notice and public hearing, files with the City Council a report and
recommendation on the proposed change.
   (B)   Application for amendment; fee. An owner or his or her duly authorized
agent or representative may make application for the amendment of the zoning
restrictions applicable to his or her property by filing with the Planning
Commission a written application in such form and content as the Planning
Commission may, by resolution, establish. An application for amendment shall be
accompanied by the payment of the fee set by Council by motion or resolution.
Costs of notice and posting shall be billed to the applicant.
   (C)   Notices and public hearing. Upon receipt of an application, the
Planning Commission shall set a date for public hearing not less than 20 days
nor more than 60 days from the date of filing. Fifteen days’ notice of the
public hearing shall be given by the Planning Commission by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. Additional notice shall be given
by the posting of a sign or signs on the property.
   (D)   Planning Commission action.
      (1)   After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote
to:
         (a)   Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved
as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or
         (b)   Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied.
      (2)   An application recommended for approval or approval subject to
modification shall be transmitted to the City Council with the report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission within 15 days from the date of
Planning Commission action; and
      (3)   An application recommended for denial shall not be considered
further unless the applicant, within 15 days from the date of the Planning
Commission action, files a written request with the City Council for a hearing.
A fee as set by the City Council shall accompany the request for a hearing
before the city. Upon notice of such request, the Planning Commission shall
forthwith transmit the application and its report and recommendation to the
City Council.
   (E)   City Council action. The City Council shall hold a hearing on each
application regularly transmitted, or which has been transmitted pursuant to an
appeal as provided in division (D)(3) above. The City Council shall approve the
application as submitted and recommended by the Planning Commission, or approve
the application subject to modification, or deny the application, or return the
application to the City Planning Commission for further study.
   (F)   Protests. If a written protest against an amendment, change or repeal
of this chapter or any part thereof is presented, duly signed and acknowledged
by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting the
territory included in such proposed change or separated therefrom only by an
alley or street, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable
vote of three-fourths of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-4)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
§ 157.035 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   For the purpose of this chapter and the promotion of public health, safety
and general welfare of the community, the following districts are established
for the city:
   (A)   A-G General Agricultural District;
   (B)   R-S Single-Family Residential District;
   (C)   R-G General Residential District;
   (D)   C-C Convenience Commercial District;
   (E)   C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District;
   (F)   C-G General Commercial District;
   (G)   I-L Light Industrial District; and
   (H)   I-H Heavy Industrial District.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-1)
§ 157.036 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be
established by ordinance and shall be delineated and shown on a map entitled
“Zoning Map of the City of New Cordell, Oklahoma”, and the zoning map is
incorporated as a part of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to maintain an up to
date official “Zoning Map of the City of New Cordell, Oklahoma”, including all
amendments directly adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-2)
§ 157.037 DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of a zoning district shall extend to a centerline of abutting
streets, regardless of the legal description used in establishing such
districts. In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the Planning Commission, upon written
application or upon its own motion, shall recommend the location of such
boundaries to the Board of Adjustment, and the Board of Adjustment shall make
the final determination.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-3)
§ 157.038 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
   Territory annexed to the corporate limits of the city subsequent to the
effective date hereof shall immediately be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and shall be deemed to be designated as A-G General Agricultural
District until altered or reclassified in the manner provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 11-4-4)
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 157.050 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No land, building, structure or improvement shall be used and no building,
structure or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered,
enlarged or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or
maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use,
height, area, coverage, yard, space and other requirements established in the
district in which such land, building, structure or improvement is located, and
such use is authorized, except as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-1) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.051 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district
permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to
the conditions set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district,
unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   It is intended that this chapter be interpreted as not permitting a
dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or
intended to be used primarily for nonresidential purposes; except that one
accessory residential unit may be provided for a night guard, motel manager or
similar purpose where essential to the main use of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-2)
§ 157.052 DIVISION OF LOTS.
   An improved lot shall not hereafter be divided into two or more lots unless
all lots resulting from such division comply with all the applicable yard,
space, area, parking and loading regulations of the zoning district in which
located.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.053 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.
   No principal building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not
abut a public dedicated street.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-4) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.054 YARD ENCROACHMENTS.
   No building, structure or improvement shall be permitted to encroach upon
required yard spaces set forth in the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that surfaced parking facilities, signs, fences and gasoline pumping
service units may be permitted to occupy required yard space unless otherwise
prohibited in those districts permitting such improvements; and provided that
no inoperative vehicle may be stored in the front yard of a lot in a
residential district.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-5) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.055 SCREENING WALLS AND FENCES.
   (A)   Specifications. When the provisions of this chapter require the
construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation and
subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence shall:
      (1)   Be constructed, designed and arrange to provide visual separation
of uses, irrespective of vegetation;
      (2)   Not be less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height; and
      (3)   Be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior.
   (B)   Maintenance required. The screening wall or fence shall be maintained
by the owner of the zoning lot containing the use requiring the construction of
the screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the Zoning Administrator
shall constitute an offense hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-6) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.056 SEWER SERVICE REQUIRED.
   No structure or use in any district shall be erected or commenced which does
not have a connection to the public sewer system, unless and until the County
Public Health Officer certifies that a septic tank or any substitute disposal
system can be installed and operated effectively. As a basis for making his or
her decision, the Public Health Officer may require such percolation tests as
he or she deems to be necessary. Such tests are to be made at the expense of
the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-7) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.057 TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Storage and parking in residential districts. Commercial vehicles and
trailers of all types, including travel, camping and hauling, and mobile homes
shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot
in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions.
      (1)   No more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and
one-half tons’ rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall be
permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling
explosives, gasoline or liquified petroleum products be permitted.
      (2)   No more than two camping or travel trailers or hauling trailers per
family living on the premises shall be permitted, and the trailer shall not
exceed 24 feet in length or eight feet in width; and further provided that the
trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is
located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall
not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored
in any area within the incorporated limits except as follows:
         (a)   A camping or travel trailer may be occupied if it is in a mobile
home park authorized under the ordinances of the city, except as provided in
division (B) below; or
         (b)   A travel trailer may be occupied for a period of up to seven
days but only with a permit from the city. However, any permitted travel
trailer shall not obstruct travel or the view of safe travel on any public
roadway.
   (B)   Display in commercial and industrial districts. Commercial vehicles
and trailers of all types may be displayed in such commercial districts
allowing sales of the vehicles or in such industrial districts allowing their
manufacture; provided, however, the vehicles may not be used for dwelling
purposes, either temporarily or permanently, except in a mobile home park
authorized under the ordinances of the city or as otherwise allowed in this
section.
   (C)   Grandfather clause. Camping or travel trailers parked and occupied as
of the effective date of this section may remain occupied and in their present
location unless and until such time as they are moved or substantially altered.
If a camping or travel trailer is moved or substantially altered this clause
will have no further force or effect and the camping or travel trailer shall be
subject to this section. SUBSTANTIALLY ALTERED shall mean such things as, but
not limited to, removal of skirting that had been attached, wheels and tires
attached to the axles that had been removed, damage sustained from wind and
other forms of storm damage and/or the location on the property changed in any
way.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-8) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 2-19-2019) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.058 JUNK OR SALVAGE YARDS UNLAWFUL WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish,
maintain or operate within the corporate limits of the city any automobile
salvage, junk or wrecking establishment.
(Prior Code, § 11-5-9) (Ord. 2018-02, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see §
157.999
A-G GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 157.070 PURPOSES.
   The A-G General Agricultural District is established for several purposes:
   (A)   To provide for the continued use of land for predominantly
agricultural purposes;
   (B)   To preserve undeveloped areas until they can feasibly be developed to
urban standards and with adequate public safeguards of health, safety and the
like; and
   (C)   To restrict development in areas subject to severe inundation until
such time as it can be shown that these areas are no longer subject to
flooding.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-1)
§ 157.071 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the A-G General Agricultural District, the following uses are
permitted:
   (A)   “Agriculture”, as defined in §
157.006;
   (B)   Churches and temples;
   (C)   Elementary schools, high schools, colleges; public or private;
   (D)   Golf courses, but not including golf driving ranges, pitch and putt
courses or miniature golf courses;
   (E)   Municipal or community recreation centers;
   (F)   Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit;
   (G)   Police or fire stations;
   (H)   Public buildings or buildings operated in the public interest by a not
for profit corporation, including art galleries, post offices, libraries or
museums;
   (I)   Public or not for profit auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, armories or
sanatoriums;
   (J)   Public or private hospitals or sanatoriums;
   (K)   Public utility and service uses, including electric substations, gas
regulator stations, electric, gas, telegraph, telephone and water transmission
metering and distribution equipment and structures, microwave relay towers,
water reservoirs or pumping stations and other similar facilities;
   (L)   Single-family dwellings;
   (M)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes only and not
for dwelling purposes, nor for a period that exceeds the completion of
construction; and
   (N)   Accessory buildings or uses incidental to the foregoing principal
uses.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-2)
§ 157.072 LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   All lots and improvements within the A-G District shall meet the following
requirements.
   (A)   All lots shall not be less than five acres of land, and not more than
one principal building shall be placed on any one lot.
   (B)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 330 feet.
   (C)   Not more than 2% of the lot area shall be covered with improvements.
Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this division
(C).
   (D)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot.
   (E)   All structures shall have not less than a 50-foot front yard setback.
   (F)   All principal structures shall have not less than a 30-foot side yard
setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not less than ten feet.
   (G)   All principal structures shall have not less than a 50-foot rear yard
setback. Accessory buildings may have a rear yard of not less than ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.073 SIGNS.
   No signs, posters, bulletin boards or other similar displays shall be
permitted in the A-G District except as follows.
   (A)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an
educational, religious, institutional or similar use requiring an announcement
of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in
surface area nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by
constant light.
   (B)   One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a
single-family subdivision or permitted nonresidential use. The sign shall not
exceed 12 square feet in surface area nor 12 feet in height, and illumination,
if any, shall be by constant light.
   (C)   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. The sign shall
not exceed 80 square feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
(Prior Code, § 11-6-4) Penalty, see §
157.999
R-S SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 157.085 DESCRIPTION, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The R-S Single-Family Residential District is established as a district in
which the use of land is for single-family dwellings, except as noted. It is
the purpose and intent of this district to promote the development of and the
continued use of the land for single-family dwellings and to prohibit
commercial and industrial use or any other use which would substantially
interfere with the development or continuation of single-family dwellings in
this district. The intent is to further discourage any use in this district
which would generate traffic or create congestion on neighborhood streets other
than the normal traffic which serves the residents in the area. This district
further encourages only those uses which, because of character or size, would
not create additional requirements and costs for public services in excess of
requirements and costs for single-family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 11-7A-1)
§ 157.086 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the R-S Single-Family Residential District, the following uses are
permitted:
   (A)   Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building, subject
to the requirements of §
157.088(G);
   (B)   Agricultural uses of the garden type that are not intended for
commercial purposes;
   (C)   Public park or playground;
   (D)   Public schools and private schools where the curriculum is similar in
nature and preparation of coursework to the public schools; and
   (E)   Single-family detached dwellings and duplexes, subject to the
requirements of §
157.088.
(Prior Code, § 11-7A-2) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-21-2015)
§ 157.087 PERMITTED USES SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment after a
public hearing; provided they meet the requirements noted for each use in
addition to applicable area regulations:
   (A)   Churches; a minimum lot size of one acre and arterial street frontage
as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
   (B)   Golf course, private or public, or country club; provided that the
chief activity is for recreational purposes, and any commercial activity is
accessory or incidental thereto;
   (C)   Home occupation; provided that it is in keeping with the meaning of
“home occupation” in §
157.006;
   (D)   Junior high or senior high schools; provided that they have arterial
street frontage as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
   (E)   Library; provided it has arterial street frontage as shown on the
thoroughfare plan.
   (F)   Parking lots; provided they are within 200 feet of a commercial or
industrial district;
   (G)   Plant nursery; provided that no building or structure is maintained in
connection therewith and no retailing of any material is carried on upon the
premises; and
   (H)   Temporary structures which are incidental to the construction of the
main building and will be removed when the main structure is completed.
(Prior Code, § 11-7A-3) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-21-2015)
§ 157.088 LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All lots shall have not less than 7,200 square feet of lot area.
   (B)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 60 feet.
   (C)   Not more than 30% of the lot area shall be covered with improvements.
Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this division
(C).
   (D)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.
   (E)   All structures shall have not less than a 25-foot front yard setback.
   (F)   (1)   For a single-family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of
the side yard shall be five feet for interior lot lines and ten feet for the
side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot.
      (2)   For buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side
yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than ten feet.
      (3)   For a principal building other than a single-family dwelling, the
minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of the
building, but in no case less than 15 feet.
   (G)   A rear yard of 20% of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the
principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in
the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that no accessory building
shall be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line, shall not have
sidewalls greater than ten feet in height and shall occupy no more than 35% of
the rear yard or 750 square feet, whichever is greater.
(Prior Code, § 11-7A-4) (Ord. 2015-07, passed 9-21-2015) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.089 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   No signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards or other similar display
shall be permitted in the R-S District except as follows.
   (A)   A temporary bulletin board or sign not exceeding 12 square feet in
area pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which
board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises is leased, hired or
sold.
   (B)   One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an
educational, religious, institutional or similar use requiring announcement of
its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface
area nor 15 feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant
light.
   (C)   Official public notices may be erected on affected property.
   (D)   One nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area and
not containing lettering other than the name of the owner or occupants or name
or address of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 11-7A-5) Penalty, see §
157.999
R-G GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 157.100 PURPOSES.
   The R-G General Residential District is intended to provide for both low and
high population density. It is established as a district in which the principal
uses of the land are for multi-family dwellings and similar high density
residential development. The intent is to encourage the development and
continued use of land for multi-family dwellings and to prohibit commercial and
industrial uses or any other use which would substantially interfere with the
development or continuation of multi-family dwellings in the district. It is
further intended to discourage any use which would generate traffic to create
congestion on the neighborhood streets other than the normal traffic which
serves the multi-family dwellings or similar residential uses in this district
and discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create
additional requirements and costs for public services which would be in excess
of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for multi-
family or other similar residential uses.
(Prior Code, § 11-7B-1)
§ 157.101 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the R-G General Residential District, the following uses are
permitted:
   (A)   Any use permitted in §
157.086 for the R-S Single-Family Residential District;
   (B)   Duplex;
   (C)   Multi-family dwelling; and
   (D)   Rooming or boarding house.
(Prior Code, § 11-7B-2)
§ 157.102 PERMITTED USES SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment after public
hearing; provided they meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to
applicable area regulations:
   (A)   Any uses permitted subject to additional requirements in §
157.087 for the R-S Single-family Residential District;
   (B)   Childcare centers or day nurseries; provided they are located on a lot
not less than 10,000 square feet in area and have principal access on an
arterial street as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
   (C)   Community services, cultural and utility facilities; provided they are
located on a lot of not less than one acre and have frontage on an arterial
street as shown on the thoroughfare plan;
   (D)   Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home and hospitals, public or
private; provided they have frontage on an arterial street as shown on the
thoroughfare plan;
   (E)   Mobile home park in compliance with §
157.105; and
   (F)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses
when located on the same lot.
(Prior Code, § 11-7B-3)
§ 157.103 LOT AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   All lots and improvements within the R-G District shall meet the following
requirements.
   (A)   All lots shall have an area of not less than 5,000 square feet for a
single-family dwelling, 10,000 square feet for a two-family dwelling or 10,000
square feet, plus 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over two for multi-
family dwellings. For uses other than dwelling purposes, the lot area shall not
be less than 10,000 square feet except as otherwise specified.
   (B)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 50 feet for single-
family dwellings, 60 feet for two-family dwellings and 100 feet for multi-
family dwellings and all other uses.
   (C)   Not more than 50% of the lot area shall be covered with improvements;
except that duplexes shall not exceed 35% coverage and single-family
improvements 30%. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the
meaning of this division (C).
   (D)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot.
   (E)   A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be provided on all
single-family and duplex dwellings. One foot of setback for each one foot of
height shall be provided for all uses other than single-family and duplex, but
not less than a 15 foot front yard shall be provided.
   (F)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there
shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15
feet. One foot of setback for each one foot of height for all uses other than
single-family and duplex shall be provided.
   (G)   A rear yard of 20% of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the
principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory uses may be located in
the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that no accessory building
shall be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line.
(Prior Code, § 11-7B-4) (Ord. 98-1, passed 3-2-1998) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.104 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   The control of signs and billboards in the R-G District is the same as that
set forth in §
157.089 for the R-S District, except one nonilluminated nameplate may be
erected not exceeding 24 square feet in area, identifying the name and use of
the premises.
(Prior Code, § 11-7B-5) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.105 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Upon compliance with the provisions of this section, a mobile home park will
be allowed within the R-G District.
   (A)   The applicant, upon making application for a zoning clearance permit,
must submit a detailed site plan locating all mobile home stands, screening or
fencing, and plans and specifications for the proposed park in a form suitable
for making the determinations required herein.
   (B)   The proposed site shall be a minimum of two and one-half acres in size
and shall contain no more than 15 mobile home stands per acre. The proposed
site shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet on a street designated as an
arterial on the thoroughfare plan. All ingress or egress by automobile shall be
on such streets. The proposed site shall be a minimum of 200 feet in depth.
   (C)   The mobile home park shall accommodate primarily permanent occupants,
with no more than 40% of the mobile home stands devoted to solely transient
purposes. These solely transient stands are to be located in one area of the
park, so they will in no way interfere with the permanent residents.
   (D)   Front yards of not less than 20 feet and side and rear yards of not
less than ten feet shall be provided on mobile home park sites.
   (E)   The proposed mobile home park shall be screened or buffered on all
sides with a screening wall or fence in accordance with §
157.055.
   (F)   The proposed site shall provide one off street parking space for each
mobile home stand, plus one additional off-street parking space for each four
mobile home stands.
   (G)   The proposed site shall provide a connection for each mobile home
stand to all public utilities.
(Prior Code, § 11-7B-6) Penalty, see §
157.999
C-C CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 157.120 INTENT.
   The C-C Convenience Commercial District is intended for a unified grouping
in one or more buildings of retail shops and stores and personal services that
provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people
residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the
suburban convenience center be developed as a unit with adequate off-street
parking space for customers and employees and with appropriate landscaping and
screening.
(Prior Code, § 11-8A-1)
§ 157.121 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the C-C District, the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Any of the following uses:
      (1)   Artist supplies and hobby shop;
      (2)   Bakery shop;
      (3)   Barbershop and beauty shop;
      (4)   Bookstore;
      (5)   Clothing or wearing apparel shops;
      (6)   Dairy products store;
      (7)   Delicatessen;
      (8)   Drugstore;
      (9)   Financial institutions;
      (10)   Florist shop;
      (11)   Gift shop;
      (12)   Grocery shop;
      (13)   Hardware store;
      (14)   Jewelry shop;
      (15)   Laundry and dry cleaning pick up stations;
      (16)   Liquor store;
      (17)   Medical facility;
      (18)   Office, professional or general;
      (19)   Pharmacy;
      (20)   Restaurants (not drive-in);
      (21)   Self-service laundries;
      (22)   Shoe repair shop;
      (23)   Sporting goods store;
      (24)   Tailor shop;
      (25)   Theater;
      (26)   Toy store; and
      (27)   Variety store.
   (B)   Any of the uses permitted in §
157.102 subject to additional requirements as provided;
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses;
provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products other than such as
are customarily incidental to retail establishments; and
   (D)   Any other commercial use deemed by the Board of Adjustment to be of a
similar nature to those listed above.
(Prior Code, § 11-8A-2)
§ 157.122 LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The parcel of land on which a convenience commercial center is located
shall not be less than 12,000 square feet.
   (B)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 100 feet.
   (C)   Not more than 40% of the lot area shall be covered with improvements.
Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this division
(C).
   (D)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot.
   (E)   It is intended that the grouping of buildings and parking areas be
designed to protect, insofar as possible, adjacent residential areas. In no
case shall the design of the shopping center provide less than the following
standards.
      (1)   All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way lines
not less than 50 feet.
      (2)   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district shall be a
side yard setback of two feet for each one foot of height.
      (3)   All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not less
than ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 11-8A-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.123 BUSINESS SIGNS.
   Business signs, poster boards, bulletin boards or other similar displays in
the C-C District shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   One business sign not exceeding 32 square feet in surface area and
identifying the business or activity conducted on the premises may be erected
on each street frontage of the parcel. In the case of a shopping center
containing a group of businesses or activities on one lot, one accessory
building sign may be erected on the lot identifying the shopping center. Such
accessory sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. Ground signs shall not
exceed the height of the building in which the principal use is located or 20
feet, whichever is lower. No business sign shall be located within 50 feet of a
residential district if visible from such district. Illumination, if any, shall
be by constant light.
   (B)   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 16 feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   (C)   All signs shall be erected upon private property and shall not
encroach upon any public street or walk except as provided by the applicable
codes of the city, and they shall not overhang at a height of less than nine
feet and shall not have a maximum projection greater than 72 inches.
(Prior Code, § 11-8A-4) Penalty, see §
157.999
C-A/R AUTOMOTIVE COMMERCIAL AND COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT
§ 157.135 INTENT.
   The C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District is
established as a district in which the principal use of land is for
establishments offering accommodations, supplies of services to motorists and
certain specialized uses, such as retail outlets, extensive commercial
amusement and service establishments which serve the entire community but do
not and should not necessarily locate in the Central Business District or the
Convenience Commercial District.
(Prior Code, § 11-8B-1)
§ 157.136 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the C-A/R Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreation District,
the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the C-C Convenience Commercial District;
   (B)   Other uses, including:
      (1)   Ambulance service office or garage;
      (2)   Amusement enterprises;
      (3)   Automobile service station;
      (4)   Billboards as permitted in §
157.138;
      (5)   Boat sales;
      (6)   Bowling alleys;
      (7)   Bus terminal;
      (8)   Dance hall;
      (9)   Drive-in theater or restaurant;
      (10)   Electric transmission station;
      (11)   Feed and fuel store;
      (12)   Funeral parlor;
      (13)   Garden stores;
      (14)   Golf course, miniature or practice range;
      (15)   Heating and plumbing sales and service;
      (16)   Hospital for small animals;
      (17)   Ice plant;
      (18)   Kennel;
      (19)   Key shop;
      (20)   Laundry;
      (21)   Motels;
      (22)   Music, radio and television shop and repair;
      (23)   New and used automobile sales and services, new and used machinery
sales and services and public garages;
      (24)   Nightclub;
      (25)   Novelty;
      (26)   Pawnshop;
      (27)   Pet shop;
      (28)   Printing plant;
      (29)   Public uses;
      (30)   Recreation center, private;
      (31)   Roller skating rink;
      (32)   Sign painting shop;
      (33)   Tavern;
      (34)   Travel trailer park and sales; and
      (35)   Wholesale distribution center.
   (C)   Any other store or shop for retail trade or for providing personal,
professional or business service other than those provided in §
157.151; and
   (D)   Buildings, structures and accessory uses customarily incidental to any
of the above uses; provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products
other than such as are customarily incidental to retail establishments.
(Prior Code, § 11-8B-2)
§ 157.137 LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The parcel of land on which any commercial use is located shall not be
less than 12,000 square feet.
   (B)   Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than 100 feet.
   (C)   Not more than 30% of the lot area shall be covered with improvements.
Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this division
(C).
   (D)   No improvement or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above the
mean elevation of the lot.
   (E)   (1)   It is intended that the commercial uses and parking areas within
a C-A/R District be designed to protect, insofar as possible, adjacent
residential areas.
      (2)   In no case shall the development have less than the following
standards.
         (a)   All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way
lines not less than 50 feet.
         (b)   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard setback of two feet for each one foot of height.
         (c)   All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not less
than 20 feet.
(Prior Code, § 11-8B-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.138 BUSINESS SIGNS.
   Business signs, poster boards or other similar display in the C-A/R District
shall conform to the following requirements.
   (A)   Business signs not exceeding in the aggregate one square foot of
display surface area per one linear foot of street frontage may be erected on
each street frontage of the parcel. Ground signs and billboards shall not
exceed 30 feet in height. No sign or billboard shall be located within 50 feet
of a residential district if visible from such district. Illumination, if any,
shall be by constant light.
   (B)   A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the
premises may be erected on each street frontage of the development. The sign
shall not exceed 50 square feet in surface area nor 15 feet in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
   (C)   All signs shall be erected upon private property and shall not
encroach upon any public street or walk, except as provided by the applicable
codes of the city, and they shall not overhang at a height of less than nine
feet and shall not have a maximum projection greater than 72 inches.
(Prior Code, § 11-8B-4) Penalty, see §
157.999
C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 157.150 INTENT.
   The C-G General Commercial District is designed for the conduct of personal
and business services and the general retail trade of the community. It is
designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the central
business district or areas of mixed business enterprises. It will not normally
be applied in the case of new commercial areas.
(Prior Code, § 11-8C-1)
§ 157.151 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the C-G General Commercial District, the following uses are
permitted:
   (A)   Any use permitted in a C-C or C-A/R District;
   (B)   Any other retail, personal service, business service or professional
use not already mentioned, including:
      (1)   Department store;
      (2)   Frozen food locker;
      (3)   Furniture repair and upholstery;
      (4)   Research laboratories;
      (5)   Wholesale, except for outdoor storage; and
      (6)   Any public buildings or uses.
   (C)   Buildings, structures and accessory uses customarily incidental to any
of the above uses; provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products
other than such as are customarily incidental to retail establishments.
(Prior Code, § 11-8C-2)
§ 157.152 LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   There are no area or height regulations in the C-G District.
(Prior Code, § 11-8C-3)
§ 157.153 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   All signs and billboards in the C-G District shall conform to the
requirements in §
157.138.
(Prior Code, § 11-8C-4)
I-L LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 157.165 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the I-L Light Industrial District is to provide a location
for industries which do not, by their nature, create nuisances. The intent is
to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and
to prohibit nonindustrial uses. Because of the traffic generated and other
potentially objectionable influences created in this district, a buffer or
setback area between this district and any other zoning district, except I-H,
is required.
(Prior Code, § 11-9A-1)
§ 157.166 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the I-L Light Industrial District, the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal
use;
   (B)   Building materials sales;
   (C)   Commercial radio and television transmitting antenna towers and other
electronic equipment requiring outdoor towers, including antenna towers for the
dispatching of private messages;
   (D)   Compounding, processing and blending of chemical products, but not
including any materials which decompose by detonation;
   (E)   General and administrative offices;
   (F)   Machine shops and metal products manufacture and tool and die shops;
provided they do not include any of the following equipment:
      (1)   Automatic screw machines;
      (2)   Drop forges; or
      (3)   Riveting machines.
   (G)   Mail order houses;
   (H)   Manufacturing and assembling of electrical and electronic products and
equipments;
   (I)   Manufacturing and assembling (or any combination of such processes) of
products from wood, cork, glass, leather, fur, plastic, felt and other
textiles, but not including, as a principal operation, the processing of any
raw materials;
   (J)   Printing and binding plants;
   (K)   Research laboratories;
   (L)   Warehouse and storage facilities;
   (M)   Water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs and lift
stations; and
   (N)   Any other manufacturing process or establishment except those
permitted in §
157.181.
(Prior Code, § 11-9A-2)
§ 157.167 LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   There are no area requirements in an I-L District.
   (B)   There are no lot frontage requirements in an I-L District.
   (C)   Not more than 40% of the lot area shall be covered with improvements.
Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this division
(C).
   (D)   There are no height requirements in an I-L District.
   (E)   No structure shall be erected, commenced or maintained which has a
front yard of less than 50 feet.
   (F)   When adjacent to a residential district, a side yard of 50 feet or two
feet for each one foot of height, whichever is greater, shall be provided.
   (G)   When adjacent to a residential district, a rear yard of 50 feet or two
feet for each one foot of height, whichever is greater, shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 11-9A-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.168 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   All signs and billboards in the I-L District shall conform to the
requirements in §
157.138.
(Prior Code, § 11-9A-4) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.169 STANDARDS.
   Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-L Light
Industrial District after the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to
comply with the following standards.
   (A)   No building shall be used for residential purposes; except that a
guard may reside on the premises.
   (B)   No retail sales or services shall be permitted, except as incidental
to or accessory to a permitted use.
   (C)   No noise, either continuous or intermittent, from any operation
conducted on the premises, other than that emanating from vehicular traffic,
shall be detectable at any boundary line of the I-L District.
   (D)   No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke, gas or odorous or particulate
matter shall be emitted that is detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on
which the use is located.
   (E)   No vibrations shall be detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on
which the use is located.
   (F)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid
casting direct light upon property located in any residential district.
   (G)   The manufacture of flammable materials which produce explosive vapors
or gases is prohibited.
   (H)   No outside storage of equipment or material, except equipment in daily
use, shall be permitted in such a location where it can be viewed from any
public street.
   (I)   Any operation that produces intense glare or heat shall be performed
within a completely enclosed building, and exposed sources of light shall be
screened so as not to be detectable beyond the lot lines.
(Prior Code, § 11-9A-5) Penalty, see §
157.999
I-H HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 157.180 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of the I-H Heavy Industrial District is to provide a location
for industries which may, by their nature, create nuisances. The intent is to
preserve this land especially for such industry in locations with access to
arterial streets as designated on the thoroughfare plan, as well as locations
generally accessible to railroad transportation. Because of the nuisances or
other objectionable influences that may be created in this district, a buffer
or setback strip between this district and other zoning districts, except I-L,
is required.
(Prior Code, § 11-9B-1)
§ 157.181 PERMITTED USES.
   Within the I-H Heavy Industrial District, the following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the I-L District;
   (B)   Blacksmiths, tinsmiths and sheet metal shops;
   (C)   Bottling works;
   (D)   Canning or preserving factories;
   (E)   Cold storage plants;
   (F)   Ice cream production and distribution;
   (G)   Laundry and dry cleaning plants;
   (H)   Machine shops;
   (I)   Machinery rental, sales and service; and
   (J)   Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, repairing, storing and
cleaning, servicing or testing of any of the following materials, goods or
merchandise:
      (1)   Apparel;
      (2)   Beverages (nonalcoholic), processing and bottling;
      (3)   Building materials specialties;
      (4)   Bulk fuel sales and storage;
      (5)   Clothing;
      (6)   Compounding and packaging of chemicals;
      (7)   Cosmetics and toiletries;
      (8)   Dairy products;
      (9)   Drugs and pharmaceutical products;
      (10)   Electrical and acoustical products and components;
      (11)   Food products (except fish, sauerkraut, vinegar and yeast);
      (12)   Furniture;
      (13)   Glass products;
      (14)   Ice, dry and natural;
      (15)   Jewelry;
      (16)   Medical laboratory supplies, equipment and specialties;
      (17)   Metal products and utensils;
      (18)   Milk, bottling and distribution;
      (19)   Monumental stonecutting;
      (20)   Motor freight terminals;
      (21)   Musical instruments;
      (22)   Optical goods;
      (23)   Paper products, including boxes and containers;
      (24)   Pattern shops;
      (25)   Printing plants;
      (26)   Processing of meat and vegetable products, including the slaughter
of animals;
      (27)   Radios, phonographs, recorders and television sets and parts;
      (28)   Railroad yards and switching areas, including lodging and sleeping
facilities for transient railroad labor;
      (29)   Sign painting;
      (30)   Soldering and welding shops;
      (31)   Spray painting and mixing;
      (32)   Textiles;
      (33)   Toys and children’s vehicles;
      (34)   Trailers and carts; and
      (35)   Wood products, including wooden boxes and containers.
(Prior Code, § 11-9B-2) (Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 157.182 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   There are no requirements for minimum lot area or frontage in the I-
H District.
   (B)   Front, rear and side yard requirements in the I-H District are the
same as those set forth in §
157.167 for the I-L District.
   (C)   Buildings shall not cover more than 50% of the site on which the use
is located.
(Prior Code, § 11-9B-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.183 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS.
   All signs and billboards in the I-H District shall conform to the
requirements in §
157.138.
(Prior Code, § 11-9B-4) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.184 STANDARDS.
   Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-H Heavy
Industrial District after the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to
comply with the following standards. No use already established on the
effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or
further conflict with, the following applicable standards for the I-H District.
   (A)   No building shall be used for residential purposes; except that a
guard may reside on the premises.
   (B)   No retail sales or services shall be permitted, except as incidental
to or accessory to a permitted use.
   (C)   No storage, manufacture or assembly of goods shall be conducted out of
a building, unless the nearest point of the activity is more than 100 feet from
the boundary of any zoning district.
   (D)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid
casting direct light upon property located in any residential district.
   (E)   All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing,
storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of goods, water and merchandise shall
be carried on in such a manner as not to be injurious or offensive by reason of
the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate
matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare, heat, fire or explosive hazards.
   (F)   No activities involving storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 11-9B-5) Penalty, see §
157.999
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 157.195 INTENT AND APPLICATION.
   It is the intent of this chapter that adequate parking and loading
facilities be provided on off the street areas for each use of land within the
city. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use.
This chapter shall apply to all uses in all districts.
(Prior Code, § 11-10-1)
§ 157.196 GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required open space. Off-street parking space may be a part of the
required open space associated with the permitted use, unless otherwise
prohibited; provided, however, the off-street parking requirements shall not be
reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
   (B)   Location of parking lots. Off-street parking lots shall be located
within 200 feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and
shall have direct access to a street or alley.
   (C)   Joint and off-site parking facilities. Whenever two or more uses are
located together in a common building, shopping center or other integrated
building complex, there may be compliance with the parking requirements by
providing a permanent common parking facility cooperatively established and
operated which contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. Owners
jointly provide for their individual parking needs through a joint facility or
facilities; provided that the total number of spaces so provided shall not be
less than the sum of the individual requirements and that each business or
other use is within 200 feet of the parking facility.
   (D)   Design requirements.
      (1)   Size of parking space. The size of a parking space for one vehicle
shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than ten feet
by 20 feet, plus adequate area for ingress and egress.
      (2)   Paved surface required. All parking spaces shall be paved with a
sealed surface permanent pavement and maintained in a manner that no dust will
result from continued use.
   (E)   Parking lots located within or adjacent to residential district.
Whenever off-street parking lots for more than six vehicles are to be located
within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions shall
apply.
      (1)   All sides of the lot within or abutting the residential district
shall be enclosed with a screening wall or fence as specified under §
157.055.
      (2)   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard when the parking
lot is located in a residential district.
      (3)   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and
shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns.
      (4)   Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that all
light is deflected from adjoining residential uses.
      (5)   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used
to guide traffic and to state the condition and terms of the use of the lots.
Only nonintermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 11-10-2) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.197 NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts
in accordance with the following schedule.
Type Of Use Spaces Required
Type Of Use                             Spaces Required
Boarding or rooming house or hotel      1 space for each sleeping room
                                        1 space for each 150 square feet of
Commercial establishments not otherwise floor space used for retail trade in
classified                              the building and including all areas
                                        used by the public
                                        1 space for each 4 permanent seats,
                                        based on maximum seating capacity of
Community center, theater, auditorium,  each 50 square feet of floor area in
church sanctuary                        rooms without permanent seating but
                                        intended to be used for assembly
                                        purposes
                                        1 space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1
Convalescent or nursing homes           space for each staff or visiting
                                        doctor, plus 1 space for each 2
                                        employees including nurses
Convention hall, lodge, club, library,  1 space for each 50 square feet of
museum, place of amusement or           floor area used for assembly or
recreation                              recreation in the building
Dwelling, multi-family                  Not less than 1/2 times the number of
                                        units in the dwelling
Dwelling, single-family or duplex       1 space for each separate dwelling unit
                                        within the structure
                                        1 space for each 4 patient beds,
                                        exclusive of bassinets, plus 1 space
Hospitals                               for each staff or visiting doctor, plus
                                        1 space for each 3 employees including
                                        nurses, plus adequate area for the
                                        parking of emergency vehicles
                                        1 parking space for each 500 square
                                        feet of gross floor area or 1 parking
Industrial establishments               space for each 2 employees, whichever
                                        is greater, and 1 loading or unloading
                                        berth for each 25,000 square feet or
                                        fraction thereof of gross floor area
Medical or dental clinics or offices    6 spaces per doctor, plus 1 space for
                                        each 2 employees
                                        1 space for each 300 square feet of
Office building                         gross floor area in the building,
                                        exclusive of the area used for storage,
                                        utilities and building service
 
(Prior Code, § 11-10-3)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 157.210 PREAMBLE.
   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended but which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after the effective date hereof.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-1)
§ 157.211 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any district in which a lot exists of record at the effective date hereof
which does not conform to the size or area requirements of this chapter,
buildings for the uses permitted in such district may be erected on such lot,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter;
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-2)
§ 157.212 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date hereof that could not
be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot
coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its
location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity.
   (B)   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-3) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.213 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.
   If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date hereof that would not be allowed in the district
under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
effective date hereof, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land
outside such building.
   (C)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   (D)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months, the
structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
   (E)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-4)
§ 157.214 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where, at the effective date hereof, lawful uses of land exist that are no
longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such
uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   No such conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date hereof.
   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date
hereof.
   (C)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-5)
§ 157.215 CHANGES IN NONCONFORMITIES.
   A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in
combination, shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the
district in which located; except that the Board of Adjustment may permit a
change to a more restricted nonconforming use, and such change shall be
construed as an abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use.
(Prior Code, § 11-11-6)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 11-3-5)
CHAPTER 158: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
158.01   Title
   
158.02   Statute authority
   
158.03   Purpose and intent
   
158.04   Scope and applicability
   
158.05   Compliance required
   
158.06   Definitions
   
158.07   Modification of provisions
   
158.08   Amendments
Subdivision Plats and Procedures
   
158.20   Preliminary plat
   
158.21   Final plat
   
158.22   Fees
Design Standards
   
158.35   Streets
   
158.36   Alleys
   
158.37   Easements
   
158.38   Blocks
   
158.39   Lots
   
158.40   Street and subdivision names
   
158.41   Marginal land
Improvements
   
158.55   Required improvements; bond
   
158.56   Public sites and open spaces
   
158.57   Monuments
 
   
158.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Required Certificates
   
Appendix B:   Design Standards
   
Appendix C:   Administrative Procedures and Checklists
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of
New Cordell, Oklahoma”.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-1)
§ 158.02 STATUTE AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted the city in 11
O.S. §§ 41-101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-2)
§ 158.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is designed to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the community by establishing standards for the subdivision
of land within the city’s jurisdiction.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are specifically designed to:
      (1)   Lessen the congestion on streets;
      (2)   Promote the orderly layout and use of land;
      (3)   Secure safety from fire and other dangers;
      (4)   Provide adequate light and air;
      (5)   Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements; and
      (6)   Protect neighborhood areas from the hazard of through traffic.
   (C)   This chapter is designed and intended to achieve the following and
should be administered so as to:
      (1)   Implement the official city plan;
      (2)   Provide for conservation of existing standard residential areas and
prevent the development of slums and blight;
      (3)   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land
to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
      (4)   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community be borne by the whole community;
      (5)   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
      (6)   Reconcile any differences of interest; and
      (7)   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-3)
§ 158.04 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall govern the subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the city and shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision.
   (A)   The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels,
any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than five acres in area.
   (B)   The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels of less than ten acres in area.
   (C)   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land, regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies.
   (D)   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of
land regardless of the area involved.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-4)
§ 158.05 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land in a
subdivision filed of record after the effective date hereof which does not
comply with all of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-5)
§ 158.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public
walks, parks or greenstrips, rural land or drainage channels or a combination
thereof.
   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. A line or lines designating the area outside
of which a building may not be erected.
   CITY. The City of New Cordell, Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL. The official governing body of the city.
   EASEMENT. A grant of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes by the
property owner to the public, a corporation or persons.
   LOT. A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or
more streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more streets.
   LOT SPLIT. Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two or
more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, and which does not constitute a “subdivision” as herein defined.
   OFFICIAL CITY PLAN. The city plan or plans for the city, and also refers to
the specific document “Comprehensive Plan - New Cordell, Oklahoma”.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission, as established by 11 O.S.
§§ 45-101 et seq.; also referred to as “City Planning Commission”.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the
character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A major street which is designated in the thoroughfare
plan or official city plan and designed to carry intercity traffic and to
relate the various neighborhood within the city.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. Those streets designed to carry intracity traffic
connecting neighborhood areas to a major street which purpose is to collect
traffic from other minor streets and to serve as the most direct route to a
major street or to a community facility.
   STREET, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL. A street which abuts a commercial or
industrial zoned property and is designed to provide access to those parcels so
designated.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic
and having one closed and terminated by a turnaround.
   STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE. A minor street auxiliary to and located on the
side of an arterial street for service to abutting properties and adjacent
areas and for control of access.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A service road or other roadway normally running
parallel to or with an arterial street for the purpose of intercepting traffic
from abutting property or intersecting streets for the purpose of limiting
access to the arterial street main roadway.
   STREET, MINOR. Any street not specifically classified on the thoroughfare
plan whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent properties.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation or other entity
acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of land by map into two or more
lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way
or easement.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of an official city plan referring to
transportation development goals, principles and standards.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-6)
§ 158.07 MODIFICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   Whenever it would be inadvisable to apply a provision of this chapter
because a tract is of such unusual size, shape or character as would render an
extraordinary hardship not created or imposed by the owner or developer, the
Planning Commission may modify such provisions only to provide that substantial
justice may be done, the public interest secured and the intent and spirit of
this chapter fulfilled; provided that in no event shall the requirements of
procedure or improvements be waived. Such modification thus granted shall be
made at the written request of the developer stating the reasons for such
modification and shall be waived only by three-fourths vote of the regular
membership of the Planning Commission. Any such modifications thus granted
shall be duly entered and recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission,
with the reasons justifying the modifications set forth therein.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-7)
§ 158.08 AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules
and regulations for the administration of this chapter to the end that the
public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. This chapter may be
enlarged or amended by the City Council after public hearing, due notice of
which shall be given as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-8)
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
§ 158.20 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Submission of plat.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit at least ten copies of the preliminary
plat to the City Clerk who shall distribute them as follows:
         (a)   One copy each to the:
            1.   School board;
            2.   Local gas company;
            3.   Local electric company;
            4.   Local telephone company;
            5.   State Highway Commission; and
            6.   Board of County Commissioners; and
         (b)   Four copies to the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall return one to the subdivider and
forward one to the City Council, together with its report and recommendation,
and retain the other copies for its use and official record.
   (B)   Approval or rejection of plat.
      (1)   After receipt of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission
shall, within 30 days of its submission, approve, conditionally approve or
reject the plat. The subdivider shall be notified, in writing, of this action,
together with any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
      (2)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not in all cases entitle the
subdivider to approval of the final plat. After preliminary approval, if any
conditions arise which would cause the preliminary plat to become
unsatisfactory due to health, safety or welfare of the community, the Planning
Commission shall recommend that the final plat be rejected.
   (C)   Required data and information.
      (1)   (a)   The preliminary plat shall be drawn on suitable tracing paper
or cloth with black waterproof ink or pencil; however, legible reproduction of
the drawings may be submitted.
         (b)   The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch and
shall contain the following information:
            1.   Date, scale and north point;
            2.   The proposed subdivision name and all intended street names;
            3.   The name of the subdivider or the engineer or surveyor
preparing the plat;
            4.   Legal description showing location of plat;
            5.   Topographic survey map of the areas being subdivided, showing
contours at two- foot intervals;
            6.   A key map showing the location of the plat in the section,
township and range in which the plat is located (see Appendix B, number 9);
            7.   Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;
            8.   Location, widths and names of all existing platted or
dedicated streets, alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent
buildings, bridges and other pertinent data as required by the Planning
Commission;
            9.   The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date
of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes
or streams. All elevations shall refer to the established United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey Datum;
            10.   When a subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distance and
bearings of a meander line shall be established not less than 20 feet back from
the ordinary high water mark of the lake or from the bank of the stream;
            11.   Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way,
including alleys, highways and easements, whether private or public, and for
public and private utilities;
            12.   The exact length of the exterior boundaries of the land to be
subdivided;
            13.   Approximate dimensions of all lots;
            14.   Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of all tangents;
and
            15.   Approximate location and area of property to be dedicated for
public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in
the subdivision, with any conditions of such dedication or reservation.
      (2)   Where deed restrictions are to be recorded on the plat, a brief
description of the proposed restrictions should accompany the preliminary plat.
      (3)   A description of the improvements, such as grading, paving, tree
planting, walks and installation of utilities which the subdivider proposes to
make, and the time when they are proposed to be made, shall also accompany the
preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-1)
§ 158.21 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Description. The final plat shall be a print or series of prints 24
inches by 36 inches in size on a stable base tracing medium of Mylar, cronar or
other suitable durable material or linen tracing cloth. When more than one
sheet is used in connection with the plat, each additional sheet shall be
numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation indicating the total number
of sheets.
   (B)   Submission of plat.
      (1)   The developer shall submit sufficient copies for examination, but
in no case shall there be less than the following:
         (a)   Five paper copies and one copy on stable base tracing medium of
Mylar or comparable cronaflex of the proposed subdivision, drawn to a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet. Such final plat shall be prepared by a registered
civil engineer or surveyor; and
         (b)   Five copies of any restrictive covenants.
      (2)   The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission and City Council for final approval within one year of
the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final
approval within such time, the preliminary plat approval shall be considered as
null and void unless the Planning Commission agrees to an extension of time.
The final plat shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk within six
months after approval of the City Council, and, if not filed within such time,
the approval shall be considered null and void.
   (C)   Required information. The final plat shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the subdivision and the name of the owner, the
subdivider and the engineer or land surveyor;
      (2)   Date, north point and scale (written and graphic);
      (3)   Boundaries of the subdivided area with accurate distances and
bearings noted thereon;
      (4)   Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all
monuments found or placed in making the survey;
      (5)   The lines, names and width or dimensions of all proposed street
rights-of-way;
      (6)   The lines, widths and purposes of all easements;
      (7)   Numbered designation of all lots in the subdivision with their
lines and dimensions accurately shown;
      (8)   The names of all adjacent subdivisions;
      (9)   Certification by the registered professional engineer or land
surveyor who designed the plat as to the accuracy of the survey and plat;
      (10)   Dedication by the owner of lands for public use, including streets
and walkways;
      (11)   Exact dimensions of all lots;
      (12)   Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents; and
      (13)   Any additional data as may be required by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Planning Commission action.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review the final plat for conformance
with the preliminary plat and shall prepare a set of written recommendations to
be submitted to the City Council at the time the final plat is considered.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall examine the final plat and shall
approve or disapprove the plat within 30 days of the date of its submittal. If
the final plat is approved with the modification or waiver of certain
requirements, the Planning Commission shall specify the reasons therefor. If
the final plat is disapproved, the grounds for refusal, including citation of
the applicable regulations or general plan, shall be stated on the records of
the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to act, a certificate
by the City Clerk as to date of submission of plat for final approval and
failure of the Planning Commission to act thereon within such specified time
shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval.
      (3)   The action of the Planning Commission shall be shown on the final
plat, with the date of action, over the signature of the Chair, Vice Chair or
Secretary.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council the
tracing and two paper copies of the final plat, together with four copies of
the restrictive covenants, and a listing of all required improvements
indicating that they have been installed, or that a contract and bond ensuring
their installation, satisfactory to the City Council, has been executed and
received by the City Clerk.
      (5)   The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the final plat as approved
by the Planning Commission to the school board affected, the public utility
companies and utility departments.
      (6)   After the Planning Commission and City Council have approved the
final plat, no change shall be made therein unless the plat is resubmitted for
approval of the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (E)   City Council action. Before recording the final plat, it shall be
submitted to the City Council for approval and for acceptance of public ways,
service and utility easements, and land dedicated to public use. This approval
of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested to by
the City Clerk or his or her deputy. The disapproval of any plat by the City
Council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
   (F)   Recording final plat. After final approval of the plat and the
affixing of all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider
shall provide the Planning Commission with two dark line prints thereof and one
contact reproducible cloth tracing, the tracing to be filed with the City
Clerk. One dark line print shall be retained in the permanent file of the
Planning Commission and one shall be sent to the office of the City Clerk. The
applicant shall file, within six months after the date of approval by the City
Council, the original tracing, one dark line copy on lineback and one contact
reproducible cloth tracing or film with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-2)
§ 158.22 FEES.
   (A)   Preliminary plat. The subdivider shall pay to the city a preliminary
plat and application fee as set by the Council by motion or resolution.
   (B)   Final plat. The subdivider shall pay to the city a final plat filing
fee as set by the Council by motion or resolution. When acreage is involved,
such as sites for industrial, housing projects and commercial purposes, the fee
shall be figured as set by the Council per acre.
(Prior Code, § 12-2-3)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 158.35 STREETS.
   (A)   Street plan and relation to adjoining street system.
      (1)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the official city plan
and this chapter.
      (2)   All streets shall be related to existing and proposed streets in
the area, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety and existing
and proposed land uses along such streets.
      (3)   All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting
lots shall conform to the applicable zoning regulations.
      (4)   Where such streets are not shown in the official city plan, the
arrangements of these streets in the subdivision shall either:
         (a)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing streets in the surrounding areas; or
         (b)   Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the
Planning Commission.
      (5)   Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through
traffic.
      (6)   Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, the Planning Commission shall require:
         (a)   Marginal access streets;
         (b)   Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property lines;
         (c)   Deep lots with rear service streets; or
         (d)   Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate
protection and stabilization of residential properties and to afford separation
of through and local traffic. (See
Appendix B, number 1.)
   (B)   Border streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad
right-of-way or limited access highway, the Planning Commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way.
   (C)   Reserve strips prohibited. Reserve strips designed and used for the
primary purpose of controlling access to minor streets by parties or persons
other than a public agency shall be prohibited.
   (D)   Alignment.
      (1)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. (See
Appendix B, number 2.)
      (2)   A tangent of not less than 100 feet in length shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. (See
Appendix B, number 2.)
      (3)   Minimum clear sight distance, measured along the chord of the
centerline, shall be provided on all streets as follows.
 
Arterial streets  400 feet
Collector streets 350 feet
Minor streets     250 feet
 
   (E)   Rights-of-way and roadway widths; paved streets.
      (1)   Street rights-of-way and roadway widths shall conform to the
official city plan. All streets shall be paved according to the established
standards adopted by the City Council.
      (2)   The following minimum standards shall apply.
Street Type Right-of-Way Width Roadway
Street Type        Right-of-Way Width Roadway
Collector          60 feet            32 feet
Commercial         70 feet            44 feet
Expressway         As per design
Industrial         60 feet            26 feet
Primary arterial   100 feet           50 feet
Residential        60 feet            26 feet
Secondary arterial 100 feet           32 feet
 
   (F)   Half streets.
      (1)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   In no event shall lots facing a one-half minor residential street
be permitted.
      (3)   Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
   (G)   Arterial street frontage access control.
      (1)   No access on an arterial street shall occur within minimum
intervals of 600 feet, measured from the nearest intersecting rights-of-way
lines (except as modified by division (G)(2) below); the distance may be
extended or increased if traffic conditions, as determined by the Planning
Commission, warrant such extension. (See
Appendix B, numbers 6 and 8.)
      (2)   In commercial and industrial subdivisions, specifically designated
“one-way turn only”, access may be provided in the direction of the adjacent
traffic lane at a minimum distance of 300 feet between major street
intersections or a minimum of 300 feet between each access point. (See
Appendix B, number 10.)
      (3)   Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to an
arterial or commercial street, and may have access to a collector street, if
traffic conditions, as determined by the Planning Commission, warrant such
extension, but shall not have access to a residential street. (See
Appendix B, number 10.)
      (4)   To assure traffic safety, appropriate nonaccess provisions shall be
designated and dimensioned along all abutting streets in commercial and
industrial subdivisions, and along major streets in residential subdivisions. A
description of such nonaccess provisions shall appear upon the plat.
      (5)   Access to property occurring within the minimum distance prescribed
for major street access, 600 feet, shall only be by the closest service or
frontage road entrance onto the major street. (See
Appendix B, number 6.)
      (6)   Individual driveways will be so located on each lot to avoid direct
vehicular access to or from any expressway, thoroughfare or arterial street.
Driveways should be located to enable direct access primarily to or from a
minor street or, if necessary, to the collector streets which serve as feeders
to or distributors from the major streets. (See
Appendix B, numbers 1 and 6.)
   (H)   Street grades. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.4%. Except
where unusual topographic conditions justify an exception, the maximum grade of
all streets shall not be greater than the following:
 
Street Type Grade
Arterial    3%
Collector   5%
Service     7%
 
   (I)   Intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles and may be
curved, if necessary, in order to make this possible. In no event shall a
street intersect any other street at any angle of less than 75 degrees.
      (2)   Street corners on local residential streets shall have a minimum
radius of 20 feet at the curb line or its equivalent.
      (3)   Street corners on commercial and industrial streets shall have a
minimum radius of 25 feet at the curb line or its equivalent. Street
intersections involving major thoroughfares shall have a minimum street corner
radius of 30 feet at the curb line or its equivalent.
      (4)   All street corner radii shall be shown on the preliminary and final
plats.
      (5)   A 30 foot area of clear vision at street intersections in
subdivisions shall be provided. This area shall be kept clear of all structures
and vegetation exceeding a height of three feet above the established city
street elevation. (See
Appendix B, number 4.)
   (J)   Culs-de-sac and dead end streets.
      (1)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet except where
topography would render impracticable the standard distance as set forth in §
158.38.
      (2)   Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a
minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet. (See
Appendix B, number 5.)
      (3)   The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall have a
minimum width of 30 feet.
      (4)   In the case of temporarily dead ended streets which are stub
streets designed to provide further connection with adjoining unsubdivided
areas, the Planning Commission may require:
         (a)   Temporary easement for a turnaround having a radius of 50 feet;
or
         (b)   An appropriate area for a backaround. (See
Appendix B, number 7.)
      (5)   In all instances, proper provisions shall be made for adequate
storm drainage so that stormwater does not collect at the ends of these
streets.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-1) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.36 ALLEYS.
   (A)   Required in commercial districts. Alleys shall be provided in all
commercial districts except where a commercial district will be developed as a
self-contained unit; then other provisions shall be made on the site for
service drives and service areas.
   (B)   Width.
      (1)   Alleys in residential areas shall not be less than 20 feet in width
when provided.
      (2)   Alleys in commercial areas shall not be less than 30 feet in width
and shall be paved.
   (C)   Dead end alleys. Dead end alleys are prohibited except where natural
or other features make it impossible to continue them. Where dead end alleys
are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround areas with a
minimum radius of 40 feet at the dead end. Backaround areas may be allowed in
residential subdivisions. (See Appendices
B and
C.)
(Prior Code, § 12-3-2) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.37 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for utility purposes,
easements shall be provided as may be advisable for poles, wires, conduits,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines and other
similar purposes.
   (B)   Rear yard easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. In the event one-
half of an easement is platted, it shall be not less than ten feet in width.
   (C)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and
such further width of construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
   (D)   Twenty foot utility easements shall be provided at the end of culs-de-
sac along major thoroughfares.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-3)
§ 158.38 BLOCKS.
   (A)   In general, blocks should have the following dimensions and shall be
subject to adjustment upon recommendation by the Planning Commission where
topography, the character of the proposed development or other similar
conditions justify blocks of greater or lesser length or width.
 
       Minimum  Maximum
Length 600 feet 1,200 feet
Width  240 feet 400 feet
 
   (B)   Block lengths and widths shall be measured from the street right-of-
way line.
   (C)   Wherever blocks are longer than 1,000 feet, crosswalks may be required
at the approximate center of the block. (See Appendix B, number 3.)
(Prior Code, § 12-3-4) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.39 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation and minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the
type of development and use contemplated.
   (B)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the existing zoning regulations, but
in no case shall the width of a lot designed for residential use be less than
50 feet.
   (C)   Each lot shall have access and front upon a public street.
   (D)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where their use will produce definite advantages in meeting special situations
in relation to topography and proper land use.
   (E)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-5) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.40 STREET AND SUBDIVISION NAMES.
   (A)   Street names. No street shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be referred to
the post office for recommendation and subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission and the City Council.
   (B)   Subdivision names. Subdivision names shall not duplicate existing
subdivisions of record.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-6) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.41 MARGINAL LAND.
   When a plat is filed on land that is subject to flooding or has been flooded
within the last 20 years, and corrective measures have not been taken to
prevent flooding, or when the land has soil conditions unsuitable for building
purposes, the plat shall not be acceptable except where the property is
dedicated to the city subject to its acceptance for a watercourse, water
drainage basin, park or conservancy district or any other purpose of protecting
the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 12-3-7)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 158.55 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS; BOND.
   (A)   Any final plat or subdivision located within the corporate limits
shall not be approved unless the subdivider or developer shall provide the
facilities listed below or file a surety bond with the City Clerk to ensure the
actual construction of such improvements according to the plans and
specifications approved by the City Council or City Engineer within a period of
time not to exceed one year from date of final plat approval. Such bond shall
equal 100% of the cost of improvements as estimated by the City Council or City
Engineer. Conditions stipulated by the bond shall be acceptable to the City
Attorney and City Council. No building shall take place until such facilities
have been constructed.
      (1)   Water mains properly connected with the public water supply system
provided to ensure adequate water flow for fire protection.
      (2)   A sanitary sewer system properly connected with the existing
system, in accordance with standard specifications governing sanitary sewer
construction and in accord with requirements of State and County Health
Departments.
      (3)   Streets graded to the full roadway width and to the established
grade. Such streets shall be paved with a stable base material such as concrete
or asphalt.
      (4)   Storm drainage facilities, curbs and gutters to provide adequate
surface water drainage for the area being drained.
   (B)   All such facilities shall be installed according to plans and
specifications of the city.
   (C)   All lots in residential subdivisions where septic tanks or individual
sewerage disposal devices are to be installed shall not contain less than
15,000 square feet, and the width of the lot at the building line shall be a
minimum of 100 feet. All such lots to be serviced by private sewerage
facilities shall comply with the regulations of the County and the State Board
of Health.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-1) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.56 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   Where a site for a proposed park, playground, play field, school,
library, fire station or other public use is proposed by the official city
plan, or is deemed by the Planning Commission to be necessary, and is located
in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Planning Commission may require the
reservation of such area within the subdivision.
   (B)   The developer shall give the public agency involved 60 days’ written
notice of the proposed subdivision, with a copy of such notice to be mailed to
the Planning Commission. During the 60-day period, the agency may or may not
express its interest in the proposed subdivision in connection with the
provision of appropriate public site. Should such interest be expressed, that
agency shall have a period of an additional 30 days within which to arrange for
the acquisition of the public site under consideration.
   (C)   Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of
suitable size for the public site intended, the site provided may be combined
with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas; thus, in the
aggregate, there will be provided a site of suitable size for the purpose
intended.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-2) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.57 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Specifications. Each block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or
pins not less than three-fourths-inch in diameter and 24 inches long and placed
at least one inch below finished grade.
   (B)   Moving monuments. Monuments marking property lines and corners shall
not be disturbed; or if such disturbance is necessary, the monuments shall be
replaced at the exact spot from which they were removed.
(Prior Code, § 12-4-3)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99 for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 12-1-9)
APPENDIX A: REQUIRED CERTIFICATES
 
   The following certificates are required:
      A.   Subdivision improvement bond.
      B.   Owner’s certificate and deed of dedication.
      C.   Surveyor’s certificate.
      D.   City clerk’s certificate.
      E.   Planning commission approval.
      F.   Acceptance of deed of dedication by city.
      G.   County treasurer’s certificate.
(Prior Code, § 12-5-1)
APPENDIX B: DESIGN STANDARDS
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1541.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1543.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1545.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1547.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1549.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 12-5-2)
APPENDIX C: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND CHECKLISTS
 
   Subdivision regulations fall generally into two (2) classes
administratively: either a two (2) step procedure or a three (3) step
procedure.
   A.   The three (3) step procedure calls for:
      1.   Preapplication conference;
      2.   Submission of a preliminary plat; and
      3.   Preparation and filing of a final plat.
   B.   The two (2) step procedure does not require the preapplication
conference. Otherwise, the two (2) processes are the same. The two (2) step
procedure is recommended for the city.
   C.   The following charts illustrate the recommended administrative
procedure for proper enforcement of the two (2) step subdivision procedure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1551.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1553.png]
 
Checklists:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1555.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1557.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/268d0c39b4919e2cdc42894c583fa89705dd4a90/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1559.png]
(Prior Code, § 12-5-3)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
5O.S. Cites Code Section
5O.S. Cites                   Code Section
2 O.S. 7-401—7-411          91.071
7 O.S. 1-136.3                70.04
10A O.S. 2-2-102(E)           135.17
11 O.S. 1-102                 91.041;
                              154.03
11 O.S. 14-101                135.35
11 O.S. 14-108                10.01
11 O.S. 14-109                10.01
11 O.S. 39-103.1              112.03
11 O.S. 41-101 et seq.        158.02
11 O.S. 45-101 et seq.        158.06
11 O.S. 49-100.1 et seq.      35.03
11 O.S. 50-101 et seq.        35.04
18 O.S.                       36.038
21 O.S. 42                    130.01
21 O.S. 540A                  70.05
22 O.S. 1108                  32.14
22 O.S. 1115.1—1115.5       32.10
25 O.S. 101—114             112.01
25 O.S. 106                   112.03
27A O.S. 2-10-101 et seq.     73.01;
                              73.03
37 O.S. 501 et seq.           112.01
37A O.S. 1-103                112.01
37A O.S. 2-135                112.01
37A O.S. 3-124                112.06
                              70.03;
47 O.S.                       74.01;
                              76.01
47 O.S. 1-101 et seq.         70.03
47 O.S. 1-114A                70.04
47 O.S. 1-136.3               70.04
47 O.S. 1-138                 70.04
47 O.S. Article VI, Chapter 7 70.09
47 O.S. 7-204                 70.09
47 O.S. 7-503                 70.09
47 O.S. 7-600—7-607         70.09
47 O.S. 7-606                 70.09
47 O.S. 11-201 et seq.        70.03
47 O.S. 11-902                72.19
47 O.S. 11-1113               74.99
47 O.S. 12-218                70.04;
                              70.05
47 O.S. 15-112                73.06
47 O.S. 15-112(D)             73.99
47 O.S. 15-112(D)(4)          73.99
47 O.S. 15-112(D)(5)          73.99
47 O.S. 15-115(C)             73.99
47 O.S. 1101 et seq.          73.06
47 O.S. 1105B5                92.01
47 O.S. 1135.1                73.06
47 O.S. 1135.2                73.06
50 O.S. 12                    91.021
50 O.S. 14                    91.021
50 O.S. 15                    91.021
50 O.S. 16                    91.015;
                              91.022
51 O.S. 24A.1 et seq.         35.20—
                              35.22
53 O.S. 351—355             152.02
59 O.S. 1301—1340           32.14
59 O.S. 1332                  32.14
59 O.S. 1680 et seq.          150.045
62 O.S. 517.1 et seq.         36.002
63 O.S. 1-1011                91.024
63 O.S. 1-2512(B)             70.04
63 O.S. 2-101 et seq.         133.22;
                              154.01
63 O.S. 421.2                 111.01
63 O.S. 422                   111.01
63 O.S. 423                   111.01
63 O.S. 683.3                 70.04
68 O.S. 205                   37.015;
                              37.045
68 O.S. 217                   37.011;
                              37.041
68 O.S. 220                   37.011;
                              37.041
68 O.S. 227                   37.014;
                              37.044
68 O.S. 301                   135.47
68 O.S. 1352                  37.002
68 O.S. 1401                  37.031
68 O.S. 1408                  37.039
68 O.S. 1621 et seq.          132.13
68 O.S. 2601 et seq.          37.060
74 O.S. 562                   76.26
75 O.S. 309—317             32.04
82 O.S. 1601—1620.1         153.01;
                              153.07
82 O.S. 1601 et seq.          153.11
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
1-1-1              10.01
1-1-2              10.02
1-1-3              10.03
1-1-4              10.04
1-1-5              10.05
1-1-6              10.06
1-2-1              10.07
1-2-2              10.08
1-2-3              10.09
1-3-1              10.10
1-3-2              10.11
1-3-3              10.12
1-4-1              10.99
1-4-2              10.13
1-4-3              10.14
1-4-4              10.15
1-5-1              11.01
1-5-2              11.02
1-5-3              11.03
1-5-4              11.04
1-6-1              30.01
1-6-2              30.02
1-6-3              30.03
1-6-4              30.04
1-7-1-1            31.01
1-7-1-2            31.02
1-7-1-3            31.03
1-7-1-4            31.04
1-7-1-5            31.05
1-7-2              31.06
1-7-3              31.07
1-7-4              31.08
1-7-5              31.09
1-8-1              35.01
1-8-2              35.02
1-8-3              35.03
1-8-4              35.04
1-9-1              32.01
1-9-2              32.02
1-9-3              32.03
1-9-4              32.04
1-9-5              32.05
1-9-6              32.06
1-9-7              32.07
1-9-8              32.08
1-9-9              32.09
1-9-10             32.10
1-9-11             32.11
1-9-12             32.12
1-9-13             32.13
1-9-14             32.14
1-9-15             32.15
1-9-16             32.16
1-9-17             32.17
1-9-18             32.18
1-9-19             32.19
1-9-20             32.99
1-10-1             35.20
1-10-2             35.21
1-10-3             35.22
1-10-4             35.23
2-1-1              31.20
2-1-2              31.21
2-1-3              31.22
2-1-4              31.23
2-1-5              31.24
3-1-1              36.001
3-1-2              36.002
3-1-3              36.003
3-2-1              36.015
3-2-2              36.016
3-2-3              36.017
3-2-4              36.018
3-2-5              36.019
3-2-6              36.020
3-2-7              36.021
3-3-1              36.035
3-3-2              36.036
3-3-3              36.037
3-3-4              36.038
3-3-5              36.039
3-3-6              36.040
3-4A-1             37.001
3-4A-2             37.002
3-4A-3             37.003
3-4A-4             37.004
3-4A-5             37.005
3-4A-6             37.006
3-4A-7             37.007
3-4A-8             37.008
3-4A-9             37.009
3-4A-10            37.010
3-4A-11            37.011
3-4A-12            37.012
3-4A-13            37.013
3-4A-14            37.014
3-4A-15            37.015
3-4A-16            37.016
3-4A-17            37.017
3-4B-1             37.030
3-4B-2             37.031
3-4B-3             37.032
3-4B-4             37.033
3-4B-5             37.034
3-4B-6             37.035
3-4B-7             37.036
3-4B-8             37.037
3-4B-9             37.038
3-4B-10            37.039
3-4B-11            37.040
3-4B-12            37.041
3-4B-13            37.042
3-4B-14            37.043
3-4B-15            37.044
3-4B-16            37.045
3-4B-17            37.046
3-4C-1             37.060
3-4C-2             37.061
3-4C-3             37.062
3-4C-4             37.063
3-4C-5             37.064
3-5-1              36.055
3-5-2              36.056
3-5-3              36.057
3-5-4              36.058
3-6-1              36.070
4-1-1              110.01
4-1-2              110.02
4-1-3              110.03
4-1-4              110.04
4-1-5              110.05
4-1-6              110.06
4-1-7              110.07
4-1-8              110.08
4-1-9              110.09
4-1-10             110.10
4-1-11             110.11
4-1-12             110.12
4-2-1              112.01
4-2-3              112.02
4-2-4              112.03
4-2-5              112.04
4-2-6              112.05
4-2-7              112.06
4-2-8              112.07
4-2-9              112.99
4-3-1              113.01
4-3-2              113.02
4-3-3              113.03
4-3-4              113.04
4-3-5              113.05
4-3-6              113.06
4-3-7              113.99
4-4-1              114.01
4-4-2              114.02
4-4-3              114.03
4-4-4              114.04
4-4-5              114.05
4-4-6              114.06
4-4-7              114.07
4-4-8              114.08
4-4-9              114.09
4-4-10             114.10
4-4-11             114.11
4-4-12             114.99
4-5-1              115.01
4-5-2              115.02
4-5-3              115.03
4-6-1              116.01
4-6-2              116.02
4-6-3              116.03
4-6-4              116.04
4-6-5              116.99
5-1-1              91.001
5-1-2              91.002
5-1-3              91.003
5-2-1              91.070
5-2-2              91.071
5-2-3              91.999
5-3-1              91.015
5-3-2              91.016
5-3-3              91.017
5-3-4              91.018
5-3-5              91.019
5-3-6              91.020
5-3-7              91.021
5-3-8              91.022
5-3-9              91.023
5-3-10             91.024
5-3-11             91.025
5-4-1              91.040
5-4-2              91.041
5-4-3              91.042
5-5-1              154.01
5-5-2              154.02
5-5-3              154.03
5-5-4              154.04
5-5-5              154.05
5-6-1              92.01
5-6-2              92.02
5-6-3              92.03
5-6-4              92.04
5-6-5              92.05
5-6-6              92.06
5-6-7              92.07
5-6-8              92.08
5-7-1              93.01
5-7-2              93.02
5-7-3              93.03
5-7-4              93.04
5-7-5              93.05
5-7-6              93.06
5-7-7              93.07
5-7-8              93.99
5-8-1              91.055
5-8-2              91.056
5-8-3              91.057
5-8-4              91.058
5-8-5              91.059
5-9-1              111.01
5-9-2              111.02
5-9-3              111.03
6-1-1              33.01
6-1-2              33.02
6-2-1              33.15
6-2-2              33.16
6-2-3              33.17
6-2-4              33.18
6-2-5              33.19
6-2-6              33.20
6-2-7              33.21
6-2-8              33.22
6-2-9              33.23
6-2-10             33.24
6-2A-1             33.35
6-2A-2             33.36
6-2A-3             33.37
6-2A-4             33.38
6-2A-5             33.39
6-2A-6             33.40
6-3-1              34.01
6-3-2              34.02
6-3-3              34.03
6-3-4              34.04
6-4-1              90.01
6-4-2              90.02
6-4-3              90.03
6-4-4              90.04
6-4-5              90.05
6-4-6              90.06
6-4-7              90.07
6-4-8              90.08
6-4-9              90.09
6-4-10             90.10
6-4-11             90.11
6-4-12             90.12
6-4-13             90.13
6-4-14             90.99
6-4A-1             90.25
6-4A-2             90.26
6-4A-3             90.27
6-4A-4             90.28
6-4A-5             90.29
6-4A-6             90.30
6-4A-7             90.31
6-4A-8             90.32
6-5-1              130.01
6-5-2              130.02
6-5-3              130.03
6-5-4              130.04
6-5-5              130.05
6-5-6              130.06
6-5-7              130.07
6-5A-1             131.01
6-5A-2             131.02
6-5A-3             131.03
6-5A-4             131.04
6-5A-5             131.05
6-5A-6             131.06
6-5B-1             132.01
6-5B-2             132.02
6-5B-3             132.03
6-5B-4             132.04
6-5B-5             132.05
6-5B-6             132.06
6-5B-7             132.07
6-5B-8             132.08
6-5B-9             132.09
6-5B-10            132.10
6-5B-11            132.11
6-5B-12            132.12
6-5B-13            132.13
6-5B-14            132.14
6-5C-1             133.01
6-5C-2             133.02
6-5C-3             133.03
6-5C-4             133.04
6-5C-5             133.05
6-5C-6             133.06;
                   133.99
6-5C-7             133.07
6-5C-8             133.08
6-5D-1             133.20
6-5D-2             133.21
6-5D-3             133.22
6-5D-4             133.23
6-5E-1             134.01
6-5E-2             134.02
6-5E-3             134.03
6-5E-4             134.04
6-5E-5             134.05
6-5E-6             134.06
6-5E-7             134.07
6-5E-8             134.08
6-5E-9             134.09
6-5E-10            134.10
6-5E-11            134.11
6-5E-12            134.12
6-5E-13            134.13
6-5E-14            134.14
6-5E-15            134.15
6-6A-1             135.15
6-6A-2             135.16
6-6A-3             135.17
6-6A-4             135.18;
                   135.99
6-6A-5             135.19;
                   135.99
6-6A-6             135.20;
                   135.99
6-6A-7             135.21;
                   135.99
6-6A-8             135.22;
                   135.99
6-6A-9             135.23;
                   135.99
6-6B-1             135.35
6-6B-2             135.36
6-6B-3             135.37
6-6B-4             135.38;
                   135.99
6-6B-5             135.39;
                   135.99
6-6B-6             135.40;
                   135.99
6-6B-7             135.41;
                   135.99
6-6B-8             135.42;
                   135.99
6-6B-9             135.43
6-6B-10            135.44;
                   135.99
6-6B-11            135.45;
                   135.99
6-6B-12            135.46
6-6B-13            135.47
6-6B-14            135.48
6-6C-1             135.01
6-6C-2             135.02;
                   135.99
6-6C-3             135.03
6-7-1              136.01
6-7-2              136.02
6-7-3              136.03
6-7-4              136.04
6-7-5              136.05
6-7-6              136.06
6-7-7              136.99
7-1-1              70.01
7-1-2              70.02
7-1-3              70.03
7-1-4              70.04
7-1-5              70.05
7-1-6              70.06
7-1-7              70.07
7-1-8              70.08
7-1-9              70.09;
                   70.99
7-1-10             70.10
7-1-11             70.11
7-1-12             70.12
7-2-1              71.01
7-2-2              71.02
7-2-3              71.03
7-2-4              71.04
7-2-5              71.05
7-2-6              71.06
7-2-7              71.07
7-2-8              71.08
7-2-9              71.09
7-2-10             71.10
7-2-11             71.11
7-3-1              72.01
7-3-2              72.02
7-3-3              72.03
7-3-4              72.04
7-3-5              72.05
7-3-6              72.06
7-3-7              72.07
7-3-8              72.08
7-3-9              72.09
7-3-10             72.10
7-3-11             72.11
7-3-12             72.12
7-3-13             72.13
7-3-14             72.14
7-3-15             72.15
7-3-16             72.16
7-3-17             72.17
7-3-18             72.18
7-3-19             72.19
7-4-1              73.01
7-4-2              73.02
7-4-3              73.03
7-4-4              73.04
7-4-5              73.05
7-4-6              73.06;
                   73.99
7-4-7              73.07
7-4-8              73.08
7-4-9              73.09
7-5-1              73.20
7-5-2              73.21
7-5-3              73.22
7-5-4              73.23
7-5-5              73.24
7-6-1              75.01
7-6-2              75.02
7-6-3              75.03
7-6-4              75.04
7-6-5              75.05
7-6-6              75.06
7-6-7              75.07
7-7-1              74.01
7-7-2              74.02
7-7-2-1            74.03
7-7-3              74.04
7-7-4              74.05
7-7-5              74.06
7-7-6              74.07;
                   74.99
7-7-7              74.08;
                   74.99
7-7-8              74.09
7-8-1              76.01
7-8-2              76.02
7-8-3              76.03
7-8-4              76.04
7-8-5              76.05
7-8-6              76.06
7-8-7              76.07
7-8-8              76.08
7-8-9              76.09
7-8-10             76.10
7-8-11             76.11
7-8-12             76.12
7-8-13             76.99
7-9-1              70.25
7-9-2              70.26
7-9-3              70.27
7-9-4              70.28
7-9-5              70.29
7-9-6              70.99
7-10-1             76.25
7-10-2             76.26;
                   76.99
8-1-1              155.01
8-1-2              155.02
8-1-3              155.03
8-1-4              155.04
8-1-5              155.05
8-1-6              155.06
8-1-7              155.07
8-1-8              155.99
8-2-1              155.20
8-2-2              155.21
8-2-3              155.99
8-3-1              94.01
8-3-2              94.02
8-3-3              94.03
8-3-4              94.04
8-3-5              94.05
8-4-1              95.01
8-4-2              95.02
8-4-3              95.03
8-4-4              95.04
8-4-5              95.05
8-4-6              95.06
8-4-7              95.99
8-5-1              96.01
8-5-2              96.02
8-5-3              96.03
8-6-1              97.01
8-6-2              97.02
8-6-3              97.03
8-6-4              97.04
8-6-5              97.05
8-6-6              97.06
8-6-7              97.07
8-6-8              97.08
8-6-9              97.09
8-6-10             97.10
8-6-11             97.11
8-6-12             97.12
8-6-13             97.13
8-6-14             97.14
8-6-15             97.15
8-7-1              156.01
8-7-2              156.02
8-7-3              156.03
8-7-4              156.04
8-7-5              156.05
8-7-6              156.06
8-7-7              156.07
8-7-8              156.08
8-7-9              156.09
8-7-10             156.10
8-7-12             156.11
8-7-11             156.99
8-9-1              77.01
8-9-2              77.02
8-9-3              77.03
8-9-4              90.01
9-1-1              50.01
9-1-2              50.02
9-1-3              50.03
9-2-1              51.01
9-2-2              51.02
9-3-1              52.01
9-3-2              52.02
9-3-3              52.03
9-3-4              52.04
9-3-5              52.05
9-3-6              52.06
9-3-7              52.07
9-3-8              52.99
10-1-1             150.001
10-1-2             150.002
10-2-1             150.015;
                   150.999
10-2-2             150.016;
                   150.999
10-2-3             150.017
10-2-4             150.018
10-2-5             150.019;
                   150.999
10-3-1             150.030
10-3-2             150.031
10-3-3             150.032
10-3-4             150.033
10-3-5             150.034
10-3-6             150.999
10-4-1             150.045
10-4-2             150.046
10-4-3             150.047
10-4-4             150.048
10-4-5             150.999
10-5-1             150.060
10-5-2             150.061
10-5-3             150.062
10-5-4             150.999
10-6-1             150.075
10-6-2             150.076
10-6-3             150.077
10-6-4             150.999
10-7-1             151.01
10-7-2             151.02
10-7-3             151.03
10-7-4             151.04
10-7-5             151.05
10-7-6             151.06
10-7-7             151.07
10-7-8             151.08
10-7-9             151.09
10-7-10            151.99
10-8-1             152.01
10-8-2             152.02
10-8-3             152.03
10-8-4             152.04
10-8-5             152.05
10-8-6             152.06
10-8-7             152.07
10-8-8             152.08
10-8-9             152.09
10-8-10            152.10
10-8-11            152.11
10-8-12            152.99
10-9-1             153.01
10-9-2             153.02
10-9-3             153.03
10-9-4             153.04
10-9-5             153.05
10-9-6             153.06
10-9-7             153.07
10-9-8             153.08
10-9-9             153.09
10-9-10            153.10
10-9-11            153.11
10-9-12            153.12
10-9-13            153.13
10-9-14            153.99
10-10-1            150.090
11-1-1             157.001
11-1-2             157.002
11-1-3             157.003
11-1-4             157.004
11-2-1             157.005
11-2-2             157.006
11-3-1             157.020
11-3-2             157.021
11-3-3             157.022
11-3-4             157.023
11-3-5             157.999
11-4-1             157.035
11-4-2             157.036
11-4-3             157.037
11-4-4             157.038
11-5-1             157.050
11-5-2             157.051
11-5-3             157.052
11-5-4             157.053
11-5-5             157.054
11-5-6             157.055
11-5-7             157.056
11-5-8             157.057
11-5-9             157.058
11-6-1             157.070
11-6-2             157.071
11-6-3             157.072
11-6-4             157.073
11-7A-1            157.085
11-7A-2            157.086
11-7A-3            157.087
11-7A-4            157.088
11-7A-5            157.089
11-7B-1            157.100
11-7B-2            157.101
11-7B-3            157.102
11-7B-4            157.103
11-7B-5            157.104
11-7B-6            157.105
11-8A-1            157.120
11-8A-2            157.121
11-8A-3            157.122
11-8A-4            157.123
11-8B-1            157.135
11-8B-2            157.136
11-8B-3            157.137
11-8B-4            157.138
11-8C-1            157.150
11-8C-2            157.151
11-8C-3            157.152
11-8C-4            157.153
11-9A-1            157.165
11-9A-2            157.166
11-9A-3            157.167
11-9A-4            157.168
11-9A-5            157.169
11-9B-1            157.180
11-9B-2            157.181
11-9B-3            157.182
11-9B-4            157.183
11-9B-5            157.184
11-10-1            157.195
11-10-2            157.196
11-10-3            157.197
11-11-1            157.210
11-11-2            157.211
11-11-3            157.212
11-11-4            157.213
11-11-5            157.214
11-11-6            157.215
12-1-1             158.01
12-1-2             158.02
12-1-3             158.03
12-1-4             158.04
12-1-5             158.05
12-1-6             158.06
12-1-7             158.07
12-1-8             158.08
12-1-9             158.99
12-2-1             158.20
12-2-2             158.21
12-2-3             158.22
12-3-1             158.35
12-3-2             158.36
12-3-3             158.37
12-3-4             158.38
12-3-5             158.39
12-3-6             158.40
12-3-7             158.41
12-4-1             158.55
12-4-2             158.56
12-4-3             158.57
12-5-1             158.99
12-5-2             158.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
98-1     3-2-1998    157.103
                     135.15—
99-2     4-1999      135.23;
                     135.99
2001-7   10-2001     150.016;
                     150.999
2001-08  12-3-2001   36.058
2002-01  1-7-2002    36.058
                     151.01—
2002-02  3-4-2002    151.09;
                     151.99
2002-05  7-1-2002    34.01—
                     34.04
2004-01  3-1-2004    36.015—
                     36.021
2004-02  4-5-2004    30.03
                     116.01—
2004-04  12-6-2004   116.04;
                     116.99
2005-02  5-2-2005    150.034
2006-05  9-18-2006   37.032
2006-06  12-4-2006   31.02;
                     31.03
2007-01  1-16-2007   31.04;
                     33.01
2007-03  2-20-2007   31.03
2007-04  2-20-2007   36.017
                     156.01—
2007-06  11-5-2007   156.11;
                     156.99
2008-02  4-7-2008    135.02;
                     135.99
2008-03  11-17-2008  150.001
2009-02  4-27-2009   50.03
2010-01  11-15-2010  35.02
2011-02  2-22-2011   95.05
                     135.35—
2012-01  4-16-2012   135.48;
                     135.99
                     153.01—
2012-02  4-16-2012   153.13;
                     153.99
                     90.01—
2013-02  4-1-2013    90.13;
                     90.99
2014-07  12-15-2014  31.20
2015-04  5-19-2015   92.01
2015-07  9-21-2015   157.086—
                     157.088
2017-04  5-1-2017    91.040;
                     91.041
2017-07  12-18-2017  31.20;
                     31.22
2018-01  2-15-2018   150.019;
                     150.999
2018-02  4-16-2018   157.058
2018-03  5-7-2018    31.04
2018-04  5-21-2018   97.13—
                     97.15
2018-05  8-20-2018   111.01;
                     111.02
2018-06  9-4-2018    157.181
2018-08  10-1-2018   11.02
2019-13  1-18-2019   35.02
2019-01  2-19-2019   157.057
                     112.01—
2018-7   4-1-2019    112.07;
                     112.99
                     76.25;
2017-2   4-15-2019   76.26;
                     76.99
2019-02  4-15-2019   90.25—
                     90.32
2019-03  6-17-2019   37.003
2019-05  7-1-2019    111.01;
                     111.02
2019-06  7-1-2019    112.02
2019-04  9-16-2019   37.003
2019-07  9-16-2019   31.20
                     31.20;
                     95.01;
                     96.02;
2019-08  9-16-2019   97.01;
                     152.03;
                     156.05;
                     157.021
2019-10  11-4-2019   111.01;
                     111.03
2019-11  11-4-2019   114.02
2019-12  11-4-2019   155.01;
                     155.02
2019-14  11-18-2019  37.032
2019-15  12-16-2019  30.03
2020-01  1-21-2020   36.070
2022-1   3-21-2022   35.02
2023-01  3-20-2023   90.05
2024-01  1-16-2024   33.15
2024-02  7-15-2024   112.07
2024-03  11-18-2024  35.02
2025-01  4-28-2025   35.05
2025-2   8-18-2025   95.20—
                     95.29
                    
 
