CITY CODE
of
OKEMAH, OKLAHOMA
2007
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-5, passed 7-28-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Okemah, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 2025-5, passed July 28, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2026-1-CITY
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF OKEMAH, OKLAHOMA, RECLASSIFYING THE ZONING DISTRICT
OF REAL PROPERTY AND MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED IN THIS ORDINANCE AS R-5, HIGH
DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
 
   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma, in consideration
of the passage of an ordinance for the zoning reclassification of real property
under the Ordinances of the City of Okemah, and the laws of the State of
Oklahoma, and said Council after hearing the facts and being sufficiently
advised, finds as follows:
 
   1.   That certain real property more particularly described herein, has a
present zoning classification of Rural Single Family Residential Zoning
District.
 
   2.   That on September 15, 2025, pursuant to Title 10, Section 10-1A-8, of
the City of Okemah Code of Ordinances, the City of Okemah made application to
the Okemah Planning and Zoning Commission for the reclassification of the
hereinafter described real property to Single Family Residential District.
 
   3.   That pursuant to said Application, the item was placed on the October
20, 2025, Meeting Agenda of the Okemah Planning and Zoning Commission for a
public hearing and consideration of evidence for making a recommendation to the
Okemah City Council. Notice of said public hearing and meeting was properly
given pursuant to Oklahoma law and the City of Okemah Code of Ordinances, more
specifically, being published on September 25, 2025, in the Okemah News Leader,
and also by certified mailing more than 20 days before said public hearing, to
all owners of property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the subject
property.
 
   4.   That on October 20, 2025, the Okemah Planning and Zoning Commission
held the public hearing on the Application and adopted its report to the Okemah
City Council regarding the Application, recommending that the Okemah City
Council reclassify the subject property as High Density Residential District.
The time of the next regular meeting of the Okemah City Council was announced
at the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting on January 12, 2026.
 
   5.   That the Okemah City Council received and reviewed the report of the
Okemah Planning and Zoning Commission and afforded the Applicant and any
protestors present the opportunity to be heard in either support or protest to
the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
 
   6.   That the Okemah City Council finds that the Application for Zoning
Reclassification of the subject property should be granted.
 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OKEMAH, OKLAHOMA:
 
Section 1. Zoning Reclassification.
 
That upon unanimous recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
subject property, situated within the limits of City of Okemah, Okfuskee
County, Oklahoma, legally described as follows:
 
Lots 1 through 3, inclusive, Block 3 of Ridgeview Addition to the City of
Okemah, Okfuskee County, Oklahoma,
 
and,
 
Lots 1 through 18, inclusive, Block 2 of Ridgeview Addition to the City of
Okemah, Okfuskee County, Oklahoma,
 
and,
 
BEG AT A PT ON E LINE OF NW 558.12' N OF SE/COR OF NW TH N0 DEG 06' 04" W ALONG
EAST LINE 296.47' TH S89 DEG 59' 51" W 466.70' TH N 0 DEG 06'04" W 466.70' TO A
PT ON THE N LINE OF S/2 NW TH 89 DEG 59' 51" W ALONG SAID N LINE 435.61' TH S
200' TH S89 DEG 59' 51" W 200' TH NORTH 200" TH S89 DEG 59'51" W 352.60' TH S
341.30' TH S 89 DEG 59'51" W 300' TH S422.87' TH N 89 DEG 57' 52" E 1756.26' TO
POB LESS 10.80 AC M/L 18-11-10 ARIZONA-OKLAHOMA TRACT 14 X 68 TRAILER LESS AND
EXCEPT 18-11N-10E A TRACT IN NW/4 BEGINNING AT SW/C NWNW THEN N88°54'19"E A
DISTANCE OF 1445 FT THEN S01°56'15"E A DISTANCE OF 200 FT AS POB THEN
N88°54'19"E A DISTANCE OF 200 FT THEN S01°05'15"E A DISTANCE OF 100 FT THEN
S88°54'19"W A DISTANCE OF 200 FT THEN N01°05'15"W A DISTANCE OF 100 FT TO POB;
 
with a current zoning classification of Rural Single Family Residential
District, is hereby reclassified to R-5, High Density Residential District.
Section 2. Emergency Clause.
It being necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety
of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma and the inhabitants thereof, an emergency is
hereby declared to exist. By reason whereof it is necessary that this ordinance
go into full effect and be of force immediately upon its passage and approval.
   PASSED AND APPROVED and the Emergency Clause voted on separately this 9th
day of February, 2026, by the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Okemah,
Oklahoma.
                                                                                             ______________________________________
               MAYOR WAYNE BACON
 
 
 
 
______________________________________
RELENA HADDOX, CITY CLERK
 
 
(SEAL)
 
 
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OKEMAH CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title; Authority
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Jurisdiction
1-1-5: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE; AUTHORITY:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Okemah. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the OKEMAH CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections
14-108 and 14-109 and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent
legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1985 Code § 1-101; amd. 2007 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2007 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in
any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof,
the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted
pages.
   B.   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in
substantially the following language: "Be it ordained by the City Council of
the City of Okemah, Oklahoma, that Section          of the code of ordinances
of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows:" (set
out new provisions in full).
   C.   When the council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the code, which the
council desires to incorporate into the code, a section in substantially the
following language may be made part of the ordinance:
Section          Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Okemah,
Oklahoma, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part
of the code of ordinances of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma, and the sections of
this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish this intention.
   D.   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to
be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the
case may be. (1985 Code § 1-106; amd. 2007 Code)
1-1-4: JURISDICTION:
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to
all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the
corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in
the future shall also apply to, and be in full effect within, the boundaries of
all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any
ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to
the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also the
outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise. (1985 Code § 1-110)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any
part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof,
or to alter or tamper with this code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this
section shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (1985 Code § 1-107)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts:
      1.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect. (2007 Code)
      2.   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. (1985 Code § 1-104)
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2007 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code, or any codes
or portions of codes adopted herein, are severable, and if any phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph, or section of this code or any code adopted herein, or of
any ordinance in the code shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal or
otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code, or of any codes or portions of codes adopted herein. (1985 Code § 1-105;
amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words; Interpretations
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines Of Sections; Citations
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS; INTERPRETATIONS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be held,
the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
not be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to
other genders and to firms, partnerships, corporations and/or any legal entity
as well.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   G.   Law: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution
and statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   H.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   I.   Or/And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the
sense requires it.
   J.   Preceding, Following: The next before and next after, respectively.
   K.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases which are not
specifically defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted
usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
   L.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words
used in the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary
intention plainly appears.
   M.   Officers, Employees, Agencies Generally: Whenever any officer,
employee, agency or department is referred to by title only, such reference
shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the city of Okemah".
   N.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   O.   Statutory References: Reference to the statutes of the state of
Oklahoma means the statutes as they now are or as they may be amended to be.
   P.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1985 Code §
1-102; amd. 2007 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Okemah, county of Okfuskee, state of Oklahoma. The word
"city" shall be construed as if the words "of Okemah, Oklahoma", followed.
CODE: The code of the city of Okemah.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Okemah.
COUNTY: The county of Okfuskee, Oklahoma.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1 of each year and
end on June 30.
MANAGER OR CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OS: Oklahoma Statutes.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, any legal entity, and
bodies politic and corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer
or employee of any of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THE STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other
public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1985 Code § 1-102; amd. 2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS; CITATIONS:
The catchlines of sections in this code are printed in capital letters, and
citations included at the end of sections are intended to indicate the
historical source, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles and official
sources of such sections; nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the
catchlines, or citations, are amended or reenacted. (1985 Code § 1-103; amd.
2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY 1
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Fines Recoverable By Civil Action
1-4-3: Application Of Provisions
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title for municipal court provisions.
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in
this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the code
or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00),
including court costs. Provided, that conviction for violation of this code or
of any ordinance or any offense relating to speeding or parking shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), including court
costs. Provided further, that no fine, including court costs, may be imposed
upon a conviction for a violation of this code or of any ordinance which is
greater than that established by Oklahoma statute for the same offense. Court
costs may be charged and collected, but shall not exceed twenty five dollars
($25.00) plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses. Specific penalties
for the violations of this code and any ordinance may be set by resolution of
the city council and said penalty reflected in the said resolution of the city
council under this subsection shall control over any specific penalties
contained in this code or by any other ordinance which contradict or conflict
with the said resolution. (Ord. 2003-01-04, 4-28-2003)
   B.   Aiding Or Abetting Violation: Any person who shall aid, abet or assist
in the violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in this section. (1985 Code § 1-108)
1-4-2: FINES RECOVERABLE BY CIVIL ACTION:
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent
jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. (1985 Code § 1-
109)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2007 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2007
Code)
CHAPTER 5
CORPORATE AND WARD LIMITS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Official City Map
1-5-2: Ward Number And Boundaries
1-5-1: OFFICIAL CITY MAP:
The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as the
official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all
annexations made to the city. The official city map shall be and remain on file
in the office of the city clerk for review and examination by the public. (1985
Code § 1-201; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-2: WARD NUMBER AND BOUNDARIES:
The city shall be divided into four (4) wards, which wards and the boundaries
thereto are specifically described as follows:
   A.   Ward one consists of the area or territory lying east of the centerline
of West 5th Street and north of the centerline of Broadway Street;
   B.   Ward two consists of that area or territory lying west of the
centerline of West 5th Street and north of the centerline of Broadway Street;
   C.   Ward three consists of that area or territory lying west of the
centerline of West 5th Street and south of the centerline of Broadway Street;
and
   D.   Ward four consists of that area or territory lying east of the
centerline of West 5th Street and south of the centerline of Broadway Street.
(1985 Code § 1-202)
CHAPTER 6
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
1-6-1: Council-Manager Form Of Government
1-6-1: COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The city is governed by the statutory council-manager form of government. The
powers of the city are vested in the city council. (1985 Code § 2-101)
CHAPTER 7
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Elections; Overlapping Terms
1-7-2: Qualifications Of Council Members
1-7-3: Council Meetings; Rules
1-7-4: Mayor And Vice Mayor
1-7-5: Powers Vested In Council, Designated Powers
1-7-6: Compensation
1-7-1: ELECTIONS; OVERLAPPING TERMS:
   A.   The terms of the elected officers shall be staggered so that, at any
one general municipal election, the following officers are to be elected for
four (4) year terms:
Council members from wards one and two.
   B.   At the next general municipal election, the following officers are to
be elected for four (4) year terms:
      1.   Council members from wards three and four; and
      2.   The council member at large. (1985 Code § 2-201)
1-7-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
   A.   City Residents; Registered Voters: Council members shall be residents
and registered voters of the city.
   B.   Residency Within Ward: Council members from wards shall be actual
residents of their respective wards at the time of their candidacy and
election, but removal of a council member from one ward to another within the
city after his election, or a change in ward boundaries, shall not disqualify
him from completing the term for which he was elected. (1985 Code § 2-204)
1-7-3: COUNCIL MEETINGS; RULES:
   A.   Setting Time And Dates Of Meetings: The city council shall hold at
least one, but not limited to one, regular meeting every month, and the setting
of the time and dates of such meetings shall be established by resolution each
calendar year by December 15. (Ord. 99-12-01, 12-6-1999)
   B.   Meeting Place; Special And Adjourned Meetings:
      1.   Every meeting of the council shall be held in the council chamber in
the city hall unless, in case of an emergency, the mayor or the council members
calling a special meeting designate another place in the city for the holding
of the special meeting.
      2.   The mayor or any three (3) council members may call a special
meeting.
      3.   Any adjourned meeting may be held at any other place designated by
the council. (1985 Code § 2-203)
   C.   Rules Of Procedure:
      1.   The council may determine its own rules, and may compel the
attendance of absent members in the manner and under penalties as the council
may prescribe.
      2.   The order of business for each meeting of the council shall be as
posted on the agenda for the meeting.
      3.   "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern matters of procedure not
included or covered in this code or in rules adopted by the city council. (1985
Code § 2-208)
1-7-4: MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR:
   A.   Selection From Council Members: The council shall elect from among its
members a mayor and a vice mayor. The mayor and vice mayor shall be elected in
each odd numbered year at the first council meeting held after council terms
begin, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and they shall serve until their
respective successors have been elected and qualified.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, and shall
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by
it. He shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial
purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall have no
regular administrative duties except that he shall sign all conveyances and
other written obligations of the city as the council may require.
      2.   The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability or
suspension of the mayor. (1985 Code § 2-205)
1-7-5: POWERS VESTED IN COUNCIL, DESIGNATED POWERS:
All powers of the city, including the determination of matters of policy, shall
be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council
may:
   A.   Appoint and remove the city manager as provided by law;
   B.   Enact municipal legislation subject to limitations as may now or
hereafter be imposed by the Oklahoma constitution and law;
   C.   Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate salaries and wages, and
all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to such limitations as may now or
hereafter be imposed by the Oklahoma constitution and law;
   D.   Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, members of
commissions and boards and other quasi-legislative or quasi- judicial officers
as provided by law, or prescribe the method of appointing or electing and
removing them;
   E.   Create, change and abolish offices, departments and agencies other than
those established by law, and assign additional functions and duties to
offices, departments and agencies established by this chapter; and
   F.   Grant pardons for violations of municipal ordinances, including the
remission of fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge.
(1985 Code § 2-206)
1-7-6: COMPENSATION:
The mayor or members of the city council may not receive any compensation as
such for any services rendered the city, other than actual expenses. (1985 Code
§ 2-207)
CHAPTER 8
CITY OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-8-1: City Attorney
1-8-2: City-County Health Department; Director
1-8-3: Public Works Department; Superintendent
1-8-4: Number, Classes Of Officers And Employees; Compensation
1-8-5: Bonds Of Officers
1-8-6: Political Activity Of Employees
1-8-7: Social Security
1-8-8: Employee Retirement System
1-8-1: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment And Removal: The city attorney is appointed by the city
manager for an indefinite term, and is removable by the manager.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The city attorney is an officer of the city. The
city attorney is the chief legal adviser of the council and all other officers,
departments, and agencies of the city government in matters relating to their
official powers and duties. He represents the city in proceedings in the
courts, and performs all services incident to his position which may be
required by law or ordinance. He may attend regular meetings of the council and
prepare ordinances for the council. He may receive a regular salary as set by
the council and, in addition thereto, receive reasonable fees for representing
the city in lawsuits or controversies to which the city is a party, whether
tried, settled or otherwise. He may provide other special services as requested
by the council or manager.
   C.   Fees For Services:
      1.   When duly authorized by the council or manager, he shall receive a
reasonable fee for such special services. (1985 Code § 2-501)
      2.   The council may contract with the city attorney for a set hourly fee
for all legal services to be rendered or may contract with the city attorney
for payment for legal services in manner agreeable to both the council and the
city attorney which is not contrary to law. (2007 Code)
1-8-2: CITY-COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR:
If so designated by the city manager, the county health department and its
director or his designee shall have the powers of a city health department and
city health officer respectively for the city. References to health department
and health officer or director of the health department in this code and in
other ordinances of the city mean the county health department and its director
or his designee, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. (1985
Code § 2-502)
1-8-3: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT; SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Department Established; Director Appointed: There shall be a public
works department, the head of which shall be the superintendent of public works
appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. The superintendent shall
be an officer of the city and shall have supervision and control of the public
works department. (1985 Code § 14-801)
   B.   Duties: It is the duty of the public works department, insofar as the
city government performs these functions with its own personnel:
      1.   To construct, improve, maintain and clean streets (including alleys
and other public ways), bridges and sidewalks; to install and maintain
streetlights, traffic control signs, markings, signals and devices; to erect
and maintain street name signs; and to supervise the use of streets by
privately owned utilities. The installation of traffic control signs, markings,
signals, and devices shall be at the direction of the chief of police or by the
city council.
      2.   To maintain all buildings and grounds used by the city.
      3.   To maintain and operate all parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and
other recreational facilities operated by the city.
      4.   To maintain and operate all city owned cemeteries.
      5.   To collect and dispose of refuse insofar as the city provides this
service.
      6.   To maintain city owned motor equipment.
      7.   To perform such other functions relating to the maintenance, repair,
improvement and operation of the physical facilities owned or used by the city
government as the city council may prescribe consistent with law and ordinance.
(1985 Code § 14-802)
1-8-4: NUMBER, CLASSES OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; COMPENSATION:
The city council, by motion, resolution, or ordinance, may regulate the number
of classes of officers and positions of employment in the various departments,
offices, and agencies of the city government, and may determine or regulate the
compensation to be paid to officers and employees. (1985 Code § 2-503)
1-8-5: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
   A.   Clerk And Treasurer: Before entering upon their official duties, the
following personnel of the city government shall provide bonds for the faithful
performance of their official duties, payable to the city, with a surety
company authorized to operate within the state, in such amounts as set or
approved by the council:
      1.   City clerk; and
      2.   City treasurer.
   B.   Other Officers And Employees: The council, by motion or resolution, may
require other officers and employees in such positions as it may designate to
be bonded.
   C.   Premiums Paid By City: The city shall pay the premiums on the bonds.
(1985 Code § 2-504)
1-8-6: POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF EMPLOYEES:
City employees shall have such rights as may be granted by state law or
otherwise as to participation in political activities. Any political activity
in which an employee participates, however, shall be exercised only during off
duty hours and while not in uniform. Any federal statutes restricting the
political activities of certain city employees shall supersede the provisions
of state law as to such employees. (1985 Code § 2-505)
1-8-7: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy: It is hereby declared to be the policy and
purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the eligible employees
and officials of the city the benefits of the system of federal old age and
survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act and all
amendments thereto, and 51 Oklahoma Statutes section 121 et seq. In pursuance
of this policy, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (1985
Code § 2-601)
   B.   Execution Of Agreement With State Agency: The mayor is authorized and
directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the public
welfare commission to accomplish the provisions of subsection A of this
section. (1985 Code § 2-602; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Withholdings: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and
officials for the purposes provided in subsection A of this section are hereby
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state or federal agency designated by the laws and regulations. (1985 Code § 2-
603)
   D.   Contributions: Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts
appropriated for these purposes from available funds to the designated state or
federal agency in accordance with applicable state or federal laws or
regulations. (1985 Code § 2-604)
   E.   Records And Reports: The city shall keep such records and submit such
reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(1985 Code § 2-605)
   F.   Exclusions: Excluded from this section authorizing the extension of
social security benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
      1.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official covered or authorized to be covered, as of the initial
effective date hereof, by any other ordinance creating any retirement system
for any employee or official of the city; or
      2.   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations. (1985 Code § 2-606)
1-8-8: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
There is hereby adopted by reference, as though set forth herein in its
entirety, an employee retirement system for the city. A copy of said retirement
system provisions, and amending ordinances, shall be and remain on file and
available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. (2007 Code; amd. Ord.
2019-11, 11-14-2019)
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Appointment; Qualifications
1-8A-2: Duties
1-8A-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Appointment; Term: The city council shall appoint a city manager for an
indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members.
   B.   Specifically: The city manager shall:
      1.   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove,
demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided
by law. The manager or the council by ordinance may authorize the head of a
department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such
department, office or agency;
      2.   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and
agencies;
      3.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council and be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
      4.   Submit to the council a report after the end of the fiscal year on
the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
      5.   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the city, and make recommendations as he deems desirable;
      6.   Manages governmental affairs of the City of Okemah. Works with
numerous departments, boards, authorities, commissions and public trusts;
      7.   Report to the City Council regularly, but no less frequently than
monthly, regarding the financial condition of the City of Okemah and the public
trusts of which the City is the beneficiary; and suggest changes and
improvements to programs and services;
      8.   Supervise department heads, provide support, counseling, and
guidance as appropriate and advise as to compliance with applicable laws and
regulations (for example, competitive bidding and sunshine laws);
      9.   Evaluate department heads and makes recommendations to the City
Council as to compensation and any other employment issues; perform annual
performance appraisals on all department heads and maintain records thereof;
      10.   Serve as administrative department head, supervising administrative
and library personnel;
      11.   Oversee the work of and establish tasks to be completed by contract
personnel who are not subject to the supervision of another department head;
      12.   Make recommendations to the City Council regarding employee actions
(after consultation with Department Heads and supervisors as appropriate) as
well as contract personnel and professional consultants;
      13.   Monitor all purchases and expenditures of municipal funds to ensure
compliance with budget; coordinate the resources, activities and functions of
the various City offices, departments and trusts;
      14.   Ensure that ordinances and policies of the City as well all
applicable state and federal laws are observed and enforced;
      15.   Assure effective and efficient utilization of all City resources,
including employees, funds, materials, facilities and time;
      16.   Coordinate overall operations of the City to assure optimum
services to the community; coordinate efforts with trusts benefitting the City
and with other entities and organizations, such as the school, civic clubs and
Chamber of Commerce for the benefit of the City and community as a whole;
      17.   Prepare and submit to the City Council reports as requested;
      18.   Serve as Safety Coordinator for the City, all Trusts and
departments;
      19.   Serve as principal advisor to the City Council on a variety of
technical and administrative issues regarding staffing (including
administrative and library employee evaluations), budget, funding, and
development of procedures for effective use and management of all resources
available to the City and the establishment of open and candid communication
with the public, City Council, Trusts, City personnel and volunteers;
      20.   Provide for citizen input and citizen awareness of City goals and
operations by maintaining close contact with citizens, community organizations,
and utilizing media resources to inform citizens of City program activities and
events affecting the City of Okemah;
      21.   Attend and participate in (as appropriate) all regular and special
meetings of the City Council, City departments or committees, and trusts
benefitting the City;
      22.   Seek out funding sources and prepare and process grant applications
in the furtherance of municipal planning goals and other programs or services
for the benefit of the municipality and its citizens;
      23.   Conduct research and develop demographic information for the area
as needed for economic development and effective planning and utilization of
resources;
      24.   Develop and maintain a Master Plan for the City;
      25.   Work closely with the Public Works Authority, Economic Development
Authority, Recreation & Tourism Trust, Airport Authority, Okemah Golf Club, the
Okemah Chamber of Commerce, Okemah Public Schools, and other appropriate
entities to achieve goals for community and economic development;
      26.   Coordinate with HEDA in response to businesses who inquire about
opportunities in Okemah. Oversees Capital Improvement Projects;
      27.   Monitor the City's financial condition by regularly evaluating
revenue/expenditure trends and recommending to the City Council changes in
service levels or in fees, utility rates and taxes as necessary to maintain a
sound financial condition; plan, prepare and prioritize grant applications;
establish and maintain intergovernmental coordination related to available
funding;
      28.   Prepare annual budget and for review and revision by the City
Council; monitor budget compliance, report findings and make recommendations to
department heads and to the City Council as appropriate;
      29.   Attend workshops and training seminars as advisable or required.
Facilitate training of employees, contractors, and volunteers;
      30.   Develop, maintain, and strengthen relationships with state and
regional Economic Development and Community Development organizations;
      31.   Maintain an honest, hardworking, high value, and ethical standard
at all times; and
      32.    Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
ordinance.
   C.   Residency: At the time of the manager's appointment, he need not be a
resident of the city or state; but, during his tenure of office, he shall
reside within the city.
   D.   Council Member Restriction: No council member may be appointed city
manager during the term for which he shall have been elected nor within two (2)
years after the expiration of his term. (1985 Code § 2-301; amd. Ord. 2020-1,
7-7-2020)
1-8A-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and
head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the
laws and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible
therefor to the council.
   B.   Specifically: The city manager shall:
      1.   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove,
demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided
by law. The manager or the council, by ordinance, may authorize the head of a
department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such
department, office or agency.
      2.   Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and
agencies.
      3.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council and be
responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable.
      4.   Submit to the council a report after the end of the fiscal year on
the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year.
      5.   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the city, and make recommendations as he deems desirable.
      6.   Authorize and approve no cost change orders in construction
contracts.
      7.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by
ordinance. (Ord. 2016-8, 9-12-2016)
ARTICLE B. FINANCE DEPARTMENT; CLERK AND TREASURER
SECTION:
1-8B-1: City Clerk
1-8B-2: City Treasurer
1-8B-3: Offices Held By Same Official
1-8B-1: CITY CLERK:
   A.   Appointment: The city clerk shall be an officer of the city, appointed
by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the city manager.
   B.   Duties: Subject to regulations the council may prescribe, the city
clerk shall do and perform the following duties:
      1.   Attend all council meetings and shall keep the journal of the
proceedings of the council.
      2.   Enroll in a book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and
resolutions passed by the council.
      3.   Attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by
law or by ordinance.
      4.   Have custody of documents, records, and archives, as may be provided
by law or by ordinance, and have custody of the seal of the city.
      5.   Have such other powers, duties, and functions related to his
statutory duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance. The person who
serves as city clerk may be employed by the city to perform duties not related
to his position as city clerk. The salary, if any, for said duties shall be
provided for separately by ordinance. (Ord. 2016-6, 7-25-2016)
1-8B-2: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment; Qualifications; Supervision Of Finance Department:
      1.   There shall be a treasurer for the city, appointed by the city
council for an indefinite term.
      2.   The person who serves as city treasurer may be employed by the city
to perform duties not related to his position as city treasurer. The salary, if
any, for said duties shall be provided for separately by ordinance.
      3.   The city manager shall have supervision and control of the finance
department.
      4.   There shall be such employees in the finance department as the
council may authorize.
   B.   Duties: Subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe, the
treasurer shall do and perform the following duties:
      1.   Collect or receive revenue and other money for the city and deposit
daily all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as the council may
designate; and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable
law or ordinance.
      2.   Maintain a general accounting system for the city.
      3.   He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be
prescribed by applicable law or by ordinance. (Ord. 2016-6, 7-25-2016)
1-8B-3: OFFICES HELD BY SAME OFFICIAL:
The same person may hold the office of city clerk and office of city treasurer
at the same time. The council may appoint as city treasurer the same person who
the city manager has appointed as city clerk and vice versa. (Ord. 2016-6, 7-
25-2016)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL COURT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Organization Of Court
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Jurisdiction Of Court
1-9-4: Judge Of The Court
1-9-5: Chief Of Police
1-9-6: Clerk Of The Court
1-9-7: Prosecuting Attorney
1-9-8: Rules Of Court
1-9-9: Written Complaints To Prosecute Violations
1-9-10: Traffic Violations Bureau
1-9-11: Traffic Violations; Procedure
1-9-12: Summons For Arrest
1-9-13: Form Of Arrest Warrant
1-9-14: Procedures For Bail Or Bond
1-9-15: Arraignment And Pleadings By Defendant
1-9-16: Trials And Judgments
1-9-17: Trial By Jury And Waiver
1-9-18: Witness Fees
1-9-19: Sentencing
1-9-20: Collection Of Fees In Addition To Fines And Penalties
1-9-21: Payment Of Jail Costs By Inmate
1-9-1: ORGANIZATION OF COURT:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal court
of the city as put into operation by resolution duly passed on January 6, 1969,
and filed in accordance with law as authorized by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections
27-101 and 27-102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of the city, the provisions of this
chapter shall control. The court shall be operative on and after February 1,
1969. (1985 Code § 6-101; amd. 2007 Code)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The peace officer in charge of the police force of the city.
CLERK: The clerk of this city, including any deputy or member of the office
staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office.
COURT: The municipal court of the city of Okemah.
JUDGE: The judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or
alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this
chapter.
THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The district court judicial district of the state of
Oklahoma wherein the government of the city is situated. (1985 Code § 6-102;
amd. 2007 Code)
1-9-3: JURISDICTION OF COURT:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with
applicable law. (1985 Code § 6-103)
1-9-4: JUDGE OF THE COURT:
   A.   Qualifications: There shall be one judge of the court. A judge need not
be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state, but, if not, he must be a
resident of the city, be at least twenty five (25) years of age, and have good
moral character. A judge who is a licensed attorney may engage in the practice
of law in other courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with
his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are
connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court pending therein, or
which might become the subject of proceedings therein. A judge who is a
licensed attorney must be a resident of this county or an adjacent county or
maintain a law office in the county. He may serve as judge of other municipal
courts, if such service may be accomplished consistent with his duties as judge
of this court, with the consent of the council. (1985 Code § 6-104)
   B.   Term: The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years expiring on
February 1 in each odd numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for
proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. (1985
Code § 6-105)
   C.   Alternate Judge: There shall be appointed for each judge of the court
an alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His
appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as the
judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is:
      1.   Absent from the court;
      2.   Unable to act as judge; or
      3.   Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (1985 Code § 6-106)
   D.   Acting Judge: If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly
appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint
some person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the
judge, who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of
pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be
available. (1985 Code § 6-107)
   E.   Appointment Of Judge And Alternate Judge: Judges and alternate judges
shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council. A
proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the city council at the
next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the day upon which the
appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at the next regularly
scheduled meeting. The city council may decide upon the proposed appointment by
a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure of decision upon a
proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly
scheduled meeting of the city council unless the mayor, in writing, withdraws
the proposed appointment. (1985 Code § 6-108)
   F.   Salary And Payments To Judges: A judge, other than an alternate judge
or an acting judge, shall receive a salary as set by the city council from time
to time, paid in the manner as set by the city council. An alternate or acting
judge shall be paid in such sum as set by the council; however, their payments
shall not exceed the salary of the judge in whose stead the acting or alternate
judge sits for any month. (1985 Code § 6-109)
   G.   Removal Of Judge:
      1.   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council
for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of the state for the
removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by:
         a.   The mayor; or
         b.   Twenty five (25) or more qualified electors of the city.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
      2.   The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the judge at least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the
hearing, the judge shall be entitled to:
         a.   Representation by counsel;
         b.   Present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him;
and
         c.   Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing.
      3.   So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma
administrative procedures act governing individual proceedings 1  shall govern
removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon
individual votes, by a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of
such removal. (1985 Code § 6-110)
   H.   Vacancy In Office:
      1.   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
         a.   Dies;
         b.   Resigns;
         c.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
         d.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed
finally in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
      2.   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor,
with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a successor to complete the
unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment is made. (1985
Code § 6-111; amd. 2007 Code)
   I.   Disqualification Of Judge: In prosecutions before the court, no change
of venue shall be allowed; but the judge before whom the case is pending may
certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under the
terms, conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a
judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting
judge appointed as provided in this section. (1985 Code § 6-112)
 
Notes
1 1. 75 OS §§ 309 through 317.
1-9-5: CHIEF OF POLICE:
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title,
to the chief of police of the city, who shall be the principal officer of the
court. (1985 Code § 6-113)
1-9-6: CLERK OF THE COURT:
   A.   Duties:
      1.   The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be ex officio
the clerk of the court.
      2.   The clerk shall:
         a.   Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers.
         b.   Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court.
         c.   Enter all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of
the court.
         d.   Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of
the court as the judge shall direct.
         e.   Receive and receipt for forfeitures, fines, deposits, and sums of
money payable to the court.
         f.   Pay to the city treasurer all monies so received by him, except
such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by him for
special purposes. All monies paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the
general fund of the city, or in such other funds as the city council may
direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the municipal government in
accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is
placed. (1985 Code § 6-114)
   B.   Bond: The clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-111, in a sum to be determined by the city
council. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the city council for
approval. When approved, it shall be filed with the city clerk and retained in
the city archives. (1985 Code § 6-116)
1-9-7: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY:
The attorney for the city, or his duly designated assistant, shall have the
power to be prosecuting officer of the court. He shall also prosecute all
alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in
his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review
from this court to any other court of the state, and to represent the city in
all proceedings arising out of matters in the court. (1985 Code § 6-115)
1-9-8: RULES OF COURT:
   A.   Prescribed By Judge: The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the
laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct
of the business of the court. (1985 Code § 6-117)
   B.   Enforcement: Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the
judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison
for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against
process issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the
district courts of the state. (1985 Code § 6-118)
1-9-9: WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE VIOLATIONS:
All prosecutions for violations of ordinances of the city shall be styled "The
City of Okemah, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or defendants)". Except as
provided hereinafter, prosecution shall be initiated by the filing of a written
complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting
forth concisely the offense charged. (1985 Code § 6-119)
1-9-10: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU:
   A.   Bureau Established: A traffic violations bureau is established as a
division of the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by the
clerk, or by subordinates designated by him for that purpose. Persons who are
cited for violation of one of the traffic ordinances of the city may elect to
pay a fine in the traffic violations bureau according to the schedule of fines
to be determined by the city council or the judge.
   B.   Rules; Payment Of Fine: The court may adopt rules to carry into effect
this section. Payment of a fine under this section shall constitute a final
determination of cause against the defendant. If a defendant who has elected to
pay a fine under this section fails to do so, prosecution shall proceed under
the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code § 6-121)
1-9-11: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Citation Issuance:
      1.   If a police officer observes facts which he believes constitute a
violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, committed by a resident or
nonresident thereof, in lieu of arresting such a person, he may take his name,
address, operator's license number, and registered license number of the motor
vehicle involved and any other pertinent and necessary information and may
issue him, in writing in form prescribed by the city manager or his duly
designated delegate, a traffic citation embracing the above information, and
also stating the traffic violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him
to answer to the charge against him at a time, no later than the date specified
in the citation.
      2.   The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator, endorsed on the citation to answer as specified, may then release the
person from custody.
      3.   If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer as
prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed and the case shall be
prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Release, Custody, Bail: If the alleged traffic violation is committed
by a nonresident or resident of the city, the police officer may: (1985 Code §
6-120)
      1.   Release the person after obtaining sufficient information, as set
out in subsection A of this section, pending his appearance on a day certain in
court, as specified in the citation; (1985 Code § 6-120; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Take the person into custody and demand that bond for the offense
charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or
      3.   Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person
either shall be taken immediately before the judge for further proceedings
according to law or shall have bail fixed for his release in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon giving
his written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in subsection A
of this section, the person shall be released from custody.
   C.   Parking Violations: If the alleged offense is a violation of an
ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any
regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator be not present,
the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to
come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that
prescribed in subsection A or B of this section, with such variation as the
circumstances require; the operator of this vehicle shall be under the same
obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him
personally under subsection A or B of this section. (1985 Code § 6-120)
1-9-12: SUMMONS FOR ARREST:
   A.   Issuance: Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any
ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or
unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested
and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person
charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the
offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in
the court on a certain day after the summons is served upon him, and including
such other pertinent information as may be necessary.
   B.   Serving Summons: The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to
the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons
within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as
provided by this chapter. (1985 Code § 6-122)
1-9-13: FORM OF ARREST WARRANT:
   A.   Form Of Warrant: Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of the
city, upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the city
attorney or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in such
form as prescribed by the court.
   B.   Execution Of Warrant: It is the duty of the chief of police,
personally, or through a duly constituted member of the police force of the
city, or through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a
warrant as promptly as possible. (1985 Code § 6-123; amd. 2007 Code)
1-9-14: PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND:
   A.   Procedure: Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response
to citation or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after
arraignment, the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail
for his appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or
the judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of
bail. In case of arrests made at night or under other conditions of emergency
or when the judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the chief of
police, or his designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty
provided by ordinance for the offense charged. (1985 Code § 6-124; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Arrest For Traffic Violation Other Than Parking Or Standing; Bail: If a
resident or nonresident of the municipality is arrested by a law enforcement
officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a traffic ordinance, other than
an ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the
arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released
upon personal recognizance as provided for in 22 Oklahoma Statutes section
1115.1, then the procedures provided for in the state and municipal traffic
bail bond procedure act as applied to municipalities, shall govern. The
municipal judge shall prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The
amount of bail shall not exceed the maximum fine and costs provided by
ordinance for each offense, unless the defendant has a previous history of
failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case
the amount of bail shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (1985
Code § 6-125; amd. 2007 Code)
1-9-15: ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT:
   A.   Arraignment: Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant
shall be arraigned. The judge, or the city attorney, shall read the complaint
to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial
by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him
whether he pleads guilty or not guilty.
   B.   Guilty Plea: If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to
judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.
   C.   Plea Of Not Guilty: If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for
jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at
a later date. (1985 Code § 6-126)
1-9-16: TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS:
   A.   Postponement: Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
   B.   Presence At Trial: The defendant must be present in person at the
trial. (1985 Code § 6-127)
   C.   Trials Of Misdemeanors: In all trials, as to matters not covered in
this chapter, or by the statutes relating to municipal courts, or by rules duly
promulgated by the supreme court of Oklahoma, the procedure applicable in
trials of misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that
they can be made effective.
   D.   Judgment Of Court: If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after
the trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within
the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence
accordingly.
   E.   Entry In Docket: At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered
immediately by the judge who shall cause it to be entered in his docket.
   F.   Acquittal: If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be
detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once.
   G.   Imprisonment: A judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct
that he be imprisoned until the fine is satisfied at the rate of one day
imprisonment for each twenty five dollars ($25.00) of fine. (1985 Code § 6-127;
amd. 2007 Code)
1-9-17: TRIAL BY JURY AND WAIVER:
   A.   Trial By Jury Or To Court: In all prosecutions for violations of
ordinances punishable by fine of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
excluding court costs, or by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment,
trial shall be by jury, unless waived by the defendant and the city. If trial
by jury is waived, trial shall be to the court. (1985 Code § 6-128; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Decision Of Defendant:
      1.   At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or
waives trial by jury. His election shall be recorded in the minutes of the
arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings in
the case.
      2.   An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed
by the defendant at any time prior to the day for which trial by the court is
set; an election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to the
commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial, but if that
change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter
be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury. (1985 Code § 6-128)
1-9-18: WITNESS FEES:
   A.   Fees And Mileage Allowed: Witnesses in any proceeding in the court
other than the police officers or peace officers shall be entitled to a fee as
set by the city per each day of attendance, plus mileage for each mile actually
and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance
if their residence is outside the city limits. However, no witness shall
receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or
the same travel.
   B.   Deposit From Defendant; Exception For Indigents:
      1.   Deposit Required: A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must
deposit with the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day
of attendance for each witness to be summoned.
      2.   Indigent Defendants:
         a.   Such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who
files an affidavit setting out:
            (1)   The name of no more than three (3) witnesses;
            (2)   That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to
provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
            (3)   That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
            (4)   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his
proper defense.
         b.   The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. (1985 Code
§ 6-129)
1-9-19: SENTENCING:
   A.   Suspension Of Sentence: After conviction and sentence, the judge may
suspend sentence, in accordance with the provisions of, and subject to the
conditions and procedures imposed by, 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 27-123 and
27-124. (1985 Code § 6-130)
   B.   Imprisonment:
      1.   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the
Sheriff of the County or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
      2.   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty
may be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets,
avenues, alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or property. For
each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited for serving two (2) days
of imprisonment under his sentence.
      3.   The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the City Manager,
shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in
charge of the place where the work is to be performed, himself, or some person
designated by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the Chief
of Police shall make provision therefor.
      4.   The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause prisoners confined in
the City Jail for nonpayment of fines or costs assessed against them in the
court to be worked and to be credited for work done as provided by State law.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to make such reasonable regulations as
may be necessary in regard to the working of such prisoners. (1985 Code § 6-
131)
   C.   Fines And Costs: If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the
Court shall tax the costs to the defendant, which shall be the maximum allowed
by State law, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses, but the total
amount of fine may not exceed the amount set out in section
1-4-1 of this title.
   The Clerk of the Court shall tax the defendant in a sum not exceeding thirty
dollars ($30.00) plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses, all of
which the defendant shall pay, in addition to any fine or administrative fees
that may be imposed, and in addition to any State mandated fees or costs. No
Court cost will be assessed for parking or seat belt violations. (1985 Code §§
6-130 through 6-132; amd. Ord. 2024-2, 4-8-2024)
1-9-20: COLLECTION OF FEES IN ADDITION TO FINES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   CLEET:
      1.   Any person convicted of an offense, including traffic offenses, but
excluding parking and standing violations, when such offense is punishable by a
fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration or any person
forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense, shall be ordered by the
Municipal Court to pay ten dollars ($10.00) as a separate fee, which fee shall
be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all fines and penalties
otherwise provided for by law for such offense. (Ord. 2017-9, 8-14-2017, eff.
8-25-2017)
      2.   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the Municipal Court shall
collect the fee provided for in subsection A1 of this section and deposit it in
an account created for that purpose. Said fees shall be forwarded monthly by
the Municipal Court Clerk to the Council on Law Enforcement Education and
Training (CLEET) before the fifteenth day of each month for the preceding
calendar month. (Ord., 2-14-2005)
   B.   AFIS: In addition to the fees imposed by subsection A of this section,
any person convicted of an offense, including traffic offenses, but excluding
parking and standing violations, when such offense is punishable by a fine of
ten dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration or any person forfeiting bond
when charged with such an offense, shall be ordered by the Municipal Court to
pay ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense for the AFIS Fund created by 74
Oklahoma Statutes section 150.25 as a separate fee, which shall be in addition
to and not in substitution for any and all fines and penalties otherwise
provided for by law for such offense. The fee shall be collected at the same
time as the fees provided for in subsection A of this section and shall be paid
directly to the AFIS Fund each month. The balance shall be deposited in the
General Revenue Fund by the Municipal Court Clerk until the said monthly
payment is made.
   C.   Forensic Science Improvement Assessment: In addition to the fees
imposed by subsections A and B of this section, any person convicted of an
offense, excluding traffic offenses, parking and standing violations, when such
offense is punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or more or by
incarceration or any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense,
shall be ordered by the Municipal Court to pay a forensic science improvement
assessment in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense as a separate
fee, which fee shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all
fines and penalties otherwise provided for by law for such offense. The
assessment shall be collected at the same time as the fees provided for in
subsections A and B of this section and shall be paid directly each month to
the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation for deposit into the Forensic
Science Improvement Revolving Fund, less five percent (5%) of the assessment
collected which may be retained by the Municipal Court Clerk as authorized by
20 Oklahoma Statutes section 1313.4. The balance shall be deposited in the
General Revenue Fund by the Municipal Court Clerk until the said monthly
payment is made. Any funds deposited as required by this subsection shall be
listed as a separate item from other deposits made pursuant to subsections A
and B of this section. (Ord. 2017-10, 8-14-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
   D.   Medical Expense Liability Revolving Fund: In addition to the fees
imposed by subsections A, B, and C of this section, any person convicted of an
offense, excluding traffic offenses, parking and standing violations, but
including violations of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 11-902 or the Municipal
ordinance for said offense, when such offense is punishable by a fine of ten
dollars ($10.00) or more or by incarceration or any person forfeiting bond when
charged with such an offense, shall be ordered by the Municipal Court to pay
ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense to the Medical Expense Liability
Revolving Fund for the State as created by 19 Oklahoma Statutes section 746, as
a separate fee, which fee shall be in addition to and not in substitution for
any and all fines and penalties otherwise provided for by law for such offense.
The fee shall be collected at the same time as the fees provided for in
subsections A, B, and C of this section and shall be paid directly to the
Medical Expense Liability Fund each month. The balance shall be deposited in
the General Revenue Fund by the Municipal Court Clerk until the said monthly
payment is made.
   E.   Responsibility Of Court Clerk: It shall be the responsibility of the
Municipal Court Clerk to account for and ensure the correctness and accuracy of
payments made to the State agencies identified in subsections A, B, C, and D of
this section.
   F.   Authority To Increase Fees: If any of the amounts listed in subsections
A through D of this section shall be increased by subsequent State Statute, or
if any new fees shall be mandated by the State which Municipal Court is
required to collect, the City Council may, by resolution, increase said
existing fees or implement said new fees by resolution, so long as said fees
are, by State Statute, in addition to, and not a substitution for, any and all
fines and penalties otherwise provided by ordinance for the offense. (Ord., 2-
14-2005)
   G.   Collection Fee: In accordance with 11 Oklahoma Statute section 22-138,
there is hereby imposed an additional fee of up to thirty five percent (35%) on
all debts and accounts receivable, i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution,
and other debts owed the City of Okemah that have been referred to a private
firm (Perdue) for collection. (Ord. 2018-2, 4-9-2018)
1-9-21: PAYMENT OF JAIL COSTS BY INMATE:
   A.   Payment Required; Assessment Of Costs; Exception:
      1.   The Municipal Judge shall require a person confined in any jail
facility for any Municipal offense to pay the jail facility the costs of
incarceration, both before and after conviction, upon conviction or receiving a
deferred sentence. The costs of incarceration shall be collected by the Clerk
of the Court. Costs of incarceration shall include booking, receiving and
processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care and
psychiatric services. The costs for incarceration shall be an amount equal to
the actual cost of the services and shall be determined by the Chief of Police
or contract amount. The cost of incarceration shall be paid to the City.
      2.   The costs of incarceration shall not be assessed if, in the judgment
of the court, such costs would impose a manifest hardship on the person, or if,
in the opinion of the court, the property of the person is needed for the
maintenance and support of immediate family.
      3.   Five percent (5%) of any amount collected shall be paid to the
Municipal Attorney's Office; five percent (5%) shall be transmitted by the
Court Clerk to the District Attorney's Council Revolving Fund, established by
19 Oklahoma Statutes section 215.28, to be used to fund personnel to process
victim compensation claims in district offices designated by the Crime Victims
Compensation Board; and the remaining amount shall be paid to the City.
   B.   Payment For Medical Care: Any offender injured during the commission of
a felony or misdemeanor offense shall be required to reimburse the City the
full amount paid by the City for any medical care or treatment administered to
such offender during any period of incarceration or preceding incarceration.
(Ord. 2003-01-04, 4-28-2003)
CHAPTER 10
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT GRANT JOB TRACKING
SECTION:
1-10-1: Job Tracking
1-10-2: Penalty
1-10-1: JOB TRACKING:
Any and every entity using any building or structure constructed with funding
from a CDBG-EDIF funded infrastructure improvement grant must agree to provide
job tracking data as a condition of using the said improvements for that period
of time starting from the date the state of Oklahoma awarded the CDBG-EDIF
funds to the city of Okemah until one year after the physical completion of the
said improvement. (Ord. 2010-02, 10-14-2010)
1-10-2: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined an amount of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and costs. (Ord.
2010-02, 10-14-2010)
TITLE 2
FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE AND PURCHASING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
2-1-1: Contractual Services Defined
2-1-2: Depositories Designated
2-1-3: Funds Secured By Unit Collateral System
2-1-4: Purchases Authorized
2-1-5: Purchasing Procedure
2-1-6: Competitive Bidding
2-1-7: Sales Of Surplus Or Obsolete Supplies Or Equipment
2-1-8: Rural Fire Protection Revenue And Expense Fund
2-1-9: Investment Of City Monies In Custody Of Treasurer
2-1-1: CONTRACTUAL SERVICES DEFINED:
"Contractual services", for the purpose of this chapter, shall mean services
performed for the City by persons not in the employment of the City, and may
include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection
with the services under express or implied contract. "Contractual services"
shall include travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone;
telegraph; utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations and
maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges, and other physical
facilities of the City; and other services performed for the City by persons
not in the employment of the City. (1985 Code § 7-103)
2-1-2: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
Funds of the City shall be deposited as required by law. The City Treasurer
shall deposit daily all public funds received by him into designated banks:
Okemah National Bank and Citizens State Bank, which are designated depositories
of the City. (1985 Code § 7-101)
2-1-3: FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM:
All public deposits made by the Treasurer shall be made in compliance with and
shall be secured as provided in the Security for Local Public Deposits Act, as
codified and amended in 62 Oklahoma Statutes section 517.1 et seq. (1985 Code §
7-102; amd. 2007 Code)
2-1-4: PURCHASES AUTHORIZED:
The City Manager, or other personnel pursuant to authorizations granted by the
City Manager and subject to his supervision and control, shall contract for and
purchase or issue purchase authorizations for all supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services for the offices, departments and agencies of
the City government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) shall require the prior approval of the City
Council. (Ord. 2017-11, 8-28-2017)
2-1-5: PURCHASING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Invitation For Quotes Or Bid: Before the City makes any purchase of, or
contract for, supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, any of
which single transactions where the cost exceeds seven thousand five hundred
dollars ($7,500.00), except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City
Manager shall obtain the authorization of the City Council and shall submit to
at least three (3) persons, firms or corporations dealing in and able to supply
the same, or to a smaller number if there are not three (3) dealing in and able
to supply the same, a request for quotation, or invitation to bid, and
specifications, to give them opportunity to bid; or publish notice of the
proposed purchase in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. (Ord.
2010-03, 12-13-2010)
   B.   Consideration Locally: The City Council shall favor a person, firm or
corporation in the City when this can be done without additional cost to the
City; but the City Manager shall submit requests for quotations to those
outside the City when this may be necessary to secure bids or to create
competitive conditions, or when the City Manager thinks that by so doing a
saving can be made for the City and shall purchase from them when the
Purchasing Officer can make a saving for the City.
   C.   City Manager And Council Determinations: If the City Manager extends
invitations to bid, all bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place. The City Manager may repeatedly reject all bids, and
again may submit to the same or other persons, firms or corporations the
request for quotation, or invitation to bid, or again publish notice of the
proposed purchase. The Council may purchase from the bidder whose bid is most
advantageous to the City, considering price, quality, date of delivery and any
other consideration the Council may deem relevant. In the event of two (2)
equal bids, the Council may purchase from one of those tying, or may divide the
purchase among those tying, always accepting the bid or bids most advantageous
to the City.
   D.   Purchases Allowed Without Requesting Quotes Or Bids: The following may
be purchased regardless of value thereof without the requirement of obtaining
quotations or giving an opportunity for competitive bidding, unless otherwise
required in this chapter or by State or Federal law or regulation:
      1.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever
bought;
      2.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased
from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from
private dealers, including government surplus;
      3.   Contractual services, including, but not limited to, natural gas,
electricity, or telephone service, purchased from a public utility at a price
or rate determined by the State Corporation Commission or other governmental
authority;
      4.   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when
purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the State purchasing
agency or any other State agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for
things purchased by the State, whether such price is determined by a contract
negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; and
      5.   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
legal, architectural and medical services. (Ord. 05-01-2000, 5-1-2000)
2-1-6: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
All public construction contracts shall be let and awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder, by free and open competitive bidding after solicitation for
sealed bids in accordance with the provisions of the Public Competitive Bidding
Act of 1974 1 , as amended. No work shall be commenced until a written contract
is executed and all required bonds and insurance have been provided by the
contractor to the awarding public agency. "Public construction contract" shall
be construed as having the meaning ascribed to it as defined in the Public
Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, as amended. (Ord. 05-01-2000, 5-1-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 61 OS § 101 et seq.
2-1-7: SALES OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE SUPPLIES OR EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Declaration By Council; Calling For Bids:
      1.   No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of any value
may be sold until the City Council shall have declared them obsolete or
surplus. (1985 Code § 7-107)
      2.   Before the City Manager sells any surplus or obsolete supplies,
materials or equipment of a value of more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Manager
shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
or give notice in such other manner as the City Manager deems necessary
adequately to reach prospective buyers to give them opportunity to make
necessary bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction. The City may
repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice again. The City Manager
shall sell such supplies, materials or equipment to the highest responsible
bidder. In case of a tie, if necessary, the City Manager shall cast lots to
determine to whom to sell, or the City Manager may divide the sale among two
(2) or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidder or bidders.
(1985 Code § 7-107; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Competitive Bidding Not Required On Certain Sales: The City Manager may
sell supplies, materials, and equipment, without giving the opportunity for
competitive bidding and after the City Council has declared said supplies,
materials, and equipment to be obsolete or surplus, at a price at least as
great as that paid by the City for the same. (Ord. 05-01-2000, 5-1-2000)
2-1-8: RURAL FIRE PROTECTION REVENUE AND EXPENSE FUND:
   A.   Fund Established; Purpose: A Rural Fire Protection Fund is hereby
established to receive the contract lease payments from the Okemah Volunteer
Firefighters' Association and any rural fire defense operations grants. All
receipts shall be received by the City Treasurer and deposited at regular
intervals into the fund. In the event the fund is depleted, the City is under
no obligation to replenish or reimburse said fund from sources other than those
herein stated.
   B.   Special Revenue Fund Account: The fund shall be accounted for as a
Special Revenue Fund type account and audited as provided for by law.
   C.   Authorized Use Of Funds: The fund shall be allowed to accumulate each
fiscal year and all interest accumulated shall be applied to the fund. The fund
will be budgeted and expended each fiscal year as all General Fund accounts
through the City budget process and may also be amended as such if the need
arises. The fund may be used to pay capital subject to the Fire Chief and City
Manager's recommendation and the City Council's approval. Any remaining
unexpended budget funds or unappropriated revenues shall be retained in the
fund and allowed to accumulate for future expenditure.
   D.   Reporting: The City Treasurer shall prepare a monthly revenue and
expenditure report of the fund for the review of the City Council. Said report
shall also be made available to the Fire Chief. Said report will conform to the
same rules, regulations, policies and procedures as are now in effect or as may
be later adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 12-01-98, 12-7-1998)
2-1-9: INVESTMENT OF CITY MONIES IN CUSTODY OF TREASURER:
The City Treasurer shall invest monies in the custody of the Treasurer, which
are in excess of the amount needed to meet the budget items for the current
fiscal year, in:
   A.   Direct obligations of the United States government, its agencies or
instrumentalities to the payment of which the full faith and credit of the
government of the United States is pledged, or obligations to the payment of
which the full faith and credit of this State is pledged;
   B.   Fully insured certificates of deposits of savings and loan
associations, banks, savings banks and credit unions, whether located in or out
of this State; and/or
   C.   Savings accounts or savings certificates of savings and loan
associations, banks, and credit unions, to the extent that the accounts or
certificates are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
(Ord. 2012-04, 10-22-2012)
CHAPTER 2
SALES TAX
SECTION:
2-2-1: Title
2-2-2: Definitions
2-2-3: Classification Of Taxpayers
2-2-4: Subsisting State Permits
2-2-5: Taxes Imposed; Effective Dates; Purposes
2-2-6: Sales Subject To Tax; Exemptions
2-2-7: Tax Due Date
2-2-8: Payment Of Tax; Brackets
2-2-9: Tax Constitutes Debt
2-2-10: Collection By Vendors
2-2-11: Returns, Remittances And Discounts
2-2-12: Delinquencies; Interest And Penalties
2-2-13: Erroneous Payments; Claim For Refund
2-2-14: Fraudulent Returns
2-2-15: Records Confidential
2-2-16: Amendments
2-2-17: Provisions Cumulative
2-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as CITY OF OKEMAH SALES TAX
ORDINANCE. (1985 Code § 7-201)
2-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Generally: The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the
Oklahoma sales tax code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1352 and 37 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 576 and 593, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter. (1985 Code § 7-202)
   B.   Tax Collector Defined: The term "tax collector", as used in this
chapter, means the department of the city or the official agency of the state
duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to
administer the collection of the tax levied in this chapter. (1985 Code § 7-
203)
2-2-3: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma sales tax code
1 . (1985 Code § 7-204)
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS § 1350 et seq.
2-2-4: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purpose of this
chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for
an additional city permit for the same purpose. (1985 Code § 7-205)
2-2-5: TAXES IMPOSED; EFFECTIVE DATES; PURPOSES:
The following city sales taxes, in the total amount of three and one-half
percent (3.5%), shall be imposed and effective as indicated, unless otherwise
extended by a vote of the people. Said taxes have been approved by a majority
of the qualified registered voters of the city voting on same in elections
conducted in the manner prescribed by Oklahoma Statutes:
   A.   Ordinance 3: Ordinance 3, effective August 1, 1967, levied a one cent
($0.01) tax to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the
municipal government of the city. (1985 Code § 7-207; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Ordinance 20: Ordinance 20, effective October 22, 1971, levied an
annual two percent (2%) tax upon the gross receipts from residential and
commercial sales of gas in lieu of other taxes. (Ord. 20, 10-4-1971)
   C.   Ordinance 83-2: Ordinance 83-2, effective September 1, 1983, levied a
two cent ($0.02) tax to be used for capital improvements, including, but not
limited to, pipelines, water hydrants, water plant, and/or vehicles. The
revenues of this tax are to be paid over to the general fund of the city for
said capital improvements.
   D.   Ordinance 83-4: Ordinance 83-4, also known and cited as the amendment
to Okemah special sales tax ordinance of 1983, became effective October 1,
1983. It amended ordinance 83-2 by splitting the approved uses of the two cent
($0.02) tax as follows:
      1.   One-half (1/2) of the revenues of the two cent ($0.02) tax shall be
transferred to the Okemah utilities authority, an Oklahoma public trust, to be
used first for the payment of the debt service of the said trust, providing
that following payment of the debt service, any remaining revenue shall be paid
into the general fund of the city for general purpose use of the city.
      2.   One-half (1/2) of the revenues of the two cent ($0.02) tax shall be
deposited to the general fund of the city for use on capital improvements of
the city as stated in ordinance 83-2.
   E.   Ordinance 97-09-03: Ordinance 97-09-03, effective November 1, 1997,
levies and assesses an excise tax of three cents ($0.03) upon the purchase
price of the storage, use or consumption of tangible, personal property
purchased outside the state of Oklahoma and brought into the city. The purpose
of this tax is to provide revenues for the support of functions of the
municipal government of the city. (1985 Code § 7-207; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Ordinance 99-02-01:
      1.   Citation: This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the
second amendment to Okemah special sales tax ordinance of 1983.
      2.   Effective Date: The provisions of ordinance 99-02-01 shall become
effective on and after May 1, 1999.
      3.   Purpose Of Revenues: The proceeds of the two percent (2%) sales tax
levied and assessed by this subsection shall be used as follows:
         a.   One-half (1/2) of the revenues generated by such sales tax shall
be transferred to the Okemah utilities authority, to be used first for the
payment of the debt service, including payments of interest and principal and
premium, if any, as the same become due, whether at the stated maturity thereof
by acceleration, call for redemption or otherwise, on indebtedness incurred by
said authority; provided, that following payment of the debt service above
stated, any remaining revenues shall be paid back to the general fund of the
city for the use of the general purposes of the city; provided, however, prior
to the incurrence of any indebtedness by said authority, the revenues may be
used to pay any costs related to the current water project and may be
accumulated for such purpose; and
         b.   One-half (1/2) of the revenues generated by such sales tax shall
be deposited to the general fund of the city for use on capital improvements of
the city and/or shall be used to create new jobs and retain existing jobs in
the city by: 1) paying the costs incidental to and debt service on obligations
issued to assist in the establishment of business and/or industrial facilities
to be owned or used by said businesses or industrial entities or the city or
public trusts having the city as beneficiary, for no consideration other than
the economic benefit to be provided to the citizens of the city, by the
establishment of said facilities and by the creation of new jobs, as will be
further specified in an agreement(s) to be negotiated; and/or 2) providing
funds for the economic development of the city, including, but not limited to,
the creation of funds to be used for marketing Okemah to potential new
businesses and/or industries, for creating new jobs by attracting new
businesses and/or industries to Okemah, to retain existing jobs and create
additional jobs by expansion of existing businesses and industries and to
provide such capital improvements as may be required to locate and attract such
new business or industry or to retain or expand such existing business or
industry, all for the purposes of job creation or job retention for Okemah,
including, but not limited to, the payment of debt service and related fees and
expenses on any indebtedness incurred by the city or public trusts having the
city as beneficiary for such purposes. The city council shall determine in its
sole discretion the percentage or amount of said revenues to be expended for
the various purposes described in this subsection F3b. (Ord. 99-02-01, 2-4-
1999)
   G.   Ordinance 99-03-01:
      1.   Citation: This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the
city sales tax ordinance of 1999.
      2.   Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed an excise tax of one-half of
one percent (0.5%) (in addition to any and all other excise taxes now in force)
to be levied upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales
taxable under the Oklahoma sales tax code.
      3.   Purpose Of Revenues: It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this
subsection to provide revenues to pay debt service or associated costs in
connection with facilities to be financed by the city or a public trust having
the city as beneficiary thereof, for use by Quantum Construction Technologies,
Inc., or related entities (collectively, "Quantum"), provided any excess
amounts shall be available to create new jobs and retain existing jobs in the
city by paying the costs incidental to and debt service on obligations issued
to assist in the establishment of business and/or industrial facilities to be
owned or used by said businesses or industrial entities or the city or public
trusts having the city as beneficiary, said sales tax to be made available and
expended for the above purposes for no consideration other than the economic
benefit to be provided to the citizens of the city by the establishment of said
facilities and by the creation of new jobs, as will be further specified in an
agreement(s) to be negotiated.
      4.   Effective Date And Termination Date: The provisions of this
subsection and the collection of the excise tax referenced herein shall only
become effective if the city council shall adopt a resolution providing that
the proceeds of the tax referenced herein are needed (said determination of
need being made in the sole discretion of the city council) to pay a debt
service or associated costs in connection with the referenced facilities to be
financed for Quantum, provided said effective date shall be the first day of a
calendar quarter and notice of said effective date shall be provided in writing
to the Oklahoma tax commission by the fifteenth day of the month next preceding
the referenced calendar quarter, and provided further said ordinance shall be
subject to approval by a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting
on the same in the manner prescribed by law. The provisions of this subsection
and the collection of the excise tax referenced herein shall terminate and said
excise tax shall not be collected after December 31, 2019.
      5.   No Repeal Of Tax: This subsection and the excise tax levied pursuant
hereto shall not be repealed by the city council or by referendum of the
registered qualified voters of the city in the event the proceeds of the
referenced excise tax are being used or have been pledged by the city or any
public trust having the city as beneficiary for the purpose of paying debt
service on obligations issued by the city or any public trust having the city
as beneficiary.
      6.   Tax In Addition To Taxes Currently Levied; Administrative
Proceedings: The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise
taxes levied or assessed by the city, including those levied and assessed by
ordinance 3 of the city and by ordinance 83-2, as amended by ordinance 83-4,
and as potentially further amended by ordinance 99-02-01 (subject to approval
by voters of the city on April 6, 1999); provided, however, that those
provisions of said ordinances relating to the provisions of this chapter shall
apply to the excise tax levied and assessed by this subsection. For purposes of
this subsection, references in this chapter and this code to specific
provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed to be references to said
statutory provisions, as amended. (Ord. 99-03-01, 3-11-1999)
2-2-6: SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The city sales tax shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of
such sales as specified by Oklahoma Statutes, and exemptions from such taxes
shall be allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes. (2007 Code)
2-2-7: TAX DUE DATE:
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma sales
tax code. (1985 Code § 7-215)
2-2-8: PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS:
   A.   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   B.   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the tax
collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the tax collector in the collection of the city sales tax and the
state sales tax. (1985 Code § 7-216)
2-2-9: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (1985 Code
§ 7-217)
2-2-10: COLLECTION BY VENDORS:
   A.   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or
an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner
as other debts. (1985 Code § 7-218)
   C.   A vendor who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to
collect the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or wilfully or
intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or
remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by
whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any
form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he
is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an
adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever, is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person,
firm, corporation, joint venture or association or other legal entity that
wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums
required to be collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1985
Code § 7-218; amd. 2007 Code)
2-2-11: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to
the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be subject to
the same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma sales tax code for
collection of state sales taxes. (1985 Code § 7-219)
2-2-12: DELINQUENCIES; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Delinquency; Statute Adopted: Section 217 of title 68 of the Oklahoma
Statutes is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest and
penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are hereby levied
and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax
levied by this chapter. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by
this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the
delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit
his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. (1985 Code § 7-220)
   B.   Waiver Of Interest And Penalties: The interest or penalty or any
portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax
herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the
waiver or as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68
Oklahoma Statutes section 220. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the
applicable provisions of said statute section are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter. (1985 Code § 7-221)
2-2-13: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and
under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state
sales tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227. To accomplish the
purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said statute section are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (1985 Code § 7-
222)
2-2-14: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or
the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or
escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this
chapter shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 7-223; amd. 2007 Code)
2-2-15: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of the state sales tax code, 68
Oklahoma Statutes section 205, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted
by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the
city sales tax as if here set forth in full. (1985 Code § 7-224)
2-2-16: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinances, hereby
authorize the mayor and city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (1985 Code § 7-225)
2-2-17: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any or
all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. (1985 Code § 7-226)
CHAPTER 3
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
2-3-1: Short Title
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Tax Rate
2-3-4: Exemptions
2-3-5: Administration And Collection Of Tax
2-3-6: Use Of Funds
2-3-7: Records Confidential
2-3-8: Fraudulent Returns
2-3-9: Amendments
2-3-10: Provisions Cumulative
2-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as CITY OF OKEMAH HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM TAX
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY: The City of Okemah, Oklahoma.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Any building or buildings, structures, trailer, or other
facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations in which five (5) or more rooms are used for the accommodation
of such guests whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term
shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or
courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels,
dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments
not occupied by "permanent residents", and all other facilities where rooms or
sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term shall
not include hospitals, sanatoriums or nursing homes, nor shall this term affect
"permanent resident" facilities as defined in this section for residents for
terms in excess of thirty (30) days.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any
room or rooms in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the
furnishings or to the services and accommodation accompanying the use and
possessions of the room or rooms.
OCCUPANT: A person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right
to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or other agreement.
OPERATOR: Any and all persons operating a hotel(s) or motel(s) in this City,
including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee,
mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such
hotel or motel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy
of any room or rooms in a hotel for thirty (30) or more consecutive days during
the current calendar year or proceeding year.
RENT: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.
RETURN: Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM: Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is
available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a
place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space
which is capable of being occupied by seventy five (75) or more persons and
which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall
include: dance halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for
public or private banquets, feasts, social, card parties or weddings, lodge and
meeting halls or rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard,
bowling and table tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private
catering purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls,
broadcasting studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
TAX: The tax levied pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-3: TAX RATE:
There is hereby levied an Excise Tax of five percent (5%) upon the gross
proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent received for every occupancy
of a room or rooms in a hotel in this City except that the tax shall not be
imposed where the rent is less than the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per day.
(Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this chapter:
      1.   Permanent residents;
      2.   The United States government or any agency or division thereof;
      3.   The State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof;
      4.   Any organization, corporation or association organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable, philanthropic or educational purposes
provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a trade or business for
profit.
   B.   Anyone claiming to be exempt from the tax must obtain a certification
from the City Clerk that the organization, association or corporation with
which he is affiliated is exempt from the tax. Prior to issuing such a
certificate, the City Clerk shall require a certification from the said
organization, association or corporation that the occupant is its agent,
representative or employee and that his occupancy of the room is required in
connection with the affairs of said organization, and upon such proof a refund
may be obtained from the respective operator. The certificate shall be
available from each operator. (Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-5: ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
   A.   Tax To Be Separately Designated On Bills: The operator shall separately
designate, charge and show the tax on all bills, statements, receipts or any
other evidence of charges or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered
by the operator.
   B.   Operator Responsible For Collection: Each operator shall be solely
responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable
to the City for the tax.
   C.   Records To Be Kept: Every operator shall keep records of every
occupancy and of all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and of the tax payable
thereon in such forms as the City Clerk may require. Such records shall be
available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the City
Clerk, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the City and shall be
preserved for a period of three (3) years from the date thereof except that the
City Clerk may consent to their destruction within that period or may require
that they be kept longer.
   D.   Returns:
      1.   Every operator shall file with the City Clerk a return of occupancy
and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the period ending June 30,
September 30, December 31, and March 31 of each year from the effective date
hereof.
      2.   The City Clerk may permit or require returns to be made for shorter
or longer periods and upon different dates. The form of return shall be
prescribed by the City Clerk and shall contain such information as the City
Clerk may deem necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. The
City Clerk may require amended returns to be filed within twenty (20) days
after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
   E.   Payment Of Tax: At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of
rents, each operator shall pay to the City of Okemah the taxes imposed by this
chapter upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies
collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of
this chapter. All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to be
filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the City of Okemah on or
before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such period without
regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed
correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon.
   F.   Assessment And Determination Of Tax: If a return required by this
chapter is not filed, or if a return when filed is incorrect or insufficient,
the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the City Clerk from such information
as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis
of external indices, such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents,
comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees, or
other factors; provided, however, such assessment shall in no event exceed the
amount of tax that was due and payable and such assessment procedure shall not
be performed in an arbitrary and capricious manner. Written notice of such
assessment shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment
of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the
tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, shall apply in writing to
the City Council or its designee for a hearing or unless the City Clerk shall
reassess the same. After such hearing, the City Council or its designee shall
give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is
assessed and such determination shall be final.
   G.   Refunds:
      1.   Refund Procedure: The City shall refund or credit any tax
erroneously collected if written application to the City Clerk for such refund
shall be made within two (2) years from the date of payment thereof. For like
causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative and
the order of the City Clerk. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor
shall be stated in writing. Such application may also be made by the person who
has collected and paid such tax to the City providing that the application is
made within two (2) years of the payment of the occupant to the operator, but
no refund of money shall be made to the operator until the amount for which the
application for refund is made has been paid to the occupant. The City Clerk in
lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payment
due from the applicant.
      2.   Determination And Hearing: Upon application for a refund the City
Clerk may receive evidence with respect thereto, and conduct an investigation.
After making a determination as to the refund, the City Clerk shall give notice
thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the
applicant within ninety (90) days after such notice shall apply in writing to
the City Council or its designee for a hearing. After such hearing, the City
Council or its designee shall give written notice of its decision to the
applicant.
   H.   Notices: Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to
have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator
or deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the
operator.
   I.   Remedies Exclusive: The remedies provided in this chapter shall be
exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability
imposed by this chapter.
   J.   General Powers Of The City Clerk: In addition to all other powers
granted to the City Clerk, the City Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered:
      1.   To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this chapter for the purposes thereof;
      2.   To extend for cause shown the time for filing return for the period
not exceeding sixty (60) days; and for cause shown to waive, remit or reduce
penalties or interest;
      3.   To delegate the functions of the City Clerk hereunder to an
assistant or other employee or employees of the City;
      4.   To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes
imposed by this chapter except the rate of tax;
      5.   To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable
rents.
   K.   Administration Of Oaths And Compelling Testimony: The City Clerk, or
designated representative, shall have the power to administer oaths and take
affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of the
powers and duties under this chapter. The City Clerk shall have the power to
subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,
papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of
duties hereunder and all the enforcement of this chapter and to examine them in
relation thereto.
   L.   Collection Permits: Every operator shall apply for a collection permit
from the City Clerk in a form prescribed by said City Clerk within ten (10)
days after the effective date of this chapter, or in the case of operators
commencing business or opening new hotels after such effective dates, within
three (3) days after such commencement or opening. The City Clerk shall, within
five (5) days after such application, issue, without charge, to each operator a
collection permit empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant
and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each collection permit or
duplicate shall state the hotel or motel to which it is applicable. Such
collection permits shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such
manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons
seeking occupancy. Said permits shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and
shall be surrendered immediately to the City Clerk upon the cessation of
business at the hotel named, or upon its sale, lease, assignment or transfer.
   M.   Interest: If any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the
person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid
tax at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month on the unpaid
balance from the date of delinquency.
   N.   Delinquent Taxes: The tax levied by this chapter shall be due and
payable at the time filing of the returns provided for in this chapter is
required. All taxes not paid within five (5) days from the time they become
due, shall be delinquent.
   O.   Discount: In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records,
filing reports, and remitting the tax when due, a three percent (3%) discount
shall be allowed upon all taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent.
(Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-6: USE OF FUNDS:
It hereby is declared to be the purpose of the revenues provided by the five
percent (5%) Hotel/Motel Tax levied by this chapter to provide revenues for
economic development, recreation and tourism within the City of Okemah,
Oklahoma. All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be deposited into the City of Okemah's General Fund. The City Council shall
annually appropriate said funds to support the said governmental purposes.
(Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-7: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the Hotel/Motel Room Tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes,
section 205 of the Sales Tax Law of the State of Oklahoma, and each subsection
thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable
to administration of the Okemah Hotel/Motel Room Tax as if herein set forth.
(Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-8: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
The wilful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances
herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction
thereof the offending operator shall be subject to a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), including costs, or by imprisonment for not more
than thirty (30) days or by both such fine or imprisonment; each day is to be
considered a separate offense to be charged severally. (Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-
2017)
2-3-9: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma, by their approval of this chapter
at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the City Council by
ordinances duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or
additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter
as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness except that the rate
of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the City as provided by law. (Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
2-3-10: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of ordinances of the City. (Ord. 2017-12, 10-12-2017)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Or Permit Required
3-1-2: License Tax Levied, Set By Resolution
3-1-3: Permit Fees Assessed; Exceptions
3-1-4: License Due Date; Delinquencies
3-1-5: Right Of Entry Of City Officials
3-1-6: Posting Or Exhibiting License Or Permit
3-1-7: Penalty
3-1-1: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Required; Signatures; Nontransferable:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent, shall
conduct, pursue or operate any calling, trade, profession or occupation listed
in section
3-1-2 of this chapter, or carry on any activity set forth in section
3-1-3 of this chapter, without first procuring a license or permit therefor,
whichever the case may be, except as may be otherwise prescribed by law.
      2.   Licenses shall be signed by the City Clerk; permits shall be signed
by the City Manager.
      3.   In no case shall a license or permit be returned or transferred.
   B.   Separate License For Each Business; Limitations Of License:
      1.   A separate license must be obtained for each branch of an
establishment or separate place of business in which the trade, calling,
profession or occupation listed in section
3-1-2 of this chapter is carried on.
      2.   For solicitors and peddlers, each individual going door to door
doing business within the City limits must have a separate license.
      3.   Each license shall authorize the party obtaining such license to
carry on, pursue, or conduct only that trade, calling, profession, or
occupation described in such license.
   C.   Separate Permit Per Occurrence; Limitations Of Permit: Unless otherwise
provided, a separate permit for an activity enumerated in section
3-1-3 of this chapter must be obtained for each occurrence of such activity,
and each permit shall authorize the party obtaining the permit to carry on or
conduct only the activity described in the permit. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-1-2: LICENSE TAX LEVIED, SET BY RESOLUTION:
There is hereby levied a License Tax on the following callings, trades,
businesses, avocations and occupations. The amount of the License Tax for each
occupation shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Such tax shall be
paid to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of the license required in section
3-1-1 of this chapter. The taxes shall be as set forth by resolution of the
City Council, for the following: (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
Alcoholic beverage sales (chapter 2 of this title).
Auction merchants.
Contractors:
Building moving
Electrical
Fence contractor
General building
Mechanical
Plumbing
Storm shelter construction
Daycare centers (chapter 3 of this title).
Home occupations.
Nursing, rest or convalescent homes (chapter 4 of this title).
Pawnbrokers (chapter 5 of this title).
Security services.
Solicitors and peddlers (chapter 6 of this title):
One day
One week
One month
One year
Taxicabs (chapter 8 of this title).
(Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1-3: PERMIT FEES ASSESSED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Fees For Certain Activities: There is hereby assessed a permit fee on
the following activities. The amount of each of the permit fees shall be set by
resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be paid to the city clerk prior
to issuance of the permit by the city manager or his designee as required in
section
3-1-1 of this chapter. Fees shall be assessed for the following activities per
occurrence, unless otherwise stated:
Auctions (estate sale, closing out sale, etc.; no license required under
section
3-1-2 of this chapter).
Building moving.
Carnivals.
Circuses.
Garage sales.
Oil and gas drilling.
   B.   Exceptions To Permit Fees: Permit fees shall not apply to circuses,
street fairs, carnivals nor any athletic exhibition given by public or private
schools, nor to any event given under the auspices of a local nonprofit
organization, nor to any event from which all the proceeds go to some
charitable cause. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-1-4: LICENSE DUE DATE; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   License Term: Except as otherwise provided, all licenses shall expire
on April 30 after the same are issued. All license taxes shall become due on
May 1 or at the commencement of business, whichever event first occurs.
   B.   Late Payment; Penalty:
      1.   If not paid within fifteen (15) days after the due date as specified
in subsection A of this section, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added
to the cost of the license, and an additional ten percent (10%) shall be added
to the cost of the license and previous penalty on the first day of each month
thereafter. If the license tax remains unpaid on September 1 of each year, the
amount of the license shall be doubled and the penalty shall be collected in
the same manner as the license.
      2.   The addition of a penalty, if any, to a license shall not exempt the
person from whom the license tax may be collected for any penalty to which he
may be liable for violating any provisions of this title. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-
24-2002)
3-1-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CITY OFFICIALS:
   A.   Authority Of City Officials: The city manager, city inspector, any
police officer or any designee of the city manager shall have power to enter
any place requiring a license or permit hereunder, during business hours, to
ascertain whether this title and other ordinances of the city are being
complied with.
   B.   Permit Fee Payment Required: It shall be the special duty of all such
officials to see that all license and permit fees required hereunder are paid
when due. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-1-6: POSTING OR EXHIBITING LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Every person having a license or permit under the provisions of this title
shall place and exhibit the same at all times while in force, in some
conspicuous part of his or her place of business or taxicab; or shall carry the
same on his person in the case of solicitors; and shall produce or exhibit the
same when applying for a renewal thereof, when requested to do so by any
inhabitants, police or other official of the city. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-1-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who engages in any business, profession,
trade, or occupation, or exercises any privilege, for which a license is
required by this chapter, without a valid license as hereby required, or who
shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   License Revocation Or Suspension: Violation of this chapter shall also
be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose
3-2-2: Fee Schedules For Licenses And Permits And Occupational Taxes
3-2-3: Breweries And Brewpubs
3-2-4: Occupational Tax For Wine, Beer And Mixed Beverage Sales For On Premises
Consumption
3-2-5: Retail Spirits Stores And Retail Stores Selling Wine Or Beer For Off
Premises Consumption
3-2-6: Interim Occupational Tax
3-2-7: Payment Required; Civil Penalty For Non-Payment
3-2-8: Location Restrictions
3-2-9: Prohibited Acts And Restrictions
3-2-10: Penalty
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the City to
preserve the public peace, safety, health and good order thereof, and to aid
the enforcement of the policy of the State as established by the Oklahoma
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-101 et seq.,
and to establish annual Occupation Taxes upon all persons engaged in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 2018-4, 7-23-
2018)
3-2-2: FEE SCHEDULES FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS AND OCCUPATIONAL TAXES:
   A.   The fee schedule, hereinafter set forth, shall be levied and collected
by the City Clerk, or the Clerk's representatives, for the applicable licenses,
fees, permits, or Occupational Tax levies, prior to the issuance of any such
license permit or conducting of business of serving alcoholic beverages. Said
fees shall be prorated. (Ord. 2019-5, 6-14-2019)
   B.   Occupational Taxes relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages 1  are
set forth as follows:
Brewer, per year                                                  $1,250.50
Brewpub, if licensee also holds a mixed beverage or wine and beer 125.00
permit, per year
Brewpub, per year                                                 1,250.00
Class B wholesaler, and effective October 1, 2018, "beer          625.00
distributer", per year
"Class I" beer license (see subsection
3-2-4B of this chapter) (available and effective only through     20.00
September 30, 2018)
"Class II" beer license (see subsection
3-2-4B of this chapter) (available and effective only through     10.00
September 30, 2018)
Distiller, per year                                               3,125.00
Mixed beverage/caterer combination                                1,250.00
Renewals, per year                                                1,250.00
Mixed beverages, first year                                       500.00
Renewals, per year                                                300.00
Oklahoma brewer license, per year                                 125.00
Oklahoma winemaker, per year                                      75.00
On premises beer or wine, first year                              300.00
Renewals, per year                                                250.00
Rectifier, per year                                               3,125.00
Retail beer (effective October 1, 2018)                           100.00
Retail spirits store                                              605.00
Retail wine (effective October 1, 2018)                           150.00
Wholesaler, and effective October 1, 2018 "wine and spirits       3,500.00
wholesaler", per year
Winemaker, per year                                               625.00
 
(Ord. 2018-6, 10-22-2018)
   C.   A special event permit shall be available to an applicant for a permit
(s) to sell alcoholic beverages as set forth in subsection B of this section if
the applicant only intends to sell the alcoholic beverages for a period of no
longer than five (5) days (includes weekends). Only one special event permit
per applicant is permitted each calendar year. The fee for a special event
permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be equal to ten percent (10%)
of the amount set forth in subsection B of this section for the type of permit/
alcoholic beverage the applicant is requesting. (Ord. 2019-5, 6-14-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. Definitions found in 37A OS § 1-103.
3-2-3: BREWERIES AND BREWPUBS:
   A.   Occupational Tax Levied: No person shall operate or maintain a brewery
or brewpub without having previously paid the Occupational Tax as provided in
this chapter.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
   BREWER: Any person who manufactures for human consumption by the use of raw
materials or other ingredients any beer upon which an Occupational Tax is
imposed.
   BREWPUB: A licensed establishment operated on the premises of, or on
premises located contiguous to, a small brewer, that prepares and serves food
and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, for on-premises consumption.
   C.   Hours Of Operation: No brewery or brewpub to which the brewery or
brewpub Occupational Tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of
such establishment shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any
beer, as that term is defined in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-103(5), on the
premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. (Ord. 2018-4, 7-23-2018)
3-2-4: OCCUPATIONAL TAX FOR WINE, BEER AND MIXED BEVERAGE SALES FOR ON PREMISES
CONSUMPTION:
   A.   Occupational Tax Levied: No person shall operate or maintain any
business serving mixed beverages or beer or wine without having previously paid
the Occupational Tax as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this chapter
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section, except when the context otherwise requires:
   CLASS I BEER LICENSE: A license for the retail sale of a beverage containing
more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) alcohol by volume and not more
than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, sold for
consumption on the premises, or sold not in the original containers for
consumption on or off the premises. "Class I" beer licenses are only available
and effective through September 30, 2018.
   CLASS II BEER LICENSE: A license for the retail sale of a beverage
containing more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) alcohol by volume and
not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, sold in
the original containers for consumption off the premises. "Class II" beer
licenses are only available and effective through September 30, 2018.
   MIXED BEVERAGE/CATERER: An Occupational Tax permit for sale of mixed
beverages specifically provided by State law for the holder of a mixed beverage
license or a caterer license.
   ON PREMISES BEER AND WINE: An Occupational Tax permit for the retail sale of
beer containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by
weight and wine which means and includes any beverage containing more than one-
half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume and not more than twenty
four percent (24%) alcohol by volume. Effective October 1, 2018, this
Occupational Tax permit will apply to the sale of both low point and strong
beer, as those terms are defined in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-103.
   C.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   No establishment to which the mixed beverage or on premises beer and
wine Occupational Tax is applicable, nor any agent, servant or employee of such
establishment shall sell, dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any mixed
beverages, beer or wine on the premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
      2.   Effective through September 30, 2018, no person who holds "Class I"
beer license, nor any agent, servant or employee of said licensee, shall sell,
dispense, serve or allow to be consumed any low-point beer on the premises
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.,
Monday through Saturday, and between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Sunday.
      3.   Effective through September 30, 2018, and except as herein provided,
no person who owns, manages or operates any business serving mixed beverages,
beer or wine or a "Class I" establishment zoned as a bar, club or tavern
licensed under the authority of this chapter shall permit any person to remain
on the premises past the applicable closing time; provided that a maximum of
eight (8) persons shall be permitted to remain for two (2) hours past the
applicable closing time, so long as they are employed by the business serving
mixed beverages, beer or wine or the "Class I" establishment and are involved
in cleaning, closing or otherwise securing the premises.
   D.   Employment: No person shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years
of age in the selling of beer or wine or employ any person under twenty one
(21) years of age in the selling of spirits. Provided:
      1.   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special
event, bottle club, retail wine or retail beer licensee may employ servers or
sales clerks who are at least eighteen (18) years of age, except persons under
twenty one (21) years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas,
and
      2.   A mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special
event or bottle club licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have
musicians who are under eighteen (18) years of age if each such musician is
either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has on their person, to be
made available for inspection upon demand by any employee of the ABLE
Commission or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the
parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in
designated bar or lounge areas.
   E.   Mixed Beverage Or Beer And Wine Certificate Of Compliance:
      1.   A mixed beverage or beer and wine certificate of compliance, on
forms furnished by the City, shall be completed by every applicant for an
original license pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
      2.   This certificate shall be reviewed and approved by the following
City departments:
         a.   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply
with all City zoning ordinances, verified by the Code Enforcement Officer, or
his designee.
         b.   The applicant's proposed site and structure must comply with all
Building Codes as required by this Code, verified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, or his designee.
         c.   The applicant's proposed site, structure, and location must
comply with all Fire Code requirements required by this Code, verified by the
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
         d.   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply
with all provisions regarding food service requirements as required by this
Code, verified by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee. (Ord. 2018-4,
7-23-2018)
3-2-5: RETAIL SPIRITS STORES AND RETAIL STORES SELLING WINE OR BEER FOR OFF
PREMISES CONSUMPTION:
   A.   Occupational Tax Levied: No person shall operate, manage or work in any
retail establishment that sells, for off premises consumption only, any type of
alcoholic beverage, as that term is found in 37 Oklahoma Statutes section 506
through September 30, 2018, and as found in 37A Oklahoma Statutes section 1-103
thereafter without having previously obtained an Occupational Tax permit for
that store as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Retail Spirits, Retail Beer And Retail Wine Certificate Of Compliance:
      1.   A retail spirits, retail beer and retail wine certificate of
compliance, on forms furnished by the City, shall be completed by every
applicant for an original license pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act.
      2.   This certificate shall be reviewed and approved by the following
City departments:
         a.   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply
with all City zoning ordinances, verified by the Code Enforcement Officer, or
his designee.
         b.   The applicant's proposed site and structure must comply with all
Building Codes as required by this Code, verified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, or his designee.
         c.   The applicant's proposed site, structure, and location must
comply with all Fire Code requirements required by this Code, verified by the
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
         d.   The applicant's proposed location and use thereof must comply
with all provisions regarding food service requirements as required by this
Code, verified by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
   C.   Deliveries: No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages shall sell or
deliver to any retail spirits store any alcoholic beverages on Saturdays,
Sundays, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open on the day of any
general, primary, runoff primary, or special election, whether national, State,
County or City.
   D.   Employment: No person shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years
of age in the selling of beer or wine or employ any person under twenty one
(21) years of age in the selling of spirits.
   E.   Hours For Selling Alcoholic Beverages:
      1.   Retail Spirits Stores: Now and through September 30, 2018, no person
shall open or operate a retail spirits store except between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Effective October 1, 2018,
retail spirits stores will be permitted to remain open and operational from
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. Further, no
person shall open or operate a retail spirits store at any time on the
following days:
         a.   Sunday;
         b.   New Year's Day;
         c.   Memorial Day;
         d.   Fourth of July;
         e.   Labor Day;
         f.   Veterans Day;
         g.   Thanksgiving Day;
         h.   Christmas Day; and
         i.   While the polls are open on the day of any general, primary,
runoff primary or special election, whether national, State, County, or City.
      2.   Retail Beer Or Wine Stores: Effective October 1, 2018, a retail wine
or retail beer establishment may offer wine or beer for retail sale on Monday
through Sunday between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. the following day.
   F.   Signs: No person shall erect or maintain any sign designating a retail
liquor store unless they comply with the regulations set forth in title 10 of
this Code. (Ord. 2018-4, 7-23-2018)
3-2-6: INTERIM OCCUPATIONAL TAX:
It is acknowledged that qualified retail spirits, wine and spirits wholesaler,
beer distributer, retail beer, and retail wine State licensees are permitted to
perform interim activities that will be permissible under these licenses as
fully effective on October 1, 2018, except for the actual sale of wine and beer
to the public. These interim activities include, but are not limited to, the
purchasing, stocking, and storing of wine and/or beer on the licensed premises.
In order to qualify for these interim activities, the State licensee must
satisfy all the requirements set forth in article XXVIIIA of the Oklahoma
Constitution and State law. After October 1, 2018, the interim Occupational Tax
shall convert to a full Occupational Tax and shall be renewable annually from
the date originally issued. (Ord. 2018-4, 7-23-2018)
3-2-7: PAYMENT REQUIRED; CIVIL PENALTY FOR NON-PAYMENT:
   A.   Failure To Pay: Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed
by this chapter without first paying the Occupation Tax imposed therefor in
advance of such operation is guilty of an offense against the City and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Civil Penalty: All sums due from any person, firm or corporation by
reason of Occupation Taxes imposed by this chapter shall be recoverable at the
suit of the City brought against such person in any court of competent
jurisdiction. In such suit, in addition to the tax, the City shall be allowed
to recover interest at the maximum allowable rate permitted by State law upon
all sums due by way of tax, from the date of accrual thereof, any penalty, and
all costs of collection, judicial or otherwise, including reasonable attorney
fees. Prosecution for an offense against the City arising out of the failure to
pay a tax levied by this chapter, regardless of the outcome or its continued
pendency, shall not constitute a defense or a bar in any manner to the
collection of any tax and penalties, if any are due, as herein provided. (Ord.
2018-4, 7-23-2018)
3-2-8: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any mixed beverage establishment, beer and
wine establishment or bottle club which has been licensed by the ABLE
Commission and which has as its main purpose the selling or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, or package store, to be
located within three hundred feet (300') of any public or private school or
church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities.
   B.   The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the
nearest property line of such public or private school or church to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of any such mixed beverage establishment, beer
and wine establishment, bottle club or package store which has been licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Mixed beverage establishments, beer and wine establishments, or
bottle clubs, which have been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-
premises consumption or retail package stores prior to November 1, 2000;
provided, if at the time of application for license renewal the licensed
location has not been in actual operation for a continuous period of more than
sixty (60) days, the license shall not be renewed; or
      2.   Establishments licensed prior to October 1, 2018, to sell low- point
beer which were permitted to be located within three hundred feet (300') of any
public or private school or church property primarily and regularly used for
worship services and religious activities, pursuant to the provisions of 37A
Oklahoma Statutes section 2-139. Such establishments shall be permitted to have
any license in effect on October 1, 2018, transferred to a mixed beverage
license; provided, if such an establishment ceases to regularly be open to the
public or changes ownership, the provisions of this paragraph shall cease to
apply.
   D.   If any school or church shall be established within three hundred feet
(300') of any package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine
establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section after
such package store, mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine establishment
or bottle club has been licensed, the provisions of this section shall not be a
deterrent to the renewal of such license if there has not been a lapse of more
than sixty (60) days. When any mixed beverage establishment, beer and wine
establishment or bottle club subject to the provisions of this section which
has a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, or
package store, changes ownership or the operator thereof is changed and such
change of ownership results in the same type of business being conducted on the
premises, the provisions of this section shall not be a deterrent to the
issuance of a license to the new owner or operator if he or she is otherwise
qualified. (Ord. 2018-4, 7-23-2018)
3-2-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Consumption Prohibited In Certain Places: No person shall drink or
consume in any manner any alcoholic beverage on the premises of a retail
spirits store or retail store selling wine or beer, nor in any other public
place. Neither shall a person open or break the seal of any original package or
retail container containing alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such
retail spirits store or retail store selling wine or beer.
   B.   Prohibited Sales:
      1.   Minors: No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic
beverages, at any place within the City limits, to any person who is a minor.
Neither shall any minor misrepresent his age verbally or in writing, or present
false documentation of age or otherwise for the purpose of inducing any other
person to sell him alcoholic beverages.
      2.   Intoxicated Or Mentally Deficient Persons: No person shall sell,
deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverage or beverages within the City to
an intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged incapacitated or
is otherwise mentally deficient.
   C.   Transporting Alcoholic Beverages: It is unlawful to transport any
alcoholic beverage, unless the same is:
      1.   In an unopened original container with seal unbroken, and the
original cap or cork not removed from the container; or
      2.   In the trunk or other closed compartment or container out of public
view and out of reach of and not accessible to the driver or any occupant of a
vehicle.
   D.   Drinking And Intoxication In Public Places:
      1.   No person within the City shall drink alcoholic beverages in any
public place, nor shall any person be intoxicated in a public place within the
City. The City Council may, by resolution, suspend enforcement of this section
for special occasions, celebrations, and festivities. Said resolution shall
state a time certain for suspension of enforcement and shall restrict the area
for suspension as close as possible to the sites of celebration by identifying
in the resolution what area or areas within the limits of the City persons may
temporarily consume alcoholic beverages.
      2.   No person operating a cafe, restaurant, club or any place of
recreation within the City, and no employee engaged in connection with the
operation of such a cafe, restaurant, club or place of recreation shall permit
any person to be drunk or intoxicated in the place of business. (Ord. 2018-4,
7-23-2018)
3-2-10: PENALTY:
Any and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is an offense
against the City, and, upon conviction of such an offense, the violator shall
be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-4, 7-23-2018)
CHAPTER 3
DAYCARE CENTERS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Scope
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: License Requirements; Application Procedure
3-3-4: Compliance With Requirements And Specifications
3-3-5: Adoption And Compliance With Minimum Standards
3-3-6: Inspections
3-3-7: Revocation, Suspension Or Denial Of License
3-3-8: Penalty
3-3-1: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to any type of establishment outside of the child's
own home, but shall not apply to the following:
   A.   The custody of any child or children in a public or private school
organized, operated or approved under the laws of this state;
   B.   Children whose custody is fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction;
   C.   Children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the
custodial person; or
   D.   Churches or religious institutions caring for children while their
parents or legal guardians are attending church services or engaged in church
activities. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
requires a different meaning:
BASEMENT: That portion of a building or structure having one-half (1/2) or more
of its clear height below the ground level.
CHILD: Any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
DAYCARE: Supplemental care of a child away from the home in which he resides,
and provided by someone other than the child's natural parents, custodians or
legal guardians for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day and on
a regular schedule more often than once a week. This definition does not
include baby sitting or custodial care. ("Baby sitting" or "custodial care"
means care of a child by a nonprofessional person in an occupied residence
which is not conducted on a regular schedule, or where the caregiver is not
compensated, or where no advertising is done in any way.)
DAYCARE CENTER: Both "nursery" and "family daycare home" as defined in this
section.
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE: Any device which utilizes electricity to produce light,
heat or power.
EXIT: A means of egress which is specifically designed for that purpose giving
access from one floor to another or to the ground level outside the building.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: An occupied residence which receives five (5) or fewer
children (including the parent's own preschool children under 5 years of age
living in the home but excluding all other members of the family occupying the
premises) for daycare.
GAS APPLIANCES: Any device which utilizes gas fuel to produce light, heat or
power.
INFANT: Any person who has not attained the age of two (2) years.
NURSERY: Any day nursery, nursery school, foster home or preschool, or any
place, home or institution which receives six (6) or more children, including
the parents' own preschool children under five (5) years of age living in the
nursery, but excluding all other members of the family occupying the premises,
for daycare or foster care, when received on a regular schedule more often than
once a week. This definition does not include public and private schools
organized, operated and approved under the laws of this state, but it does
include churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children
within the institutional building. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   License Required: No person shall open, operate or maintain a nursery
or family daycare home subject to the provisions of this chapter without first
having obtained a license and paid the tax thereon, as required in section
3-1-2 of this title. The tax required shall be in addition to any fee required
by the laws of the state of Oklahoma.
   B.   Application For License: Application for a license shall be made in
writing to the city clerk. The application shall be referred to the city
manager or his designee, who shall cause strict inquiry and investigation to be
made regarding the fitness, character and reputation of applicant, the
suitability of the accommodations, including adequate facilities, cleanliness,
ventilation, heating, lighting, location, fire safety and all other matters
pertinent to the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
   C.   Compliance With Minimum Standards: All applicants for a license shall
comply with the minimum standards adopted for daycare centers and no license
shall be issued, continued or reissued unless such compliance is shown.
   D.   Authority Of City Officials: Either the city manager or his designee
shall have full authority to approve or disapprove the issuance of a license
based on the findings of their investigations and subject to procedures set
forth in section
3-3-7 of this chapter.
   E.   Records And Reports Of Licensee: Every licensee shall keep and maintain
such records and make such reports to the city manager or his designee as
required by the minimum standards in force. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
No person shall operate or maintain a nursery or family daycare home subject to
the terms of this chapter unless such nursery or family daycare home conforms
to the requirements, specifications and provisions contained in this chapter or
any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-5: ADOPTION AND COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM STANDARDS:
   A.   Adoption Of Standards: The city council shall, from time to time,
adopt, amend, and/or supplement such minimum standards for the various types of
daycare centers as may be necessary. Such standards and regulations shall be
adopted, amended, or supplemented by resolution duly adopted by the city
council.
   B.   Standards Incorporated By Reference: Once regulations and standards are
adopted, they shall be incorporated by reference within this section, and a
violation of any of the regulations so adopted shall be an offense.
   C.   Copies On File; Effect: At least three (3) copies of such regulations
shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and made available to the
public at a reasonable cost. The regulations on file at the time of the
effective date hereof shall remain in full force and effect until amended,
supplemented, or modified by the city council. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-6: INSPECTIONS:
The city manager or his designee shall investigate all nurseries and family
daycare homes as defined in this chapter as often as they shall deem necessary
for the adequate supervision thereof, and they shall have the right to enter
all such places at any reasonable time for the purpose of making such an
investigation. Acceptance of a license shall constitute expressed consent to
such inspections. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-7: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Written Notice Of Denial: If the city manager or his designee, based on
their findings, determine that a license shall not be issued or renewed, they
shall then issue to the applicant a written notice of denial or nonrenewal
specifying the grounds therefor. Any denial of license may be appealed to the
city council.
   B.   Delivery Of Notice; Right To Appeal: If the city manager or his
designee, by their inspections, observe violations of this chapter or state law
sufficient to warrant revocation or suspension of a license, written notice of
revocation and the grounds therefor shall be delivered to the licensee by
personal service or by certified mail. Any revocation or suspension of a
license may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-3-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who operates or maintains a nursery or
family daycare home without a license as required in section
3-1-1 of this title or violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   License Revocation Or Suspension: Violation of this chapter shall also
be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
CHAPTER 4
REST HOMES, NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOMES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Scope
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: License Required; Application
3-4-4: Location And Structure Requirements
3-4-5: Standard Facilities
3-4-6: Compliance With State Health Regulations
3-4-7: Storage Of Combustible Materials
3-4-8: Annual Inspection
3-4-9: Penalty
3-4-1: SCOPE:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to hotels or other similar places that
furnish only board and room, or either, to their guests, or such facilities
that are operated administratively or provisionally as a part of or adjunct to
a duly licensed general or specialized hospital or sanitarium. (Ord. 01-01-
2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
requires another meaning:
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: Any home, establishment or institution offering
or providing chronic and convalescent care for three (3) or more persons not
related to the operator, who are unable to care for themselves by reason of
advanced age, physical infirmity, prolonged illness or defect, or recovery from
injury, illness or disease and including any or all procedures commonly
employed in caring for the sick, such as administration of medicines,
preparation of diets, giving bedside care and carrying out treatment prescribed
by duly licensed practitioners of the healing arts.
RELATED INSTITUTION: Means and includes any home, establishment or institution
offering or providing planned continued care, personal services or chronic or
convalescent care for three (3) or more persons not related to the operator,
but whose services are restricted to the care of certain age groups, a specific
type of infirmity, illness or disease, either chronic or convalescent. Nothing
herein contained shall authorize any person in any manner to practice the
healing arts or the practice of medicine as defined by law.
REST HOME: Any home, establishment or institution offering or providing planned
continued care for three (3) or more aged or incapacitated persons not related
to the operator. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   License Required; Payment Of Fee: No person, partnership, association
or corporation shall establish, conduct or maintain in the city any rest home,
nursing or convalescent home, or related institution without first obtaining a
license and paying the tax required in section
3-1-2 of this title. The tax required shall be in addition to any fee required
by the laws of the state of Oklahoma.
   B.   Contents Of Application; State License Required: Application for
license shall be in writing showing the location of the rest home, nursing
home, convalescent home or related institution, showing the size and type of
structure, the number of patients or persons to be housed therein, the name of
the operator of same, the number and date of the license issued by the state
department of health and the type of institution or home to be conducted. (Ord.
01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-4: LOCATION AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Proper Zoning Area: No rest home, nursing or convalescent home, or
related institution shall be maintained in the city except in an area zoned for
multiple dwellings.
   B.   Construction: The house shall be constructed so that the persons cared
for shall not be housed either above or below the ground floor thereof.
However, persons cared for may be housed on the second floor thereof if the
house is constructed as to have a fire resistance of one hour and if it has an
adequate fire escape as approved by the fire chief of the city, and either
approved sprinkler system or an approved automatic fire detection system. (Ord.
01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-5: STANDARD FACILITIES:
All rest homes, nursing or convalescent homes and related institutions shall
provide the following:
   A.   Safe water supply;
   B.   Sanitary sewer and garbage disposal;
   C.   Natural gas or other approved fuel for heat;
   D.   Electricity;
   E.   Telephone service;
   F.   Fire extinguishers or other firefighting facilities as approved by the
fire chief or his designee;
   G.   Enclosed yard where needed for use by persons cared for;
   H.   Safe dry storage space for bulky items belonging to persons cared for;
   I.   Storage space for medicine and first aid equipment;
   J.   Storage space for poisons in a locked cabinet located other than in the
bathroom;
   K.   Linen storage;
   L.   Adequate refrigeration;
   M.   Provisions for fire safe storage of janitor supplies and cleaning
equipment;
   N.   Sanitary handling of dishes and foods;
   O.   Screening for all outside doors, windows and other openings;
   P.   A heating system to be approved by the fire chief;
   Q.   A hot water tank located other than in a bedroom; and
   R.   That the home be in a location free from excessive noise and odors.
(Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-6: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE HEALTH REGULATIONS:
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, all rest homes, nursing
homes, convalescent homes and related institutions must comply with the rules
and regulations pertaining to the state health department and must at all times
have a valid license issued by the state health department. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
3-4-7: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
Storage of combustible materials in the attic or basement of the rest home,
nursing or convalescent home or related institutions is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-8: ANNUAL INSPECTION:
The fire chief of the city or his designee shall inspect the rest home, nursing
or convalescent home or related institutions annually. He shall issue a
certificate of inspection which shall be displayed in a prominent place in the
rest home, nursing home, convalescent home or related institution. (Ord. 01-01-
2002, 1-24-2002)
3-4-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, partnership, association or corporation
who establishes, conducts or maintains any rest home, nursing or convalescent
home, or related institution in the city without first obtaining a license and
paying the tax required in section
3-1-2 of this title, or who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   License Revocation Or Suspension: Violation of this chapter shall also
be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definition
3-5-2: License And Tax Required
3-5-3: Report Requirements
3-5-4: Minors Pawning Merchandise
3-5-5: Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINITION:
A "pawnbroker" is defined as any person who loans money on deposit of personal
property or who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of
selling the same back again at a stipulated price or who makes a public display
of his business by a sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their
business. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-5-2: LICENSE AND TAX REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall carry on the business of pawnbroker in the
city until he has first obtained a license and paid the tax thereon as required
in section
3-1-2 of this title. The tax required shall be in addition to any fee required
by the laws of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-5-3: REPORT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Reports Required: All pawnbrokers doing business in the city are
required to furnish the chief of police reports as requested at his office,
showing fully the following:
      1.   The name, age, sex, residence and general description of each person
who shall have pawned, pledged, or sold any article during the preceding day;
and
      2.   A full description of the article pawned, pledged or sold, by each
person, together with the description in subsection A1 of this section,
including the number of each article bearing a number.
   B.   Reports In Duplicate Maintained For Inspection: In addition to
furnishing to the chief of police reports required in subsection A of this
section, all pawnbrokers in the city are hereby required to keep duplicates of
such reports, which shall at all times be subject to the inspection of the city
inspector and any member of the police department. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-5-4: MINORS PAWNING MERCHANDISE:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agent or employee, to accept any
pawn or pledge or buy from any minor or to knowingly advance any money or other
thing of value upon the property of a minor. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-5-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation who shall carry on the
business of pawnbroker in the city without first obtaining a license and paying
the tax thereon as required in section
3-1-2 of this title, or who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   License Revocation Or Suspension: Violation of this chapter shall also
be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
CHAPTER 6
ITINERANT VENDORS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required; Fee
3-6-3: Application For License
3-6-4: License Nontransferable
3-6-5: Exemptions
3-6-6: Invitation To Private Residences
3-6-7: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ITINERANT VENDOR:
   A.   Means and includes all persons, firms or corporations, as well as their
agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in the
city of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, amusements or
services, or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the
purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof; and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof, either hire,
rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other
enclosure, vacant lot or any other property whatever in the city in, through,
or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale or
exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof.
   B.   An "itinerant vendor" which considers itself exempt from this chapter
by reason of being engaged in interstate commerce shall have the right to
request a hearing before the judge of the municipal court to determine the
burden, if any, imposed on the vendor by this chapter.
TEMPORARY: Any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which
definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of
premises for at least one hundred (100) days, in or upon which such business is
to be operated or conducted.
TRANSIENT: Any such business of any such itinerant vendor as may be operated or
conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees
who reside away from the city or who have fixed places of business in places
other than the city, or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples
thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them, or the
unsold portion thereof, away from the city before the expiration of one hundred
(100) days. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale,
exhibit for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale
thereof, any goods or merchandise in the city without first obtaining a license
as provided for herein.
      2.   The city clerk shall issue to any itinerant vendor a license
authorizing such itinerant vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or
exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof in the city his
goods or merchandise only after such itinerant vendor shall have fully complied
with all provisions of this chapter and shall have paid the license fees
hereinafter provided, which sum shall be compensation to the city for the
services herein required of it and to enable the city to partially defray the
expenses of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   License Fee: The license fee for itinerant vendors shall be set by
resolution of the city council, for the following time periods:
One day
One week
One month
One year
(Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Application To Clerk: The itinerant vendor shall make application to
the city clerk prior to his contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the
city.
   B.   Affidavit; Contents: The application shall be in the form of an
affidavit, stating the following:
      1.   Full name and address of the itinerant vendor.
      2.   The location of his or its principal office and place of business.
      3.   The names and addresses of its officers if it be a corporation and
the partnership name and the names and addresses of all partners if such
itinerant vendor be a firm.
   C.   Accompanying Documents: The application therefor must be accompanied
by:
      1.   A statement showing the kind and character of goods to be sold, or
merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited.
      2.   A certified copy of the charter if the itinerant vendor be a
corporation, incorporated under the laws of this state. If the itinerant vendor
be a corporation, incorporated under the laws of some state other than
Oklahoma, a certified copy of authority to do business in this state.
      3.   A certified copy of its permit or authority to do business in the
state.
      4.   Tax identification and social security number, date of birth and
fingerprinting as may be required by the city.
      5.   A copy of its state sales tax permit. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-6-4: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
The license provided for herein shall not be transferable nor give authority to
more than one person to conduct a business as an itinerant vendor. (Ord. 01-01-
2002, 1-24-2002)
3-6-5: EXEMPTIONS:
A license is not required of:
   A.   Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods or
merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and
dealing in goods or merchandise or service, or to sales at wholesale and not
retail, or to sales of advertising in any phone book or other professional
directories;
   B.   Vendors of farm produce or agricultural products in their natural
state; and
   C.   Sales of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the
proceeds thereof to be applied to any charitable purpose. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-
24-2002)
3-6-6: INVITATION TO PRIVATE RESIDENCES:
   A.   Sales At Private Residences Prohibited: In the exercise of the
authority conferred upon the city by state law, the practice of going to, in or
upon the premises of any private residence in the city by any itinerant vendor
without the express consent, request or invitation of the owner or the occupant
of such private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the
purchase or for the sale of goods, wares, or publications or merchandise of any
description, or the purpose of peddling, or hawking the same, or for the
purpose of soliciting subscriptions thereto, is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Nonprofit Organizations Exempt: This section shall not apply to
salespersons, solicitors, peddlers or order takers representing sales for local
nonprofit or charitable organizations. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-6-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation who engages in
business without a license as required by this chapter or violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   License Revocation Or Suspension: Violation of this chapter shall also
be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license granted. (Ord. 01-01-
2002, 1-24-2002)
CHAPTER 7
FIREWORKS SALES AND STORAGE
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Licenses And Insurance Required
3-7-3: Sales Tax On Fireworks
3-7-4: Conditions For Storage And Sale
3-7-5: Certain Fireworks Prohibited; Labeling
3-7-6: Unlawful Sales
3-7-7: Sale Of Class B Fireworks Prohibited; Penalty
3-7-8: Violations, Penalties And Enforcement
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings specified
below:
DISTRIBUTOR: Any person who sells fireworks to other distributors, wholesalers
or retailers for resale.
FIREWORKS: Shall mean and include any composition or device for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, and which is defined as common or special fireworks by the
United States department of transportation (DOT). "Fireworks" are further
classified in this law as class C or class B. The term "fireworks" shall not
include toy cap pistols and caps, blank cartridges, railroad flares and model
rockets.
   A.   Class C Fireworks (DOT Common Fireworks): Any devices suitable for use
by the public that conform with the requirements of the United States consumer
products safety commission (CPSC) and are designated primarily to produce
visible effects by combustion, and some small devices designed to produce an
audible effect.
   B.   Class B Display Fireworks (DOT Special Fireworks): All articles of
larger fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion or explosion. Class B fireworks include, but are not limited to,
firecrackers and salutes containing more than two (2) grains (130 mg) of
explosive composition and other exhibition display items that exceed the limits
for classification as class C fireworks according to the department of
transportation.
MANUFACTURER: Any person engaged in the making or constructing of fireworks.
PERSON: Shall include any corporation, association, partnership or one or more
individuals.
RETAILER: Any person who purchases fireworks for resale to consumers only.
WHOLESALER: Any person who purchases fireworks for resale only to retailers and
consumers. (Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
3-7-2: LICENSES AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   State And Local Licenses: Any person operating a retail location where
fireworks are sold directly to the consumer shall be required to purchase a
retail fireworks license from the state and an itinerant vendor license from
the city.
   B.   Premises Liability Insurance: The city shall not issue an itinerant
vendor license to an applicant without proof of premises liability insurance in
the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
   C.   Application And Insurance Filed With City: The license application and
proof of insurance shall be kept on file at city hall for at least two (2)
years.
   D.   Posting Of Licenses: Both the retail fireworks license and the
itinerant vendor license shall be conspicuously posted in the immediate
vicinity of the sales operation and shall be immediately available for
examination by the public or any enforcement officer.
   E.   Licenses Nontransferable: No license provided for herein shall be
transferable nor shall any person be permitted to operate under a license
granted to another person. (Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
3-7-3: SALES TAX ON FIREWORKS:
Any sale of fireworks to a consumer by a retailer shall be subject to the levy
and collection of state and city sales tax pursuant to the provisions of the
Oklahoma state tax code and this code. (Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
3-7-4: CONDITIONS FOR STORAGE AND SALE:
Class C common fireworks may be legally stored and sold to the general public
within the city limits with the exceptions and under the conditions specified
under the provisions of this chapter, and the following:
   A.   No Smoking: All fireworks storage and sales areas shall be
conspicuously posted with signs reading "Fireworks - No Smoking".
   B.   Conditions For Sale:
      1.   Fireworks offered for retail sale must be protected from direct
contact and handling by the public at all times.
      2.   Self-serve or marketing where retail customers are allowed to move
among stocks of fireworks or serve themselves from fireworks stocks or displays
is strictly prohibited.
      3.   Mail order sales to consumers are prohibited through any medium of
either interstate or intrastate commerce.
      4.   Sales of fireworks may only be made at properly licensed retail
locations within the city limits.
      5.   A sales clerk must be on duty to serve the consumer at the time of
purchase.
   C.   Structures And Vehicles Regulated:
      1.   Fireworks shall not be sold or displayed to the public within any
building or portion thereof or any vehicle which allows entry by any persons
other than employees within such building or vehicle unless the fireworks are
kept where they cannot be reached or handled by those persons.
      2.   An enclosed building used for sale of fireworks to the public shall
have adequate exits as determined by the state fire marshal.
      3.   The use of tents or other nonrigid shelters for the sale or storage
of fireworks where the public may move about under or within the confines of a
shelter is prohibited. Provided, however, tents or other nonrigid shelters for
the sale or storage of fireworks may be utilized if the public is allowed
access of no more than two feet (2') under the outside perimeter of the tent or
nonrigid structure and there exists a barrier preventing the public from moving
within or under the confines of the shelter so that they are unable to touch or
handle any fireworks stored thereunder.
   D.   License And Insurance Holder Requirements:
      1.   The holder of the policy for premises liability insurance, the
retail license and the itinerant vendor license must be the same person and
shall be responsible for the safe operation of retail sales to the public.
      2.   The license holder shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
   E.   Time For Sales: No person shall offer fireworks for sale to consumers
at retail before June 15 or after July 6. (Ord., 6-16-2003)
3-7-5: CERTAIN FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; LABELING:
   A.   Prohibited Fireworks: Possession of skyrockets with sticks as defined
by the United States department of transportation is hereby prohibited and
shall be considered contraband. This prohibition shall include, but is not
limited to, explosive devices commonly known as "bottle rockets" or "stick
rockets".
   B.   Labeling: Possession of any and all items of class C common fireworks
not properly labeled according to the United States consumer product safety
commission and identified with the "DOT class C common fireworks" marking on
each retail sale unit is prohibited and shall be considered contraband. (Ord.
2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
3-7-6: UNLAWFUL SALES:
   A.   Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to offer for
retail sale or to sell any fireworks to children under the age of twelve (12)
years, unless accompanied by an adult, or to any intoxicated person or any
person acting in an irresponsible manner at the time of sale.
   B.   Location Restrictions: No person shall offer for retail sale any
fireworks within the city limits which is not commercially zoned; does not have
adequate off street parking for consumers, as determined by the city manager or
his designee; or is within one hundred feet (100') from any structure
containing NFPA class B flammable substances, or within seventy five feet (75')
of any building or structure located in the city limits. (Ord., 6-16-2003)
3-7-7: SALE OF CLASS B FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; PENALTY:
   A.   Prohibition; Penalty Imposed: The sale of class B fireworks within the
city limits is hereby prohibited. Violation of this section shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) per occurrence.
   B.   License Revocation For Violation: In the event of a conviction, for the
violation of this section, of the license holder or any of his agents or
employees, the license of the retailer shall be permanently revoked and no
other person shall be granted a license to operate in the same location for a
period of two (2) years. (Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
3-7-8: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Penalties Imposed: The violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be punishable as follows:
      1.   Discharging fireworks within the city limits shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   Illegal sale, violations of the licensing provisions, false
labeling, or any other violation of this chapter or of state statutes shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) per
occurrence.
      3.   In the event of a conviction for violations of subsection A1 or A2
of this section, of the license holder or any of his agents or employees, the
license of the retailer shall be permanently revoked, and no other person shall
be granted a license to operate in the same location for a period of two (2)
years.
   B.   Contraband Seizure By State Officials; Right To Appeal:
      1.   The state fire marshal, his deputies, or any authorized police or
peace officer of this state, shall seize as contraband any illegal fireworks as
defined under the terms of this chapter or of the state statutes. Fireworks
(contraband) seized in the enforcement of this chapter shall be held in custody
of the police department or other seizing agency.
      2.   The party surrendering the fireworks, if aggrieved by the action,
may file an action or appeal in writing to the district court of Okfuskee
County. Upon hearing the appeal, the district court may authorize the return of
part or all of the confiscated fireworks; otherwise, the court shall authorize
and direct that such contraband be destroyed.
   C.   Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the
state fire marshal, local fire officials, the sheriff, the police, or any peace
officer licensed or authorized by the state or by their respective agencies.
(Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
CHAPTER 8
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License And Fee Required
3-8-3: Application For License; Insurance Required
3-8-4: Indemnity Deposit In Lieu Of Insurance Certificate
3-8-5: Schedule Of Fares
3-8-6: Revocation Of License
3-8-7: Penalty
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PASSENGER: A person riding in an automobile as distinguished from the operator
of same.
PERSON: Shall include individuals, firms, corporations, copartnerships or other
legal entities or organizations.
TAXICAB: Shall mean and include all automobiles carrying passengers for hire
within the limits of the city, excepting ambulances and vehicles licensed by
the state corporation commission to transport passengers between towns and
cities in the state, excepting buses operating with the approval of the city
along certain designated routes or streets within the city. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
3-8-2: LICENSE AND FEE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any taxicab in the city unless
a license has been issued to the owner thereof and a tax paid in accordance
with section
3-1-2 of this title. The tax required shall be in addition to any fee required
by the laws of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSURANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Verification: An application for a license to operate a taxicab in the
city shall be in writing, verified by the applicant or his duly authorized
representative.
   B.   Required Information; Insurance: The application shall be filed with
the city clerk and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the names
and addresses of all the partners; if a corporation, the state of incorporation
and the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof;
      2.   The address of the principal place of business of the applicant;
      3.   The cities or towns in which the applicant operates a taxicab and
the number of taxicabs in the fleet; and
      4.   A certificate of liability insurance policy by an insurance company
authorized to do business within the state, providing liability coverage for
each taxicab within the applicant's fleet of not less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for the injury or death of one person, twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) for the injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one
accident, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage in any one
accident. The insurance coverage shall be effective whether the taxicab was at
the time of the accident being driven by the owner, his agent, servant or
employee, lessee or licensee, and the policy shall contain a provision that it
cannot be cancelled until ten (10) days' written notice of such cancellation
shall have been filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-8-4: INDEMNITY DEPOSIT IN LIEU OF INSURANCE CERTIFICATE:
In lieu of the certificate of liability insurance policy provided for in
section
3-8-3 of this chapter, the applicant may, at his option, file with his
application for license a certificate of the state treasurer verifying that the
applicant has deposited with the state treasurer, thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) in cash or securities for each taxicab within the applicant's
fleet. The securities must be those such as may legally be purchased by savings
banks or trust funds of a market value of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
Such deposit shall be held by the state treasurer to satisfy any execution on a
judgment issued against the person making the deposit for damages resulting
from the ownership, maintenance, use or operation of a taxicab within the city
after the deposit was made. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-8-5: SCHEDULE OF FARES:
The licensee shall file with the city clerk a schedule of all fares or rates
charged, which shall not exceed the fares or rates charged in the city of
Oklahoma City. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-8-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Fraudulently Obtaining License: The city council may, after proper
hearing, revoke a license issued whenever it shall appear, upon investigation,
that a license was obtained as a result of misrepresentation or fraud.
   B.   Ineffective Insurance Or Deposit: If for any reason the required policy
of insurance or indemnity deposit terminates, lapses, becomes ineffective or
falls below the minimum standards specified in this chapter, then any license
issued thereon shall automatically terminate after five (5) days unless the
licensee obtains a new policy or restores the deposit, whichever the case may
be. (Ord. 01-01-2002, 1-24-2002)
3-8-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who operates or permits to be operated any
taxicab in the city without first obtaining a license and paying a tax as
required in section
3-1-2 of this title, or who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall
be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   License Revocation Or Suspension: Violation of this chapter shall also
be grounds for revocation or suspension of license granted. (Ord. 01-01-2002,
1-24-2002)
CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL SALES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Permit Fee; Number Restricted; Revocation Refusal
3-9-3: Sale Restrictions
3-9-4: Public Nuisance
3-9-5: Compliance Inspection
3-9-6: Exceptions
3-9-7: Penalty
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Terms Defined: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this chapter, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
    PERSONAL PROPERTY: Property which is owned, utilized and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. Personal property does
not include merchandise which was purchased for resale, obtained on consignment
or acquired through the operation of a business.
   RESIDENTIAL SALE: Any sale of what is held out to be or is commonly known as
a garage, porch, room, yard, or patio sale, or any other type of general sale
conducted from or on any premises located in a residential zoning district,
where goods or articles of any type are held out for sale to the public.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   The definition of a "residential sale" shall not include a situation
where specific items are held out for sale and all advertisements of such sale
specifically name the items to be sold. No more than two (2) items at any one
time are allowed under this exception.
      2.   The definition of a "residential sale" shall not include items
offered for sale on the internet or through any electronic media. Said items
shall not be placed in public view and marked as for sale. (Ord. 2016-10, 12-
12-2016)
3-9-2: PERMIT FEE; NUMBER RESTRICTED; REVOCATION REFUSAL:
   A.   Permit And Fee Requirements: There is hereby imposed a residential
sales fee to be set by resolution of the city council per occasion on any
persons engaged in a residential sale. A permit shall be issued by and the fee,
if any, collected by the city utility office. Permits shall be obtained at
least twenty four (24) hours prior to any residential sale. Permits must be
posted on the property where the sale is being held in a location which is no
more than fifteen feet (15') from the curb of any residence.
   B.   Time Limits And Number Restrictions: No person or persons living in a
residence within the city limits shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate
in any manner or allow a residential sale to be held or conducted on premises
under their control or ownership more than three (3) times, lasting more than
three (3) days per occasion, within a twelve (12) month period of time.
Further, no more than one residential sale shall be held within a four (4) week
period. Permits shall be issued on the residence where the sale is to be
conducted and not to a particular person or persons. No sales shall be held on
Sunday.
   C.   Revocation: Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or any
application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the city clerk if the
application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false,
fraudulent or misleading information.
   D.   Refusal: If any person living in a permitted residence is convicted of
an offense under this chapter, the city clerk is instructed to cancel any
existing residential sale permit issued to the residence of the person so
convicted and not to issue such person, or any other person living in that
residence, another residential sale permit for a period of two (2) years from
the date of conviction. (Ord. 2016-10, 12-12-2016)
3-9-3: SALE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sale Area: The sale area of any residential sale is confined to the
premises under the control or ownership of the sale operator. No unoccupied or
vacant premises shall be used for sales as described herein except for sales
conducted under process of law.
   B.   Removal Of Items: The permit holder shall remove all unsold items from
public view no later than twenty four (24) hours from end of sale.
   C.   Display Of Sale Property: Personal property offered for sale may be
displayed in a garage or within the residence. Property may also be offered for
sale under an open carport, on a driveway or in a yard in an area not to exceed
nine hundred (900) square feet.
   D.   Advertising: Signs advertising the residential sale may be placed on
private property only with the permission of the property owner. All signs must
be removed by the permit holder within twenty four (24) hours following the end
of the sale. Signs may not be placed on any street or highway rights of way.
(Ord. 2016-10, 12-12-2016)
3-9-4: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The individual(s) conducting the sale and the owner(s) or tenant(s) of the
premises on which such residential sale is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such residential sale. No individual shall permit
any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises nor permit vehicles to impede
the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of the premises. All
such vehicles shall obey the orders of any member of the police department,
fire department or any code enforcement official in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2016-10, 12-12-2016)
3-9-5: COMPLIANCE INSPECTION:
A police officer or any other code enforcement official designated by the city
manager to make inspections under the building or zoning regulations shall have
the right of entry onto any premises showing evidence of a residential sale for
the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may close the premises from such a
sale for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. The police department may enforce such temporary controls
necessary to alleviate any special hazards or congestion created by a
residential sale. (Ord. 2016-10, 12-12-2016)
3-9-6: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
   A.   Persons acting pursuant to an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction; and
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials. (Ord. 2016-10, 12-12-2016)
3-9-7: PENALTY:
Any persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Every day a sale is conducted in violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2016-10, 12-12-2016)
CHAPTER 10
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
SECTION:
3-10-1: Retail Marijuana Establishments
3-10-2: Prohibited Facilities
3-10-3: Inspection
3-10-4: Marijuana Growing Facilities For Personal Medical Use; Security
3-10-5: Smell Or Noxious Odor
3-10-1: RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   All operators of retail marijuana establishments are required to obtain
a retail marijuana establishment permit from the City Clerk. Retail marijuana
establishments is defined as any retail marijuana establishment licensed by the
State of Oklahoma.
   B.   The City Council will establish by resolution a fee to obtain the
retail marijuana establishment permit. The fee shall be used to offset
Municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection,
administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments.
   C.   A retail marijuana establishment permit will not be granted to any
applicants where the proposed location would be located within one thousand
feet (1,000') of any of the following uses: private or public preschool,
elementary, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or university.
   D.   For the distance requirements outlined in this section, the distances
described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the
nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in
subsection C. is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit
in which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be located.
   E.   Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with
ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off
premises.
   F.   Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the
retail marijuana establishments permit.
   G.   It is the intent of the City of Okemah, Oklahoma that nothing in this
chapter be construed to: 1) allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers
or causes a public nuisance; 2) allow the use of marijuana for non-medical
purposes; or 3) allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted
by State law. (Ord. 2019-1, 2-25-2019; amd. Ord. 2019-1, 8-12-2019)
3-10-2: PROHIBITED FACILITIES:
   A.   Commercial marijuana growth facilities are hereby prohibited within the
Municipal boundaries of Okemah, Oklahoma.
   B.   Wholesale marijuana facilities are hereby prohibited within the
Municipal boundaries of Okemah, Oklahoma.
   C.   Marijuana storage facilities other than in a retail outlet are hereby
prohibited within the Municipal boundaries of Okemah, Oklahoma. (Ord. 2018-3,
7-23-2018)
3-10-3: INSPECTION:
   A.   All permits outlined in this chapter will be subject to inspection by
an authorized Municipal inspector prior to issuance.
   B.   The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time
scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the Municipal inspector.
   C.   The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection.
(Ord. 2018-3, 7-23-2018)
3-10-4: MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR PERSONAL MEDICAL USE; SECURITY:
   A.   All owners of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use are
required to obtain a permit from the City Clerk.
   B.   The City Council will establish by resolution a fee to obtain the
marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use permit. The fee shall be
used to offset Municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing,
inspection, administration and enforcement of marijuana growing facilities for
personal medical use.
   C.   All marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be
subject to security provisions as stated herein prior to the granting of a
permit. Failing to comply with security provisions as stated herein will result
in revocation of the permit.
   D.   Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for marijuana
cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key or
equivalent, at all times except when the residential facility is actively being
supervised in person by the permit holder.
   E.   Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to the
interior of a single private residence.
   F.   Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right- of-way.
   G.   The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical
components used shall comply with Municipal Building and Fire Codes. The
growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or
other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed one thousand watts (1,000 W)
per light. The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) or CO2 and ozone
generators in the growing area is prohibited.
   H.   Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a
public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana
produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to
public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of
life and property.
   I.   The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is grown
shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking,
eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress and
egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will
impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or sanitation/
bathing.
   J.   If the residence is rented, consent of the property owner shall be
obtained prior to any cultivation commencing. This consent must be evidenced by
a signed and notarized statement from the property owner permitting the growth
of marijuana in the residence. (Ord. 2018-3, 7-23-2018)
3-10-5: SMELL OR NOXIOUS ODOR:
The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of marijuana by a
person possessing a valid State issued medical marijuana license shall be
treated as a public nuisance. (Ord. 2018-3, 7-23-2018)
CHAPTER 11
FILMING REGISTRATION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-11-1:    Purpose And Intent
3-11-2:    Definitions
3-11-3:    Registrations And Exemptions
3-11-4:    Rules And Regulations
3-11-5:    Applications, Registration And Fees
3-11-6:    Liability Provisions
3-11-7:    Filming Regulations And Special Activity Permits
3-11-8:    Permit Revocation, Suspension, Appeal
3-11-9:    Appeals
3-11-10: Violation–Penalties
3-11-11: Tourism, Film And Music Board
3-11-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Okemah to encourage the motion
picture and television industries to utilize the scenic beauty and variety of
backdrops afforded in the city as locations for filming and/or videotaping for
commercial production. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide
the means by which such activities may be reasonably regulated to preserve the
public health and safety and provide for the protection of property, to not
unduly restrict such activities, and to maintain harmonious relations between
the community and those engaged in such activities, and pursuant to this
purpose and intent, the City of Okemah hereby declares itself to be a “Film
Friendly City.” (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
CHARITABLE FILMS: Commercials, motion pictures, television, or videotapes
produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly
or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the
film or from showing the films, or tapes.
CITY-PRODUCED GOVERNMENT ACCESS FILMS: Motion pictures or programs produced by
or in association with the city. No person, directly or indirectly, shall
receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing
the films or tapes.
FAMILY OR PERSONAL USE FILMING: The filming or videotaping of motion pictures
solely for private, personal or family use.
FILM AND MUSIC OFFICE LIAISON: The director of tourism's designee responsible
for routing and processing film registrations.
FILM OFFICE: The Okemah film and music office within the City of Okemah
department of tourism.
FILM OR FILMING OR FILMING ACTIVITY: All activities in preparation of, and
attendant to, staging, making, striking, filming, videotaping, or electronic
digital recording of commercial motion pictures, television shows, programs and
commercials, including magazines or documentary programs.
NEWS MEDIA: The photographing, filming, videotaping, or electronic digital
recording for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast
or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or camera operators.
STUDENT FILMS: Motion pictures, television programs or commercials produced to
satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The
student filmmaker must supply proof that he/she is currently enrolled.
STUDIO: A fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly
conducted upon the premises. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-3: REGISTRATIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Film registration required. No person shall use any kind of public or
private property, facility or residence for the purpose of taking commercial
motion pictures or television pictures without first completing a film
registration from the Okemah film and music office. Registration of the
production does not indicate approval of pertinent special activity permits
which will be determined subsequent to the registration.
   B.   Exemptions.
      1.   News media. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or
affect reporters, photographers or camera operators in the employ of a
newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print media,
publishing or broadcasting, of news events concerning those persons, scenes or
occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.
      2.   Family or personal use video. The filming or videotaping of motion
pictures solely for private family use.
      3.   Charitable films. Projects that qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
      4.   Photographers. This chapter does not apply to still photography
produced with a cast and crew of less than five (5) persons.
      5.   City-produced government access films.
      6.   Studio filming. Filming activities conducted at a studio with a
current certificate of occupancy and business license. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Rules. The Okemah film and music office liaison is hereby authorized
and directed to coordinate special activity permitting requests across
departments within the City of Okemah and external agencies as the production
activities dictate. Submittal of a film registration does not infer approval of
required special activity permits. The rules and regulations shall be based
upon the following criteria:
      1.   The health and safety of all persons.
      2.   Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected
area.
      3.   The safety of property within the city.
      4.   Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city.
   B.   Change of date. Upon the request of the registrant, the issuing
authority shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the
date for which the film registration or subsequent special activity permits
have been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect
to time and location. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-5: APPLICATIONS, REGISTRATION AND FEES:
   A.   Registering authority. The registering authority shall be the Okemah
film and music office within the City of Okemah department of tourism.
   B.   Film registration fee. The applicant shall pay a film registration
application fee in the amount established by the city manager of the City of
Okemah. The film registration application fee shall be paid to the City of
Okemah when the registration form is submitted for review. The film
registration fee is to cover the city's cost of processing a film registration,
notwithstanding supplemental costs for other related city services (including,
but not limited to, law enforcement, traffic control, fire safety, trash
hauling and attorney's fees). No film registration or subsequent special
activity permits shall be issued to an applicant who owes the city money on a
prior registration or permit. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-6: LIABILITY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Liability insurance. Before any required special activity permits are
issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount established by
the city, naming the City of Okemah as insured party for protection against
claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property
damage. The city officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds.
The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until
after thirty (30) days' written notice to the city manager or his/her designee.
A copy of the certificate will remain on file.
   B.    Worker's compensation insurance. A registrant shall conform to all
applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance.
   C.   Hold harmless agreement. A registrant shall execute a hold harmless
agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any required
pertinent special activity permits under this chapter.
   D.   Performance deposit. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an
applicant may be required to post a refundable deposit, or cash in lieu of
bonds (amount to be determined) at the time registration is submitted. Upon
completion of filming, and inspection of the site by the city, the deposit may
be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-7: FILMING REGULATIONS AND SPECIAL ACTIVITY PERMITS:
   A.   Acknowledgment. The applicant/registrant shall, in the credits of the
motion picture or television program, acknowledge the production was filmed in
the City of Okemah, Oklahoma.
   B.   Advance notice for approval. A representative of the production company
will be required to submit a film registration at least forty-five (45) days
prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which
a film registration is required. Special activity permit(s) may be required at
least forty-five (45) days in advance for activities like closing public
streets or sidewalks, excessive noise, large crowds, etc. Productions that did
not properly register or permit activities that have caused the need for public
interventions (traffic issues, fire, damage) will be billed at the current
emergency rates.
   C.   Filming, including setup and dismantling of film equipment, shall not
be done before seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. or after seven o’clock (7:00) p.m. in
a residential zone. The film and music office liaison may extend these hours
upon a showing of necessity and upon showing the exception would not unduly
disturb the public.
   D.   Cleanup. The registrant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion
with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the
cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris
upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition
before leaving the site.
   E.   Filming on private prope1iy. The registrant is required to obtain the
property owner's permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not
owned or controlled by the city. A written film site location agreement is
strongly recommended.
   F.   Requests for the use of bull horns, explosives, gunfire, public address
systems, sirens, or other noise-creating devices shall be reviewed by the fire
and/or police departments in jurisdiction.
   G.   Flood plains and control structures. When filming in an area prone to
flooding or used as a flood control structure, the crew is required to vacate
the area at the request of the film and music liaison, director of tourism,
city manager or emergency manager.
   H.   Public works department (roads and streets). If the applicant must park
equipment, trucks, and/or cars in zones that will not allow it, temporary “No
Parking” signs must be posted by the city. The applicant must also obtain
permission to string cable across sidewalks, or from generator to service
point. Cable placed in public right-of-way shall be securely matted or covered.
   I.   Traffic control. For filming that would impair traffic flow, an
applicant must provide detailed information to the City of Okemah police
depaiiment personnel and comply with all traffic control requirements deemed
necessary.
   J.   Fires and campfires. When a scene requires a fire or campfire, any
campfire not equipped with a fire ring shall require the assignment of a fire
safety advisor, officer or a similarly qualified person.
   K.   Pyrotechnics. When a scene requires pyrotechnics or any other flammable
or explosive effect, a fire safety advisor, officer or a similarly qualified
person shall be assigned.
   L.   Parking lots. When parking in a city-owned parking lot, an applicant
may be billed according to the current rate schedule established by the city.
In order to assure the safety of citizens in the surrounding community, access
roads which serve as emergency service roads must never be blocked. No
relocation, alteration, or moving of structures will be allowed without prior
approval.
   M.   Drone flights. All current FAA, state and local guidelines must be
followed when deploying a drone.
   N.   Notification. It shall be the responsibility of the registrant to
provide notification to city residents as indicated by the pertinent special
activity permit(s). (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-8: PERMIT REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, APPEAL:
   A.   Special activities permit revocation. The City of Okemah may revoke a
special activity permit if the permittee, or any agent, employee, or contractor
of the permittee fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this
chapter, or in the special activity permit, or if it is determined that the
film registration was false in any material detail.
      1.   Notice of the grounds for revocation of any special activity permits
shall be provided in writing by the city manager to the permit applicant or
person in charge at the location of the filming activity.
      2.   Appeals of the special activity permit(s) revocation shall be
conducted in the manner specified in this chapter.
   B.   Permit suspension. The city manager may suspend a special activity
permit if at any time the filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons
or property and the location manager will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard
after being instructed to do so by the officer. The grounds for the special
activity permit suspension shall be provided in writing by the city manager to
the permittee within two (2) working days of the suspension.
   C.   Appeals of the film permit suspension shall be conducted in the manner
specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-9: APPEALS:
The special activity permit applicant or permittee may appeal a denial of a
special activity permit, or a revocation, suspension, or permit condition. Such
appeal shall be filed with the city manager or his/her designee not later than
three business days after the date on which written notice of the decision is
made. Failure to timely file an appeal shall result in a waiver to the right to
appeal. The appeal shall be reviewed by the city manager or his/her designee.
The decision of the city manager or his/her designee shall be rendered in five
working days and shall be final and is subject to judicial review pursuant to
11 O.S. § 1-101, infra. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-10: VIOLATION–PENALTIES:
With respect to the provisions of this chapter, a person who violates a
provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with the provisions
of Section
1-4-1  of this Code. (Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
3-11-11: TOURISM, FILM AND MUSIC BOARD:
   A.   Appointment; Terms; Compensation:
      1.   Board Created; Appointment: In advancement of the purpose and intent
of this Chapter, a Tourism, Film and Music Board is hereby created which shall
consist of five (5) members, all adult citizens and residents of the city,
appointed by the City Council.
      2.   Terms:
         a.   The terms of the members first appointed shall expire as follows:
            One member at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. on the first Monday
in July of 2026;
            Two (2) members at that time in 2027;
            Two (2) members at that time in 2028.
         b.   The terms of their respective successors shall be three (3) years
and shall expire at that time every third year; provided, that members shall
serve until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified.
      3.   Vacancies And Removals:
         a.   The council shall fill all vacancies as they occur by proper
appointment.
         b.   Any member of the board may be removed by the council for cause.
      4.   Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Meetings; Officers:
      1.   At the first meeting of such board following their appointment and
at the first meeting in July of each year, or as soon thereafter as practical,
the board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary. The board
shall meet at least twice each year; and the mayor, the chairman or any three
(3) members thereof may call special meeting of the board.
   C.   Powers:
      1.   The Tourism, Film and Music Board may consider any matter relating
to tourism, film and music programs of or pertaining to the city, and provide
information and make recommendations thereon to the city council and the city
manager, as the board deems desirable.
      2.   The board shall be advisory only and the city council shall not be
obligated to approve recommendations of the board.
      3.   Among the matters which the Tourism, Film and Music Board shall
consider are the following:
         a.   Tourism;
         b.   Film;
         c.   Music; and
         d.   Any other matter delegated to said board by the City Council.
(Ord. 2023-3, 9-25-2023)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Nuisance Defined; Public And Private Nuisances
4-1-2: Persons Responsible
4-1-3: Lapse Of Time, Effect
4-1-4: Remedies Against Nuisances
4-1-5: City Power To Define And Summarily Abate
4-1-6: Certain Public Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-7: Summary Abatement Of Nuisances
4-1-8: Abatement By Suit In District Court
4-1-9: Inability To Pay; Abatement By City
4-1-10: Assessment Of Costs; Lien For Nonpayment
4-1-11: Health Nuisances Defined; Abatement
4-1-12: Nuisance Unlawful
4-1-13: Toilet Facilities Required; Nuisance
4-1-14: Procedures Cumulative
4-1-15: Penalty; Additional Charges For Continuing Nuisance
4-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED; PUBLIC AND PRIVATE NUISANCES:
   A.   Nuisance: A "nuisance" is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to
perform a duty, which act or omission either:
      1.   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others;
      2.   Offends decency;
      3.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or
      4.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   B.   Public Nuisance: A "public nuisance" is one which affects at the same
time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons,
although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals
may be unequal.
   C.   Private Nuisance: Every nuisance not included in subsection B of this
section is a "private nuisance".
   D.   Exception; Authority Under State Or Federal Statute: Nothing which is
done or maintained under the express authority of a federal or state statute
can be deemed a nuisance. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
4-1-2: PERSONS RESPONSIBLE:
   A.   Allowing Existence Of Nuisance: No person in charge or control of any
property in the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise,
shall allow a nuisance to exist on the property. Every successive owner of
property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such
property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as
the one who first created it.
   B.   Recovering Damages For Past Existence: The abatement of a nuisance does
not prejudice the right of any person to recover damages for its past
existence. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
4-1-3: LAPSE OF TIME, EFFECT:
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right. (1985 Code § 8-403)
4-1-4: REMEDIES AGAINST NUISANCES:
   A.   Public Nuisance: The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      1.   Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court;
      2.   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      3.   Civil action; or
      4.   Abatement:
         a.   By person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 12;
or
         b.   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. (1985 Code § 8-
404)
   B.   Private Nuisance: The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      1.   Civil action; and
      2.   Abatement by person injured as provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes
sections 14 and 15. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
4-1-5: CITY POWER TO DEFINE AND SUMMARILY ABATE:
   A.   Defining: As provided in 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16, the city has
power to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its
corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public
parks, and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits.
   B.   Summary Abatement: Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has the
power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an
opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. (1985 Code § 8-406)
4-1-6: CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   Nuisances Enumerated: In addition to other public nuisances declared by
other sections of this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be
public nuisances:
      1.   Unwholesome Food Or Drink: The sale, or offering for sale, of
unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or
offerings are made.
      2.   Intoxicating Liquor: The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of
intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or
keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or
furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city.
      3.   Obscene Materials: The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of
obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or
the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed.
      4.   Gambling: The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by
cards, slot machines, punchboards or otherwise.
      5.   Places Of Prostitution: The keeping of a place where prostitution,
illicit sexual intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced.
      6.   Places Where Illegal Activities Conducted: The keeping of a place
where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or
carried on.
      7.   Public Dances: The conduct or holding of public dances in violation
of the ordinances of the city or the keeping of a place where such dances are
held.
      8.   Diseased Persons: The public exposure of a person having a
contagious disease.
      9.   Noisy Conditions: The continued making of loud or unusual noises
which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities or the keeping of an animal which
makes such noises.
      10.   Interfering With Wireless Reception: The operation or use of any
electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with
radio or television reception by others.
      11.   Assemblies Obstructing Traffic: Any use of a street or sidewalk or
a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to
obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs
traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance.
      12.   Water Flowing, Ice Or Snow Falling Upon Streets: Permitting water
or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk.
      13.   Stagnant Water Bodies: All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or
containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which
are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public
safety.
      14.   Unwholesome Accumulations And Premises: Rank weeds or grass,
carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things, which are, or are
likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs;
and the premises on which such exist.
      15.   Dangerous Structures:
         a.   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay or other condition.
         b.   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire,
by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the City or its inhabitants
from any cause.
      16.   Dangerous Premises: Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so
constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety.
      17.   Fire And Explosion Hazards: Any fire or explosion hazard which
endangers the public safety.
      18.   Dangerous Businesses: Any occupation or activity which endangers
the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare.
      19.   Unlicensed, Stored Vehicles: Any motor vehicle, whether in
operating condition or not, or any trailer without a current vehicle plate as
required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept
in a residence district; or the storing, parking or leaving of any motor
vehicle, whether in operating condition or not, which violates the provisions
of section
4-5-2 of this title.
      20.   Animal Shelters And Noises: Any stable or other place where animals
are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the City, by
reason of any noise or noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack
of sanitation, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      21.   Places Where Drug Related Felonies Committed: The repeated use of
any real property or structure thereon to commit a felony violation of the
Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act 1 .
   B.   Enumeration Cumulative: The above enumeration of certain public
nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or
ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more
specific terms. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 2-101 et seq.
4-1-7: SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
   A.   Dangerous Circumstances: Some nuisances are of such nature as to
constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or
welfare of one (1) or more persons or of the public generally. If such
circumstances actually exist, the City Manager or other appropriate officer or
agency of the City government may take immediate and proper action summarily to
abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate
action can be taken toward such abatement.
   B.   Submission Of Statement Of Nuisance: The Chief of the Fire Department,
the Chief of Police, the City Attorney, the Health Officer, the building
inspector, the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector, or any other
officer subordinate to the City Manager or any Council member or resident, may
submit, through or with the consent of the City Manager, a statement as to the
existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the City or law, and a
request or recommendation that it be abated. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
   C.   Investigation; Notice To Abate: Upon receiving the complaint or
observing the nuisance himself, the City Code enforcement officer will
investigate the alleged nuisance. If he determines that a public nuisance
exists, he will notify the person responsible for the nuisance. Such notice to
the owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by
service of a police officer if their names and addresses are known. At the time
of mailing of notice to the property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of
mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee(s). If the names and addresses
are not known, and the public peace, health, safety, morals, welfare would not
be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation within the City. Such notice shall
provide not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days, at the
discretion of the City Manager or his designee, in which to abate such nuisance
or to request a hearing as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017)
   D.   Request For Appeal; Hearing: If the person responsible for a nuisance
wishes to appeal the City Manager's decision, he may request a hearing before
the City Council. Such request must be in writing and submitted to the City
Clerk within five (5) days after notice of the decision of the City Manager is
mailed to him, or within five (5) days after the publication of the notice in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City.
   E.   Council Action; Order Abatement; Assessment Of Costs:
      1.   The Council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a
nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the
Council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers and
other effects. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
      2.   If the Council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner or other person responsible for or causing the nuisance to
abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals or
welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety,
morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if
the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate
it within the specified time, the Council shall direct the City Manager to
abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as
authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 16. The City Clerk shall send a
statement of the cost of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons
responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the
circumstances, if the names and addresses are known. Provided, however, that
the minimum costs assessed by the City for such summary abatement shall not be
less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each abatement. Until paid, such
cost shall constitute a debt to the City, collectible as any other cost of
abatement as detailed in subsection 4-1-10A of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-2, 3-9-
2009)
4-1-8: ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT:
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the City
may bring suit in the District Court of the County as provided in 50 Oklahoma
Statutes section 17. (1985 Code § 8-409; amd. 2007 Code)
4-1-9: INABILITY TO PAY; ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the person responsible for the nuisance is unable to pay for its removal,
the work may be done by the employees of the City under supervision of the City
Manager, or it may be let by contract to the lowest and best bidder, after
appropriate notice, in the manner for letting other contracts by public bid.
(1985 Code § 8-410)
4-1-10: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS; LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
   A.   Itemized Report; Issuance Of Statement; Lien:
      1.   Upon the completion of work ordered to be performed under section
4-1-7 of this chapter, the City Manager shall complete a report of the cost
thereof. Such report may be itemized as to each tract, as follows: labor,
machinery rental or depreciation, fuel and supplies, cost of notice, and other
costs. Provided, however, that the minimum costs assessed by the City for such
abatement of public nuisance shall not be less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) for each abatement of each tract, and for each continuing abatement
thereafter. The City Manager shall direct the City Clerk to forward a statement
and demand payment thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to
the owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the
Office of the Okfuskee County Treasurer. (Ord. 2009-2, 3-9-2009)
      2.   If the statement is not paid within twenty (20) days after such
statement is mailed, the City Manager may direct the City Attorney to institute
action to establish its lien against the property on which such work was done
and to request the court to cause such property to be sold and the lien paid.
(Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
   B.   Costs Certified To County Treasurer: In the event the City does not
elect to proceed by legal action as set forth herein, then six (6) months from
the date of mailing the notice prescribed by section
4-1-7 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of such costs to the Okfuskee County Treasurer for the property upon
which the work was done is located, to be levied upon the property and to be
collected by the County Treasurer in the manner prescribed by the laws of this
State. (1985 Code § 8-412; amd. 2007 Code)
4-1-11: HEALTH NUISANCES DEFINED; ABATEMENT:
   A.   City Manager As Health Officer: The City Manager is hereby appointed as
Health Officer for the City. The duties of the Health Officer shall be to
enforce the ordinances of the City relating to public health.
   B.   Authority Of Health Officer; Notice To Abate:
      1.   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-
1011, the Health Officer of the City shall have authority to order the owner or
occupant of any private premises in the City to remove from such premises, at
the owner's or occupant's own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness,
condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute
to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the
public health, within twenty four (24) hours, or within such other time as may
be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order
shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of
the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the Health Officer or by a police
officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the
owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the State.
      2.   If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner,
occupant, or agent is unknown, or is without the State, the order may be served
by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one
(1) issue of newspaper having a general circulation in the City.
   C.   Abatement By City; Costs:
      1.   If the order is not complied with, the Health Officer may cause the
order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified
to the City Clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be
added to the City utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of
utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to
which it is added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same
regulations relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself.
      2.   If such owner or occupant is not a user of any City utility service,
such cost thereof shall be certified to the County Treasurer, who shall add the
same to the ad valorem taxes assessed against the property, and such cost shall
be a lien against the property, until paid, and shall be collected in the same
manner as ad valorem taxes against the property, and when collected shall be
paid to the City for reimbursement of the funds used to pay such cost. (Ord.
2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
4-1-12: NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner,
lessee, or other person to create or maintain a public nuisance within the
City, or to permit a public nuisance to remain on premises under his control
within the City. (Ord. 2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
4-1-13: TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED; NUISANCE:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the respective meanings ascribed to them herein:
   HUMAN EXCREMENT: The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
   SANITARY WATER CLOSET: The flush type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the
contents at all times.
   B.   Sanitary Facilities Required; Septic Tanks:
      1.   Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside,
are employed, or congregate within the City shall install, equip, and maintain
adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a
sanitary water closet. The closets and toilets hereby required shall be of the
sanitary water closet type when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of
a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the sanitary water closet type
(notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water closet
type emptying into a septic tank system.
      2.   A septic tank system may be used in such cases only if it meets the
standards of and is approved by the State Health Department.
   C.   Disposal Of Human Excrement: All human excrement disposed of within the
City shall be disposed of by depositing it in closets of the type provided for
in this section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the City to
permit the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any
person to dispose of human excrement within the City in any other manner.
   D.   Maintaining Public Nuisance:
      1.   All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner
different from that required by this section, and all closets so constructed,
situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are hereby declared
to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as such.
      2.   Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense,
and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
   E.   Sanitary Facilities For Assemblages: Sanitary facilities of the water
closet type or portable sanitary facilities approved by the State Department of
Health or City are required for any public or private meeting, gathering,
assembly or activity wherein one hundred (100) or more people congregate. (1985
Code § 8-415)
4-1-14: PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE:
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by
other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative and additional to any
other penalties or procedures authorized. (1985 Code § 8-417)
4-1-15: PENALTY; ADDITIONAL CHARGES FOR CONTINUING NUISANCE:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter or shall allow the premises occupied to become
unsanitary shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The City of Okemah Code Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to write and issue citations to any person, firm or corporation who
violates the provisions of this chapter or allows the premises occupied to
become unsanitary. (Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017)
   B.   Continuing Violation: If the nuisance upon which the initial conviction
under this chapter has not been abated within ten (10) days after the date of
the initial conviction, then and in that event, said person or other legal
entity so convicted may be charged with an additional violation of this chapter
for each day the said nuisance remains unabated after said ten (10) days. (Ord.
2003-01-08, 8-25-2003)
CHAPTER 2
WEEDS, GRASS AND TRASH
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Accumulation Of Trash Or Weeds Unlawful
4-2-3: Cleaning Trash, Weeds And Grass; Costs; Lien
4-2-4: Deposits Of Rubbish
4-2-5: Dead Animals
4-2-6: Littering
4-2-7: Abandoned Refrigerators, Containers
4-2-8: Burning Refuse Prohibited; Exceptions
4-2-9: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CLEANING: The removal of trash from property.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the County
Treasurer.
TRASH: Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials,
rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for,
discarded or abandoned, whether solid or liquid in form.
WEEDS:
   A.   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac
and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
      1.   Exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, except healthy trees, shrubs
or produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden,
unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a
hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of the weeds;
      2.   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
      3.   Harbors rodents or vermin;
      4.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
      5.   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
      6.   Is dead or diseased.
   B.   The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from
a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. (1985 Code § 8-102)
4-2-2: ACCUMULATION OF TRASH OR WEEDS UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated
wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the City to allow trash or
weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises, and it is the duty of
such owner to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds. (1985 Code § 8-101)
4-2-3: CLEANING TRASH, WEEDS AND GRASS; COSTS; LIEN:
   A.   City Authority; Administration:
      1.   The City may cause property within the City limits to be cleaned of
trash and weeds and/or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
      2.   The City Manager is hereby designated by the City to carry out the
duties of the City Council in this section.
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   Notice; Hearing; Abatement; Cost Assessment:
         a.   At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the
property by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
County Treasurer's Office, before the Housing Standards Board holds a hearing
or takes any action allowed under this section. At the time of mailing of
notice to the property owner, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from
the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the
name and address of the owner of the property.
         b.   The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property
of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate,
and the notice shall further state that, unless such work is performed within
ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the City and
a notice of lien shall be filed with the County Clerk against the property for
the costs due and owing the City.
         c.   However, if the property owner cannot be located as shown by the
return receipt, or if the return receipt is not returned within ten (10) days
from the date of mailing by the City, notice may be given by posting a copy of
the notice on the property or by publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1-102, one time not less than ten (10) days prior to any
hearing or action by the City.
         d.   If the City anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the notice,
whether by certified mail, posting, or publication, shall state that any
accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's
property occurring within six (6) months after the removal of trash or cutting
or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may be
summarily abated by the City; that the costs of such abatement shall be
assessed against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to
secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner.
      2.   Property Owner Consent For City Removal: The owner of the property
may give written consent to the City authorizing the removal of the trash or
the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving the written consent, the owner
waives any right to a hearing by the City.
      3.   Hearing By Housing Standards Board; Administrative Order:
         a.   A hearing shall be held by the City Housing Standards Board to
determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has
caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare
of the public and the community; has caused a hazard to traffic; or creates a
fire hazard to the danger of property.
         b.   An administrative order, in writing, recording the findings of
the City Housing Standards Board at said hearing will be filed with the City
Clerk and shall be sent to the address, as determined in subsection B1 of this
section, to the owner of the property.
      4.   City Authority To Remove; Filing Notice Of Lien:
         a.   Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of
such conditions, the agents of the City are granted the right of entry upon the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds and/or grass, and
performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the City.
         b.   Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the
City Clerk shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk of Okfuskee
County, Oklahoma, describing the property and the work performed by the City,
and stating that the City claims a lien on the property for the cleaning and/or
mowing costs.
      5.   Determination Of Cost; Issuance Of Statement:
         a.   The City Code enforcement officer shall determine the actual cost
of such cleaning and/or mowing and any other expenses as may be necessary in
connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing.
         b.   The City Clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner, at
the address specified in subsection B1 of this section, a statement of such
actual cost and demanding payment.
         c.   If the cleaning and/or mowing are done by the City, the cost to
the property owner for the cleaning and/or mowing shall not exceed the actual
cost of the labor, maintenance, and equipment required.
         d.   If the cleaning and/or mowing by the City is done on a private
contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
      6.   Certified Statement To County Treasurer; Lien; Collection:
         a.   If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of
the mailing of the statement, the City Clerk shall forward a certified
statement of the amount of the cost to the Okfuskee County Treasurer and the
same shall be levied on the property and collected by the County Treasurer as
other taxes authorized by law.
         b.   Once certified by the County Treasurer, payment may only be made
to the County Treasurer except as otherwise provided for in this section. Until
fully paid, the cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation
of the property owner from and after the date the cost is certified to the
County Treasurer. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a
lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the County
Treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and
special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens
against the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully
paid.
         c.   At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall collect a
fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. The fee shall be
deposited to the credit of the General Fund of the County.
         d.   If the County Treasurer and the City agree that the County
Treasurer is unable to collect the assessment, the City may pursue a civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon by an action in
personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose the
City's lien against the property.
         e.   A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not
owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
         f.   Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to
the County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing the discharge of
the lien.
      7.   Right Of Appeal: The property owner shall have a right of appeal to
the City Council from any administrative order of the City Housing Standards
Board. Such appeal shall be taken by filing notice, in writing, of appeal with
the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered.
   C.   Summary Abatement Of Nuisance; Notice; Costs:
      1.   If the City causes property within the City limits to be cleaned of
trash and/or weeds and/or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the
procedure provided for in subsection B of this section, any subsequent
accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property
occurring within a six (6) month period may be declared to be a nuisance and
may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner.
      2.   At the time of each such summary abatement, the City shall notify
the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall
state that the property owner may request a hearing before the City Council by
filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after
the date of mailing the notice.
      3.   Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such
abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in subsections B5
and B6 of this section. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply
if the records of the County Clerk show that the property was transferred after
notice was given pursuant to subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-
2017; amd. Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017; Ord. 2023-2, 7-24-2023)
4-2-4: DEPOSITS OF RUBBISH:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash,
slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse
or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or watercourse, or
upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in the City. (1985 Code
§ 8-109)
4-2-5: DEAD ANIMALS:
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in the City shall,
within twenty four (24) hours after the death of such animal, remove its
carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1985 Code § 8-
110)
4-2-6: LITTERING:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this chapter, "littering" is defined as
any trash, refuse, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, abandoned
appliances, paper wrappings, cigarette butts, cardboard, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, grass, bedding, wastepaper, tin cans, bottles, or any other
object or substance.
   B.   Littering Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to litter upon the
public streets, alleys, roadways, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks of the City,
except in public receptacles, or upon any real property owned or occupied by
another. (1985 Code § 8-111)
   C.   Littering From Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to throw from
any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the
streets, alleys and roadways of the City any litter, trash, wastepaper, tin
cans or any other substance or refuse whatever. (1985 Code § 8-112)
   D.   Litter Accumulation On Property:
      1.   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation occupying any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow
trash, wastepaper, litter, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of
objects to accumulate upon such real property or premises or on the sidewalk,
alley, right-of-way abutting the property or premises.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation occupying any
real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulated trash,
wastepaper, litter, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of objects
to be carried from the occupied premises, either by the wind, elements or
otherwise to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or occupied by the
offender. (1985 Code § 8-113)
4-2-7: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS, CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to leave in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container
of a capacity of one and one- half (11/2) cubic feet or more, which has an
airtight door with a lock or other fastening device which cannot be easily
released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator, or
container, without first removing the door, lock, or fastener. (1985 Code § 8-
115; amd. 2007 Code)
4-2-8: BURNING REFUSE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Burn Permit And Compliance Required: It is unlawful for any person,
firm, corporation, or any other entity to burn trash, wood, leaves or other
combustible material within the limits of the City. Provided, however,
residents of the City may build fires within the limits of the City for
recreation, ceremonial or noncommercial food preparation if they have obtained
a burn permit from the City and comply with all the rules and provisions of the
said burn permit.
   B.   Rules And Permit Fees Set By Council Resolution: The rules and
provisions of open burning shall be set by resolution of the City Council;
provided, that said rules and provisions do not violate State or Federal law or
the regulation of any State or Federal agency. Further, the City Council shall
set the fee for burn permits by resolution. The City Manager, or his designee,
shall be responsible for issuing burn permits, for inspecting fire sites, and
for enforcement of this section. The issuance or denial of a burn permit is
within the discretion of the City Manager, and any permit may be denied by the
City Manager if, in his opinion, it would endanger the peace, safety or welfare
of the citizens of the City.
   C.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to the burning of any wood or
like substance for fuel in any indoor fireplace or wood burning stove, or the
outdoor burning of any wood, charcoal or propane in any grill constructed for
outdoor cooking. (Ord. 05-01-2002, 5-6-2002)
4-2-9: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or shall allow the premises occupied to become unsanitary shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The City of Okemah Code enforcement officer shall have the
authority to write and issue citations to any person, firm or corporation who
violates the provisions of this chapter or allows the premises occupied to
become unsanitary. (Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017)
CHAPTER 3
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS; GRAFFITI
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions Concerning Dilapidated Buildings
4-3-2: Condemnation Of Buildings; Notice; Removal; Costs
4-3-3: Boarding And Securing Dilapidated Buildings
4-3-4: Removal Of Graffiti
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS CONCERNING DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
DILAPIDATED BUILDING:
   A.   A structure which through neglect or injury lacks necessary repairs or
otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the
structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public;
   B.   A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of
necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public;
   C.   An "unsecured building", meaning any structure which is not occupied by
a legal or equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable
owner, and into which there are one (1) or more unsecured openings such as
broken windows, unlocked windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in
exterior walls, holes in the roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways,
unlocked basement or cellar hatchways, or other similar unsecured openings
which would facilitate an unauthorized entry into the structure;
   D.   A structure which has been boarded and secured, as defined by 11
Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112.1, for more than eighteen (18) consecutive
months; or
   E.   A structure declared by the City Council to constitute a public
nuisance.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the County
Treasurer. (Ord. 2012-1, 2-13-2012)
4-3-2: CONDEMNATION OF BUILDINGS; NOTICE; REMOVAL; COSTS:
   A.   City Authority; Administration:
      1.   The City may cause dilapidated buildings within the City limits to
be torn down and removed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      2.   The City Housing Standards Board is hereby designated as the
administrative body for the City to carry out the duties of the City Council in
this section.
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   Notice; Hearing; Abatement; Cost Assessment:
         a.   At least ten (10) days' notice that a building is to be torn down
or removed shall be given to the owner of the property before the Housing
Standards Board holds a hearing. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
         b.   A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be
affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by mail to the
property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
Office of the Okfuskee County Treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to
any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the Office of the Okfuskee
County Clerk to the last known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing
of notice to any property owner or mortgage holder, the Municipality shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However,
if neither the property owner nor the mortgage holder can be located, notice
may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property, or by publication
as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102. Such notice may be published
once not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the City
pursuant to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017)
      2.   Hearing By Housing Standards Board To Determine Dilapidation: A
hearing shall be held by the City Housing Standards Board to determine if the
property is dilapidated and has become detrimental to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public and the community, or if the property creates a
fire hazard which is dangerous to other property.
      3.   Failure Of Owner To Comply; Removal By City; Lien:
         a.   Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property
constitutes a detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefited by
the removal of such conditions, the Housing Standards Board shall fix
reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work by the owner.
Should the owner not comply with either the commencement or completion of the
work by the dates allowed, the City may cause the dilapidated building to be
torn down and removed.
         b.   Upon completion of the work by the City, the City Clerk shall
immediately file a notice of dilapidation and lien with the Okfuskee County
Clerk describing the property, the findings of the City at the hearing, and
stating that the City claims a lien on the property for the destruction and
removal costs, and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date of filing of the notice.
         c.   The agents of the City are granted the right of entry on the
property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function
of the City if the work is not performed by the property owner within dates
fixed by the City Housing Standards Board.
      4.   Determination Of Cost; Issuance Of Statement:
         a.   The City Code enforcement officer shall determine the actual cost
of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings and any other expenses
that may be necessary in conjunction with the dismantling and removal of the
buildings, including the cost of notice and mailing.
         b.   The City Clerk shall forward a statement of the actual cost
attributable to the dismantling and removal of the buildings and a demand for
payment of such costs, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the
property owner.
         c.   In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any
mortgage holder at the address provided for in subsection B1 of this section.
         d.   If the City dismantles or removes any dilapidated buildings, the
cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor,
maintenance, and equipment required for the dismantling and removal of the
dilapidated buildings.
         e.   If dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings is done
by the City on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the
lowest and best bidder.
      5.   Certified Statement To County Treasurer; Lien; Collection:
         a.   When payment is made to the City for costs incurred, the City
Clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual
cost of the dismantling and removal of the buildings is not made within six (6)
months from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such
property, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of
the cost to the Okfuskee County Treasurer.
         b.   Once certified to the Okfuskee County Treasurer, payment may only
be made to the County Treasurer except as otherwise provided for in this
section. The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the County
Treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. Until finally paid, the costs
and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner
from and after the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed with
the County Clerk. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a
lien against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with
the County Clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes
and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to
all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until
the cost is fully paid.
         c.   At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall collect a
fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. The fee shall be
deposited to the credit of the General Fund of the County.
         d.   If the County Treasurer and the City agree that the County
Treasurer is unable to collect the assessment, the City may pursue a civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon including an
action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose
its lien against the property.
         e.   A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not
owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
         f.   Upon receiving payment, the City Clerk shall forward to the
County Treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the
lien.
      6.   Right Of Appeal: The property owner shall have the right to appeal
to the City Council from any administrative order or finding of fact of the
City Housing Standards Board. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the
administrative order or finding of fact of the Housing Standards Board is
rendered.
      7.   Summary Abatement Of Nuisance: Nothing in the provisions of this
section shall prevent the City from abating a dilapidated building as a
nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the health, safety
or welfare of the general public.
      8.   Nonliability Of City Officers And Employees: The officers, employees
and/or agents of the City shall not be liable for any damages or loss of
property due to the removal of dilapidated buildings performed pursuant to the
provisions of this section or as otherwise prescribed by law.
      9.   Exception, Agricultural Use: The provisions of this section shall
not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 2017-
5, 5-8-2017)
4-3-3: BOARDING AND SECURING DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
   BOARDING AND SECURING OR BOARDED AND SECURED: The closing, boarding or
locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the
structure.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: A structure that, due to lack of necessary
repairs, is considered uninhabitable and is a hazard to the health, safety, and
welfare of the general public.
   UNSECURED BUILDING: Any structure which is not occupied by a legal or
equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into
which there are one (1) or more unsecured openings such as broken windows,
unlocked windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes
in the roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar
hatchways, or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an
unauthorized entry into the structure.
   B.   City Authority; Administration:
      1.   After a building has been declared dilapidated, as provided in
section
4-3-2 of this chapter, and before the commencement of the tearing down and
removal of a dilapidated building, the City may authorize that such a building
be boarded and secured. However, if the dilapidated building is vacant and
unfit for human occupancy, the City may authorize the structure to be
demolished pursuant to section
4-3-2 of this chapter.
      2.   The City Housing Standards Board is hereby designated as the
administrative body for the City to carry out the duties of the City Council in
this chapter.
   C.   Cleaning Trash And Weeds: The City may cause the premises on which an
unsecured building is located to be cleaned of trash and weeds in accordance
with the provisions of section
4-2-3 of this title.
   D.   Procedure For Boarding And Securing: The City may cause an unsecured
building to be boarded and secured in accordance with the following procedure:
(Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
      1.   Notice Requirements; Contents:
         a.   Before the City enforcement officer orders such action, at least
ten (10) days' notice that such unsecured building is to be boarded and secured
shall be given by mail to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided
in section
4-3-2 of this chapter. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the
property to be affected. However, if neither the property owner nor the
mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the
notice on the property or by publication as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1-102. Such notice shall be published one time, not less than ten (10)
days prior to any hearing or action by the Housing Standards Board pursuant to
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017)
         b.   If the City anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of subsection D9 of this section, the notice
shall state that any subsequent need for boarding and securing the building
within a six (6) month period after the initial boarding and securing of the
building pursuant to such notice may be summarily boarded and secured by the
City; that the costs of such boarding and securing shall be assessed against
the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such
payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage
holder.
      2.   Property Owner Consent For City Boarding And Securing: The owner of
the property may give written consent to the City authorizing the boarding and
securing of such unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred
thereby. By giving written consent, the owner waives any right the owner has to
a hearing by the City Housing Standards Board.
      3.   Hearing And Determination By City Housing Standards Board:
         a.   If the property owner does not give written consent to such
actions, a hearing shall be held by the City Housing Standards Board to
determine whether the boarding and securing of such unsecured building would
promote and benefit the public health, safety or welfare.
         b.   Such hearing may be held in conjunction with a hearing on the
accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the premises of such
unsecured building held pursuant to the provisions of section
4-2-3 of this title.
         c.   In making such determination, the City shall apply the following
standard: The Housing Standards Board may order the boarding and securing of
the unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would make such
building less available for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard
created by such building, or decrease the hazard that such building would
constitute an attractive nuisance to children.
         d.   Upon making the required determination, the City Housing
Standards Board may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building.
      4.   Filing Notice And Lien With County Treasurer: After the City Housing
Standards Board orders the boarding and securing of such unsecured building,
the City Clerk shall immediately file a notice of unsecured building and lien
with the Office of the Okfuskee County Clerk, describing the property, stating
the findings of the City Housing Standards Board at the hearing at which such
building was determined to be unsecured, and stating that the City claims a
lien on the property for the costs of boarding and securing such building and
that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and
after the date of filing the notice.
      5.   Right Of Entry By City: Pursuant to the order of the City Housing
Standards Board, the agents of the City are granted the right of entry on the
property for the performance of the boarding and securing of such building and
for the performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function of the
City.
      6.   Determination Of Cost; Issuance Of Statement:
         a.   After the unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the
City Code enforcement officer shall determine the actual costs of such actions
and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction therewith,
including the cost of the notice and mailing.
         b.   The City Clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs
attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a
demand for payment of such costs, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section
4-3-2 of this chapter.
         c.   If the City boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost
to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, materials
and equipment required for the performance of such actions.
         d.   If such actions are done by the City on a private contract basis,
the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
      7.   Certified Statement To County Treasurer; Lien; Collection:
         a.   When payment is made to the City for costs incurred, the City
Clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual
cost of the boarding and securing of the unsecured building is not made within
thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of
such property, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount
of the cost to the Okfuskee County Treasurer. Once certified to the Okfuskee
County Treasurer, payment may only be made to the County Treasurer, except as
otherwise provided for in this section.
         b.   The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the
County Treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law.
         c.   Until finally paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be
the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of the
notice of unsecured building and lien is filed with the County Clerk.
         d.   In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien
against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with the
County Clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and
all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all
other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the
cost is fully paid.
         e.   At the time of collection, the County Treasurer shall collect a
fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. The fee shall be
deposited to the credit of the General Fund of the County.
         f.   If the County Treasurer and the City agree that the County
Treasurer is unable to collect the assessment, the City may pursue a civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon including an
action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose
its lien against the property.
         g.   A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not
owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien
created pursuant to this section.
         h.   Upon receiving payment, the City Clerk shall forward to the
County Treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the
lien.
      8.   Right Of Appeal: The property owner shall have the right to appeal
to the City Council from any administrative order or finding of fact of the
City Housing Standards Board. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the
administrative order or finding of fact of the City Housing Standards Board is
rendered.
      9.   Summary Abatement Of Nuisance; Notice; Costs:
         a.   If the City causes a structure within the City limits to be
boarded and secured, any subsequent need for boarding and securing within a six
(6) month period constitutes a public nuisance and may be summarily boarded and
secured without further prior notice to the property owner or mortgage holder.
         b.   At the time of each such summary boarding and securing, the City
shall notify the property owner and mortgage holder of the boarding and
securing and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner
may request an appeal before the City Council by filing written notice of
appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the mailing of the
notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in subsection D1 of
this section.
         c.   Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such
boarding and securing shall be determined and collected as provided for in
subsections D6 and D7 of this section.
      10.   Order Of City Housing Standards Board: The City Housing Standards
Board may determine that a building is unsecured and order that such building
be boarded and secured in the manner provided for in this section even though
such building has not been declared to be dilapidated.
      11.   Exception, Agricultural Property: The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes. (Ord.
2017-5, 5-8-2017)
4-3-4: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    ADVERTISING: Any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message,
drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on the
property by an owner or tenant of the property, or an agent of such owner or
tenant, for the purpose of promoting products or services or conveying
information to the public.
   GRAFFITI: Means, without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol,
slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible
to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or etched on a rock,
tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure; provided, this
definition shall not include advertising or any other letter, word, name,
number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of
any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property, a tenant of
the property, or by an authorized agent for such owner or tenant.
   OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   REMOVAL, REMOVE OR REMOVED: When used in relation to the eradication of
graffiti, means the act of taking graffiti off of, or masking the presence of
graffiti on, a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or any other
structure.
   TENANT: Any person shown by the records of the County Clerk's Office as a
lessee of the property, or any person lawfully in actual physical possession of
the property.
   B.   City Authority; Administration:
      1.   The City may cause graffiti to be removed from property within the
City limits in accordance with the following procedure.
      2.   The City Housing Standards Board is hereby designated as the
administrative body for the City to carry out the duties of the City Council in
this section.
   C.   Graffiti Removal Procedure:
      1.   Property Owner Consent For City Removal: The property owner and the
tenant, if any, may give their written consent to the City authorizing removal
of graffiti. By giving such written consent, the owner and tenant each waives
the right to notice and a hearing by the City Housing Standards Board as
otherwise required in this section.
      2.   City Authority To Remove Without Consent: If the consent of the
property owner and the tenant, if any, to remove graffiti from the property
cannot be obtained, the City may remove the graffiti without such consent
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
      3.   Notice; Time Limit For Removal:
         a.   To remove graffiti from property without the consent of the
property owner and the tenant, if any, at least ten (10) days' notice shall be
given by mail directed to the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in
the County Treasurer's Office. Notice to the tenant, if any, shall be given by
mail to the property address. At the time of mailing of notice to the property
owner and the tenant, if any, the City shall obtain a receipt of mailing from
the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the
name and address of the mailee(s). (Ord. 2017-6, 5-22-2017)
         b.   The notice shall order the property owner and tenant, if any, to
remove graffiti from the property and shall further state that unless such work
is performed within twenty (20) days of the date of the notice, the work shall
be done by the City. In addition, notice shall be given by posting a copy of
the notice on the property at least one time not less than ten (10) days prior
to any hearing or action by the City.
         c.   If the City anticipates summary abatement of graffiti in
accordance with the provisions of subsection D of this section, the notice
shall state that any accumulations of graffiti on the property occurring within
one (1) year from and after the date of the notice may be summarily abated by
the City without a hearing and further prior notice to the property owner or
the tenant, if any, except by posting of notice at least one time on the
property not less than two (2) business days prior to such summary abatement.
      4.   Hearing By City Housing Standards Board: A hearing may be held by
the City Housing Standards Board to determine whether the accumulation of
graffiti on the property has caused the property to become detrimental or a
hazard to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public and the
community.
      5.   Right Of Entry; City Authority: Upon finding that the condition of
the property constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property, the
public, and the community would be benefited by the removal of such conditions,
the agents of the City are granted the right of entry onto the property for the
removal of the graffiti thereon and for performance of the necessary duties as
a governmental function of the City.
      6.   Right Of Appeal: The property owner and the tenant, if any, shall
have a right of appeal to the City Council from any order of the City Housing
Standards Board. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk within ten (10) business days after the administrative
order is rendered.
   D.   Summary Abatement:
      1.   If a notice is given by the City Housing Standards Board to a
property owner and tenant, if any, ordering graffiti to be removed from
property within the City limits in accordance with the procedure provided for
in subsection C of this section, any subsequent accumulations of graffiti on
the property occurring within a one (1) year period may be summarily abated
without further mailing or publishing prior notice to the property owner or
tenant, if any. However, prior to the summary abatement by the City, notice
thereof shall be posted at least one time on the property not less than two (2)
business days prior to such summary abatement.
      2.   This subsection shall not apply if the records of the County Clerk
show that the ownership and/or tenancy of the property was transferred after
notice was given pursuant to subsection C of this section.
   E.   Removal At City Expense: Removal of graffiti by the City pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall be performed at the sole expense of the
City. In removing the graffiti, the City shall restore the property as nearly
as possible to the condition as it existed immediately prior to the graffiti
being placed on the property.
   F.   Abatement As Nuisance: Nothing in the provisions of this section shall
prevent the City from abating graffiti as a nuisance or otherwise exercising
its police power to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
   G.   Nonliability Of City Officers And Employees: The City and its officers,
employees or agents shall not be liable for any damages or loss of property due
to the removal of graffiti performed pursuant to the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
CHAPTER 4
FOOD AND RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Food Establishments
4-4-1: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Food Service Sanitation Ordinance Adopted:
      1.   The latest edition of the "Oklahoma State Department Of Health Rules
And Regulations Pertaining To Food Service Establishments" is hereby adopted
and incorporated in this subsection by reference. At least one copy of the
regulations shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. The regulations
shall govern the definitions; inspection of food service establishments; the
issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate food service
establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food
or drink and the enforcement of this subsection.
      2.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may
be enjoined from continuing the violation. (1985 Code § 8-201)
   B.   Definitions; Permit Requirements:
      1.   Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, as follows:
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe,
luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, snow cone stand, retail
grocery store, and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as
kitchens or other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale elsewhere.
   ITINERANT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: One operating for a temporary period in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other similar
gathering.
      2.   Permit Requirements; Fee; Exception:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person who does not possess a current and
unrevoked permit from the city to operate a food establishment in the city.
         b.   Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
         c.   Only persons who comply with the requirements of this section
shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit.
         d.   Such permits are not transferable to another person or location.
         e.   Every person desiring a permit to operate a food establishment in
the city shall make application for such permit to the city.
         f.   Upon approval of the application by the city manager or his
designee such a permit may be issued by the city clerk.
         g.   There shall be a fee as set by the council per year, and each
permit shall expire on June 30, next after the date upon which such permit is
issued.
         h.   A person conducting an itinerant food establishment shall not be
required to secure a permit.
      3.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful:
         a.   For any person who operates a food establishment in the city to
hire, permit to be hired, or permit to work gratis, any person who does not
possess a current and unrevoked permit approved by the city manager or his
designee; and
         b.   For any person who does not have in his or her possession a
current and unrevoked permit approved by the city manager or his designee, to
work in any food establishment in the city.
   C.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Application for such a permit must be made to the city manager or
his designee by such person.
      2.   Prior to approval of such application, the city manager or his
designee shall instruct such person in the sanitation requirements of this
section and in approved sanitation practices in food handling.
      3.   Upon approval of such application by the city manager or his
designee, the city clerk shall issue the person such permit. The permit shall
entitle such person to work in a food establishment during the calendar year
for which the permit is issued.
      4.   The city manager or his designee is authorized to issue temporary
permits permitting the applicants to work in a food establishment until the
next regular course of instruction in sanitary practices of food handling is
conducted; provided, that such temporary permits shall expire on the day above
mentioned course of instruction begins unless the person takes the course, and
in this case, it shall expire at the close of such course.
      5.   Before approval of applications for permits, the city manager or his
designee may require such medical and laboratory examinations as he deems
necessary to minimize the possibility of transmission of communicable disease.
      6.   The city manager or his designee may at any time revoke the permit
of any employee in any food establishment for failure to comply with the
provisions of this section, or for acts adversely affecting the health of the
public. The permit may be reinstated only by the city manager or his designee.
(1985 Code § 8-202; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Inspections:
      1.   At least once every six (6) months the city manager or his designee
shall inspect every food establishment located within the city.
      2.   In case the city manager or his designee discovers the violation of
any item of sanitation, he shall make a second inspection after the lapse of
such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second
inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of
this section.
      3.   Any violation of the same items of this section on such second
inspection shall call for immediate suspension of permit.
   E.   Revocation Of Permit: A permit for the operation of a restaurant may be
temporarily suspended by the city manager upon violation by the holder of any
of the terms of this section, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by
the city manager or his designee upon serious or repeated violation. (1985 Code
§ 8-203; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED OR WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Illegal Storage; Nuisance Declared; Exception
4-5-3: Notice To Remove
4-5-4: Hearing And Appeal
4-5-5: Responsibility For Removal
4-5-6: Failure To Remove; City Authority
4-5-7: Notice Of Removal; Sale; Redemption
4-5-8: Abandonment Of Vehicle
4-5-9: Impoundment Of Vehicle
4-5-10: Penalty
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle for which, after a period of seventy
two (72) hours, there is no evidence of an apparent owner who intends to remove
the vehicle.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined herein, which does not
have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a
current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which
is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or
discarded.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along
the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall mean any other publicly owned property or facility.
(1985 Code § 8-301)
4-5-2: ILLEGAL STORAGE; NUISANCE DECLARED; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Time Limit For Storage: No person shall park, store, leave, or permit
the parking, storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in
an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially
dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or private
property within the city for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72)
hours.
   B.   Nuisance Declared; Abatement: The presence of an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or
parts thereof, on private or public property, is hereby declared a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within
a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a
business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city. (1985 Code
§ 8-302)
4-5-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
   A.   Generally: Whenever it comes to the attention of the city manager or
his designee that any nuisance as defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter exists, in the city, a notice in writing shall be served
upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no
such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them
of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time
specified in this chapter. (1985 Code § 8-303)
   B.   Notice Procedure:
      1.   The chief of police or his agent shall give notice of removal to the
owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, at least ten
(10) days before the time of compliance.
      2.   It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted
in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is
located and duplicate copies are sent by certified mail to the owner or
occupant of the private property to his last known address. (1985 Code § 8-305)
   C.   Contents Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal
within the time specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that
upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city shall prosecute a
criminal complaint for failure to abate the nuisance, or the city or its
designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied
against the owner or occupant of the property. (1985 Code § 8-306)
4-5-4: HEARING AND APPEAL:
   A.   Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are directed, or
their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the
city manager within the ten (10) day period of compliance prescribed in
subsection 4-5-3B of this chapter. (1985 Code § 8-307)
   B.   Hearing Procedure:
      1.   The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised
of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days in advance thereof.
      2.   At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notices
have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party
deems necessary.
      3.   An appeal from the decision of the city manager made at or after the
hearing may be made to the city council by filing, within ten (10) days of the
city manager's decision, a written request with the city clerk for an appeal to
the council. (1985 Code § 8-308)
4-5-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
   A.   Removal: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of
the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle and the owner or
occupant of the private property upon which the same is located, either or all
of them, shall be responsible for its removal.
   B.   Expenses: In the event of removal and disposition by the city, or
private contractor as provided by state law, the owner, or occupant of the
private property where the vehicle is located, shall be liable for the expenses
incurred. (1985 Code § 8-304)
4-5-6: FAILURE TO REMOVE; CITY AUTHORITY:
   A.   City Authority To Remove; Interference Prohibited:
      1.   If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied
within the ten (10) day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice
requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the existence of
the violation is affirmed by the city manager, the chief of police or his agent
has the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from
the premises.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse
to allow such person to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing
a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Continuing Prosecution Or Removal: The city shall continue to prosecute
criminal charges on a daily basis for failure to abate the nuisance or shall
have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it
from the premises. (1985 Code § 8-309)
4-5-7: NOTICE OF REMOVAL; SALE; REDEMPTION:
   A.   Notify Owner: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such
vehicle, the chief of police or his agent shall give notice to the registered
owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the
private property from which the vehicle was removed, that the vehicle has been
impounded and stored for violation of this chapter.
   B.   Contents Of Notice: The notice shall give the location of where the
vehicle is stored, and the costs incurred by the city for removal, and state
that the vehicle will be sold, or otherwise disposed of if not redeemed by the
owner upon payment of all applicable costs within the specified time.
   C.   Notice And Sale Conducted By City: The notice of sale and sale shall be
conducted by the city or its agent in accordance with applicable state law.
(1985 Code § 8-310)
4-5-8: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLE:
No person, firm or corporation shall abandon any vehicle within the city on any
public or private property, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place
within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the
vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. (1985 Code § 8-311)
4-5-9: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLE:
The chief of police or other appropriate official, or any designated member of
his department, is hereby authorized to remove or have removed, in accordance
with removal procedures set out in Oklahoma Statutes title 47, any vehicle left
at any place within the city, which reasonably appears to be in violation of
this chapter, or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the applicable
ordinances. (1985 Code § 8-312)
4-5-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 8-313)
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING STANDARDS BOARD
SECTION:
4-6-1: Housing Standards Board Created; Membership; Compensation
4-6-2: Terms Of Office; Vacancies
4-6-3: Meetings; Organization And Rules
4-6-4: Powers And Duties
4-6-1: HOUSING STANDARDS BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION:
There is hereby created within and for the City a Housing Standards Board,
which shall consist of five (5) citizens of the City, one (1) member nominated
by each member of the City Council which resides in said Council member's
respective ward, and confirmed by the Council. The members of the Housing
Standards Board shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their
fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and shall serve without
compensation except as may be otherwise provided. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
4-6-2: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
Members of the City Housing Standards Board shall hold office for a term of
three (3) years, with the exception that in the first instance, the two (2)
members appointed from Wards 1 and 2 shall be appointed to serve for terms of
one (1) year, the two (2) members appointed from Wards 3 and 4 shall be
appointed to serve for terms of two (2) years, and the member appointed at
large shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Appointments thereafter shall
be made for a term of three (3) years; except, when a vacancy occurs, the
appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
4-6-3: MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
   A.   Meetings; Officers; Bylaws: The members of the City Housing Standards
Board shall meet within thirty (30) days after their appointment and
confirmation, and organize by electing from their members a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, and Secretary; and shall adopt from time to time such bylaws, rules,
and regulations and amendments thereto as may be necessary to effectuate the
purposes of the board.
   B.   Quorum: Three (3) members of the City Housing Standards Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
4-6-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Housing Standards Board is designated as the administrative body for
the City to carry out the powers and duties of the City Council as set forth in
this title. (Ord. 2017-5, 5-8-2017)
CHAPTER 7
TOBACCO-FREE AND VAPOR-FREE ORDINANCE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Prohibited Conduct
4-7-3: Required Signs
4-7-4: Penalties And Enforcement
4-7-5: Appendix Adopted By Reference
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY PROPERTY: All buildings, indoor areas, and outdoor areas, including but
not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or portions thereof,
owned or operated by the City of Okemah, including but not limited to vehicles
and equipment owned by the municipality.
INDOOR AREA: Any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the public, at
all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. "Indoor area"
includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms,
employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees,
as well as all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or
totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or
closed windows, stairways, or the like.
OUTDOOR AREA: Any area that is not an indoor area, and includes outdoor
recreational areas.
SMOKING: The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other
lighted smoking device.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption. "Tobacco product" does not include any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product.
VAPOR PRODUCT: Any noncombustible product, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. "Vapor product" shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or electronic device. (Ord. 2019-6, 8-
12-2019)
4-7-2: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   Smoking tobacco products is prohibited in all places in which smoking
tobacco products is prohibited by Oklahoma state law.
   B.   Using tobacco products and vapor products is prohibited on all city
property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and recreational areas.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting
the use of tobacco products or vapor products on their property, even if the
use of tobacco products or vapor products is not otherwise prohibited in that
area.
   D.   No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco products
or vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity
and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by
law.
   E.   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such
as ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person or
entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of ash
receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products
or vapor products in violation of any provision of this chapter.
   F.   No person shall dispose of tobacco product or vapor product waste
within an area in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is
prohibited.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell tobacco products
or vapor products within three hundred feet (300') of any public or private
school. The distance shall be measured from the nearest property line of such
public or private school, and if an establishment, then to the nearest
perimeter wall of the premises of any establishment which sells tobacco
products or vapor products.
   H.   No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise retaliate
against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-6, 8-12-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-1, 2-27-2023)
4-7-3: REQUIRED SIGNS:
   A.   The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in
which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this
chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of
entry to the area, and in at least one (1) other conspicuous point within the
area.
   B.   For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products in
indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least four (4) inches by two (2)
inches in size and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is
prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on
the use of tobacco products or vapor products in outdoor areas, signs shall be
weather-resistant, at least fifteen inches (15") by fifteen inches (15") in
size, with lettering of at least one inch (1"), and shall clearly state that
smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is
provided.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her designee
shall be responsible for the posting of signs on city property, both indoor and
outdoor.
   D.   Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall
not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor products
in violation of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-6, 8-12-2019)
4-7-4: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City of
Okemah. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official may enforce
this chapter.
   B.   Any person who knowingly violates this chapter shall be punished by a
citation and fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) and not more than ten
dollars ($10.00) in accordance with this chapter of the City of Okemah, City
Code.
   C.   The possession of a lighted tobacco product in violation of this
chapter is a nuisance.
   D.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   E.   Each instance of tobacco product or vapor product use in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
   F.   The use of a vapor product in violation of this chapter is a nuisance.
   G.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product use shall
also constitute a violation of this chapter.
   H.   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law,
any violation of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product use
may be remedied by the City Attorney and City Council, including, but not
limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, criminal
code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 2019-6, 8-
12-2019)
4-7-5: APPENDIX ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Appendix A: Findings, attached to Ord. 2019-6, is hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated into this code as if laid out herein in full. (Ord. 2019-6, 8-
12-2019)
CHAPTER 8
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
SECTION:
4-8-1: Coronavirus (COVID-19)
4-8-1: CORONAVIRUS (COVID19):
   A.   Due to the onset of the Coronavirus (COVID 19) pandemic, a state of
emergency continues from the previous declaration in the City of Okemah,
Oklahoma; and the following are ordered for the protection of public health.
   B.   All orders contained in the Executive Orders issued by the Governor of
the State of Oklahoma relating to Coronavirus (COVID 19) and all subsequent
Executive Orders relating to COVID 19 are hereby adopted by the City of Okemah
and ordered to be complied with, subject to additional requirements,
restrictions, recommendations and exceptions set forth in (C) below.
   C.   All persons shall wear facial masks which are consistent with CDC
guidelines or facial shields when out in public (indoors and outdoors) and
social distancing of six feet (6') or more cannot be maintained, with the
following exceptions:
      1.   Any person younger than sixteen (16) years of age or if sixteen (16)
years of age or older while attending a school or university, where masks or
facial shields have not been made mandatory;
      2.   Any person with a medical condition or disability that prevents
wearing a face covering as recommended by their physician;
      3.   Any person at a restaurant to eat or drink (at table). Masks should
be worn at other times inside restaurant;
      4.   Any person while the person is exercising outdoors or engaging in
physical activity outdoors, and maintaining a safe distance (six feet (6') or
more) from other people not in the same household;
      5.   Any person while the person is driving alone or with passengers who
are part of the same household as the driver;
      6.   Any person obtaining a service that requires temporary removal of
the face covering for security surveillance, screening, or a need for specific
access to the face, such as while visiting a bank or while obtaining a personal
care or dental service involving the face, but only to the extent necessary for
the temporary removal;
      7.   Any person while the person is in a swimming pool, lake or similar
body of water;
      8.   Any person who is voting, assisting a voter, serving as a poll
watcher, or actively administering an election;
      9.   Any person who is actively providing or obtaining access to
religious worship;
      10.   Any person while the person is giving a speech for a broadcast or
to an audience;
      11.   Any person performing work in which face coverings present or
exacerbates a hazard;
      12.   Any person who is deaf or hard of hearing or communicating with a
deaf or hard of hearing person.
Although the above are exceptions to wearing of a face covering or shield, it
is strongly encouraged that those persons included within an exception wear a
face covering or face shield when possible.
   D.   The City Manager's authorization to modify city services as needed in
response to the state of emergency, including, but not limited to, hours of
operation, public access, and employee working conditions, shall continue.
   E.   The fine for a violation of any of the provisions contained in this
chapter shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), inclusive of court costs.
   F.   This chapter shall be effective until April 12, 2021 at twelve o’clock
(12:00) A.M. (Ord. 2020-2, 11-23-2020; amd. Ord. 2020-4, 12-28-2020, Ord. 2021-
1, 1-25-2021; Ord. 2021-5, 4-12-2021)
CHAPTER 9
ENFORCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL LIENS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Title
4-9-2: Definitions
4-9-3: Applicability
4-9-4: Fees, Penalties, And Abatement Costs As Lien
4-9-5: In REM Foreclosures, Requirements, And Enforcement
4-9-6: Code Enforcement, Notice, And Petition
4-9-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be entitled as Enforcement of Municipal Liens. (Ord. 2025-5,
7-28-2025)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
CITY OR       The City of Okemah.
MUNICIPALITY:
CODE          The City of Okemah Code Enforcement Officer or an employee of a municipality who
ENFORCEMENT   is tasked by the City Council or City Manager with the enforcement of state law
DIRECTOR:     or local ordinances related to the condition of real property within the
              jurisdiction of the municipality.
              1.   The person who last appears as owner of the real property in the county
              records.
              2.   The current mortgage of record of the property or assignee of record of the
              mortgagee.
              3.   The current holder of a beneficial interest in a deed of trust recorded
              against the real property;
INTERESTED    4.   A tax certificate holder; or
PARTY:        5.   Any party having an interest in the real property, or in any part thereof
              legal or equitable, in severalty or as tenant in common, whose identity and
              address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or
              records maintained in the county records or as revealed by a full title search,
              consisting of fifty (50) years or more. An interested party shall not include the
              holder of the benefit of an easement which burdens the real property, the holder
              of the benefit or burden of a real covenant which burdens the real property, or
              the holder of the benefit of a utility easement which burdens the real property.
MINIMUM BID   The price that equals the redemption amount.
PRICE:
              Any lien that has been levied against real property by the City of Okemah that is
              the result of the nonpayment of any fine, penalty, abatement cost or enforcement
              cost incurred by the City related to the enforcement of state or local housing
MUNICIPAL     and building codes. Such lien shall include only those liens which arise out of a
CODE LIEN:    failure to comply with any law of the State of Oklahoma, or from the failure to
              comply with the City of Okemah s ordinances or resolutions.
              A municipal code lien shall not include any lien that has previously been
              certified to the tax collector or the county for inclusion on the property tax
              bill associated with the real property.
              The principal amount of a municipal code lien. interest accrued at the rate of
              seven and one-half percent (7.5%) per annum from the date the municipal code lien
MUNICIPAL     was filed in the office of the county clerk, any fees or costs incurred in the
CODE LIEN     collection of such a lien under this act including, without limitations, the cost
PAYOFF:       of title examinations and publication of notices, and any other penalties
              allowable under either the laws of the State of Oklahoma or under an ordinance or
              resolution enacted by the City of Okemah.
              Real property that is lawfully occupied as a principal residence that is any of
              the following:
              1.   A homestead as described in Section 2888 of Title 68 of the Oklahoma
OWNER-        Statutes;
OCCUPIED:     2.   Exempt from ad valorem taxation under Sections 2904 through 2911 of Title 68
              of the Oklahoma Statutes; and
              3.   Eligible for the designations listed in subparagraph a or b or this
              paragraph, but which has not yet been granted such designation and which is
              lawfully occupied by the family of a deceased individual.
              The sum of:
REDEMPTION    1.   The full amount of the municipal code lien payoff for each municipal code
AMOUNT:       lien on which the municipality is seeking to foreclose under this act; and
              2.   Any tax payoff that may be applicable to the property on which the City is
              seeking to foreclose under this act;
              Any of the following:
              1.   A tax sale purchaser who holds a certificate of purchase;
TAX           2.   The state, where it has accepted and recorded a certificate of purchase
CERTIFICATE   obtained at a tax sale;
HOLDER:       3.   Any party to which a certificate of purchase obtained at a tax sale has been
              assigned; or
              4.   The purchaser or assignee of a tax lien certificate.
              All amounts necessary to satisfy any claims for delinquent taxes assessed against
              the real property on which the City is seeking foreclosure under this act. Those
              amounts shall include:
              1.   If the taxes associated with the property are delinquent, but the property
              has not yet been sold for taxes, the full amount of delinquent taxes, costs,
TAX PAYOFF:   fees, and charges due to the county tax collector;
              2.   If the property has been sold for taxes to either the state or to a party
              other than the state, those amounts required for redemption, except for when the
              City is the prevailing bidder, the tax payoff amount shall be the lesser of these
              amounts; and
              3.   If a tax lien has been sold by a county, the amount required for redemption.
              (Ord. 2025-5, 7-28-2025)
              Those taxes assessed against real property by either tile State of Oklahoma. the
              county in which the real property is situated, or the City that are delinquent as
              of the date a proceeding under this act is commenced or at any time before final
TAXES:        resolution of the same, and shall also include any taxes assessed against real
              property that are unpaid from any previous year and any amounts required for
              redemption. As provided in Section 3103 of Title 68 or the Oklahoma Statutes, a
              lien for taxes shall be superior to all other liens, including municipal code
              liens.
 
4-9-3: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter shall apply to the collection of liens attached by the City of
Okemah as to real property, other than owner-occupied property, within the City
of Okemah. This Chapter shall not apply to owner-occupied property. (Ord. 2025-
5, 7-28-2025)
4-9-4: FEES, PENALTIES, AND ABATEMENT COSTS AS LIEN:
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any fees, penalties, and abatement
costs imposed against property other than owner-occupied real property for
violations or the City of Okemah’s housing and building codes adopted pursuant
to the statutes of the State of Oklahoma may be enforced in rem as a lien in
accordance with this Chapter; provided, however, such enforcement shall not
commence until the cumulative amount of fees, penalties. and abatement costs
outstanding equals or exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
Every municipal code lien, as defined in this Chapter, shall be superior to all
other liens, except those liens for taxes described or referenced in Section
3103 of Title 68 or the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 2025-5, 7-28-2025)
4-9-5: IN REM FORECLOSURES, REQUIREMENTS, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The City of Okemah is authorized to proceed with judicial in rem
foreclosures of municipal code liens in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
   B.   Proceedings in accordance .with this Chapter are to solely enforce the
municipal code lien for real property subject to the municipal code lien and
shall not constitute an action for personal liability for the municipal code
liens against the owner or owners of the real property.
   C.   The rights and remedies set forth in this Chapter are available solely
to the City or Okemah and shall not extend to any nongovernmental transferee of
municipal code liens.
   D.   The judicial in rem proceedings of this Chapter are the sole remedy for
the enforcement through the sale of real property.
   E.   The enforcement proceedings authorized by this Chapter may be initiated
only by the City of Okemah. (Ord. 2025-5, 7-28-2025)
4-9-6: CODE ENFORCEMENT, NOTICE, AND PETITION:
   A.   After a municipal code lien has been recorded with the office of the
county clerk of the county in which the real property is located, the code
enforcement director may identify those properties on which to commence a
judicial in rem foreclosure in accordance with this Chapter. accept that those
properties the code enforcement director identifies as owner-occupied shall not
be subject to judicial in rem foreclosure under this act. The code enforcement
director shall not rile a petition for judicial in rem foreclosure in
accordance with this Chapter for a period of six (6) months following the date
upon which the municipal code lien is recorded in the office of the county
clerk. A petition for judicial in rem foreclosure may include any other
municipal code lien that has been filed prior to the date the petition is
filed. After enforcement proceedings have commenced in accordance with this
Chapter. the enforcement proceedings may be amended to include any subsequently
arising municipal code liens and, or applicable, any and all taxes as defined
in this Chapter.
   B.   If the property on which the City is seeking to foreclose under this
act is subject to taxes as defined in this act, then, at least sixty (60) days
prior to the filing of the petition, the code enforcement director shall notify
all other taxing agencies within the jurisdiction of the City and the State of
Oklahoma of the code enforcement director's intention to file a petition for
judicial in rem foreclosure of the real property on which a municipal code lien
exists.
   C.   In the name of the City of Okemah, the code enforcement director shall,
in the appropriate lis pendens record in the office of the county clerk of the
county in which the real property is located, file a notice of his or her
intent to file a judicial in rem foreclosure action. The notice shall include a
legal description of the property, street address of the property if
unavailable, a statement that the property is subject to judicial in rem
foreclosure proceedings under this net, and a statement that those proceedings
may extinguish any legal interests in the property.
   D.   Simultaneous with the filing of his or her notice of intent to file a
judicial in rem foreclosure action, the code enforcement director, in the name
of the City of Okemah, shall file a petition with the clerk of the district
court for the district in which the real property is located.
   E.   The petition shall be filed against the real property against which the
municipal code lien has been recorded and shall provide all of the following:
      1.   The identity of the municipality and the name and address of the
code enforcement director;
      2.   The real property address;
      3.   A description of the real property;
      4.   The tax identification number of the real property;
      5.   The municipal code lien which is being foreclosed;
      6.   The principal amount of the municipal code lien together with
applicable interest and penalties;
      7.   The principal amount of any additional municipal code liens together
with applicable interest and penalties in accordance with this section, if any;
      8.   The year or years for which the taxes are delinquent, if any;
      9.   The principal amount of the taxes together with interest and
penalties. if any;
      10.   A statement that upon final sale in accordance with this act and
payment of the amount due for taxes, if applicable, an interested party's
rights of redemption shall he extinguished; and
      11.   The names and addresses of all interested parties to whom copies or
the petition to be sent in accordance with subsection F. of this section.
   F.   The City shall mail copies of the petition by both certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by regular mail to all interested parties whose
identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the petition
shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the real property address to the
attention of the occupants of the property, if any. In addition, notice shall
be physically posted on the real property and shall include the following
statement:
         "THIS PROPERTY IS SUBJECT TO A JUDICIAL IN REM FORECLOSURE ACTION AND
MAY BE TRANSFERRED TO THE CITY OF OKEMAH OR ANOTHER PARTY. PERSONS WITH
INFORMATION REGARDING THE CURRENT OWNER OF THE PROPERTY ARE REQUESTED TO
CONTACT THE CITY OF OKEMAH."
   G.   Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the petition. the City shall
cause a notice of the filing of the petition to be published once each week for
three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
in which the property is located. Such notice shall specify:
      1.   The name and address of the code enforcement director;
      2.   The real property address;
      3.   A description of the real property;
      4.   The tax identification number of the real property;
      5.   Any applicable municipal code lien which is being foreclosed upon;
      6.   The principal amount of any municipal code lien together with
interest and penalties;
      7.   The applicable period of tax delinquency, if any;
      8.   The principal amount of taxes, if any;
      9.   That upon deposit with the appropriate parties by the court of the
tax payoff amount, if any, any and all rights of redemption accorded to
interested parties are extinguished; and
      10.   The date and place of the filing of the petition. (Ord. 2025-5, 7-
28-2025)
TITLE 5
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Police Department And Chief
5-1-2: Duties Of Department
5-1-3: Service Outside City
5-1-4: Unclaimed Property
5-1-1: POLICE DEPARTMENT AND CHIEF:
There is a police department, the head of which is the chief of police, or
police chief, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and
removable by the city manager. The chief of police is an officer of the city,
and has supervision and control of the police department. All police officers
are officers of the city. (1985 Code § 13-301)
5-1-2: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
It is the duty of the police department:
   A.   To apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all
violators of the ordinances of the city;
   B.   To suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies which may come
to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace;
   C.   To serve all warrants, writs, executions, and other processes properly
directed and delivered to them;
   D.   To apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as
provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; (1985 Code § 13-
302)
   E.   To enforce all municipal ordinances; and
   F.   In all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of
police officers. (1985 Code § 13-302; amd. 2007 Code)
5-1-3: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   City Approval: Approval is hereby given for service of members of the
regular police department of the city as police officers of any other city or
town, in an emergency situation, in the state, not more than one hundred (100)
miles distant from this city, when such service is requested by the mayor or
chief of police of the city or town.
   B.   Requests For Service: Requests for service under this section shall be
made by writing or by telephone, or other means of communication, to the city
manager and, in his absence, the mayor, who, if he determines that the request
can be granted consistently with the continuance of the proper police
protection of the inhabitants of this city, and after consultation with the
chief of police, shall direct the chief of police to furnish the number of
officers requested and to arrange their transportation to the requesting
municipality. (1985 Code § 13-303)
5-1-4: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
   A.   Complete Record Required:
      1.   All personal property which comes into the possession of any police
officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the
possession of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a
criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto,
shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge
of the chief of police.
      2.   The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose,
make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof, the name of the person from whom it was
taken and the place where it was found; and the record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. (1985 Code § 13-501)
   B.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Property:
      1.   Any unclaimed personal property, other than animals, which remains
in the possession of the chief of police, unclaimed, or the ownership of which
is not to him satisfactorily established, for a period of six (6) months, shall
be sold, and the proceeds of the sale shall be paid over to the city clerk, who
shall issue his receipt therefor, and deposit the same to the credit of the
general fund of the city, except such personal property as in the opinion of
the city manager can be more advantageously used by some department or office
of the city government. (1985 Code § 13-502; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Ten (10) days before a sale of such unclaimed property, the chief of
police shall sign and have posted in a conspicuous place in the city clerk's
office, where it will be plainly visible to persons who visit that office,
notice of the time, place, and manner of such sale, and general description of
the property to be sold. However, if in the opinion of the city manager, all or
any portion of the personal property may be more advantageously used in any
city department or office, he shall so instruct the chief of police in writing,
and the chief shall thereupon deliver the personal property designated to that
department or office of city government and make a permanent record of its
disposition. (1985 Code § 13-502)
   C.   Property Found By Private Person:
      1.   Any personal property found by a person other than a public official
or employee, which is delivered to any police officer for identification, if
not claimed or identified within six (6) months, shall, within ten (10)
additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to him, and
a record of such disposal made thereof. (1985 Code § 13-503; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   If the finder does not request return of the property to him within
such additional ten (10) days, then the chief of police shall sell the property
as if it had been found by a public official or employee, or, on instruction by
the city manager, deliver it to some department or office of the city
government for its use. (1985 Code § 13-503)
   D.   Recovery By Owner: If any property is sold as herein provided, and the
owner thereof takes and recovers possession of same from the purchaser, the
amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser, upon verified claim
being submitted and approved by the city council. (1985 Code § 13-504)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT 1
SECTION:
5-2-1: Fire Department And Chief
5-2-2: Duties Of Fire Chief And Assistant Chief
5-2-3: Selection Of Department Officials And Company Officers
5-2-4: Office Of Secretary-Treasurer
5-2-5: New Members Of Department
5-2-6: Rules And Regulations
5-2-7: Equipment And Property
5-2-8: Open Burning For Department Training
5-2-9: Service Outside City
5-2-10: Payment Of Volunteer Firefighters
 
Notes
  1. See also section
1 2-1-8 of this code regarding the rural fire protection revenue and expense
  fund.
5-2-1: FIRE DEPARTMENT AND CHIEF:
   A.   Department Created; Chief And Officers: There shall be a fire
department, the size of which is to be limited to not less than twelve (12) nor
more than twenty five (25) members. The chief shall be the head of the fire
department. The chief of the fire department shall be an officer of the city,
and shall have supervision and control of the fire department. There shall be
such additional officers of the fire department as authorized by the city
either by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2012-03, 6-11-2012)
   B.   Department Duties Generally: It is the duty of the fire department,
among other duties: to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire;
to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to persons injured in or about
burning structures, or elsewhere, in case of an emergency; enforce all
ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of persons from fire
and explosions in theaters, stores, and other public buildings. (Ord. 12-02-98,
12-7-1998)
5-2-2: DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF:
   A.   Fire Chief: The chief shall be at the head of the department, subject
to the laws of the state, ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations
adopted in this chapter. The chief shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   The chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the department, the training of members, and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him.
      2.   The chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the
department, the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year.
      3.   The chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members.
      4.   The chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the
officers and members in the performance of their duties.
      5.   The chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the department.
      6.   The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism shall notify
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use
in the case. (1985 Code § 13-202)
      7.   The chief is authorized to enter any public building or premises in
the city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to
serve written notice on the owners or occupants to correct any hazards or
violations that may be found.
      8.   The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of the
department and shall make reports to the city manager as he may require. (1985
Code § 13-202; amd. 2007 Code)
      9.   The chief shall file the appropriate activity report forms with the
office of the state fire marshal in Oklahoma City on an annual basis. The
activity report forms shall be designed by the state fire marshal and shall
include, but not be limited to, the amount of property and vehicle fire loss,
types of fires, inspections and investigations. The report shall include
notification of all fire related civilian deaths and injuries in the respective
jurisdiction and of firefighter deaths in the line of duty and of firefighter
injuries in the line of duty requiring the services of a hospital or physician
or both. (2007 Code)
   B.   Assistant Chief: In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on
duty shall command the department and be held responsible therefor in all
respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief. Other officers
or employees as deemed necessary shall be appointed by the city manager after
consultation with the fire chief. (Ord. 12-02-98, 12-7-1998)
5-2-3: SELECTION OF DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS AND COMPANY OFFICERS:
   A.   Qualifications: The fire chief, assistant fire chief and all other
company officers of the volunteer department shall be selected upon their
ability to meet the following requirements:
      1.   Their knowledge of firefighting;
      2.   Their leadership ability; and
      3.   Their knowledge of firefighting equipment.
   B.   Recommendations From Department Members:
      1.   The volunteer members of the fire department shall recommend a fire
chief and an assistant fire chief from among its membership to the city
manager.
      2.   The city manager may approve or deny the recommendations. If a
recommendation is approved, the recommended member shall serve indefinitely in
his respective office. If a recommended candidate is not approved, the members
of the fire department shall recommend another candidate for approval. This
procedure shall continue until a suitable candidate is found.
      3.   The members of the fire department shall make all their
recommendations in writing to the city manager, detailing a candidate's
qualifications as required by state law and city ordinance.
      4.   The city manager shall list his reasons for disapproving any
candidate in writing and provide such reasons in selecting a suitable
candidate. (Ord. 12-02-98, 12-7-1998)
5-2-4: OFFICE OF SECRETARY-TREASURER:
   A.   Election From Membership: One member elected by the fire department
shall be secretary-treasurer.
   B.   Duties: The duties of the secretary-treasurer shall consist of the
following:
      1.   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      2.   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      3.   Collecting any money due the department by the members. (1985 Code §
13-211)
5-2-5: NEW MEMBERS OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Probation:
      1.   All new members shall be on probation for one year after their
appointment.
      2.   New probationary members shall be recommended by majority of members
of the full time and volunteer fire department appointed by the city manager or
his designee.
   B.   Approval Required: New volunteer members, upon completion of their
probation period, must be approved by the majority of the full time and
volunteer members of the fire department and appointed by the city manager or
his designee. (1985 Code § 13-212)
5-2-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The volunteer fire department shall be subject to the following rules and
regulations which shall be incorporated in the bylaws of the department:
   A.   A volunteer firefighter is required, when notified, to respond to
alarms of fire and other emergencies.
   B.   A volunteer firefighter is required to be present at all regular
meetings, call meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the
firefighters.
   C.   There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month.
   D.   Any volunteer firefighter having two (2) unexcused absences in
succession or three (3) unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months will
be dropped from the fire department rolls.
   E.   Volunteer firefighters leaving the city for an extended period of time
will be required to notify the chief. (1985 Code § 13-213)
   F.   Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes provided
for him will be expelled from the rolls.
   G.   Any volunteer member of the fire department shall be expelled from the
rolls for the following offenses: (1985 Code § 13-213; amd. 2007 Code)
      1.   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      2.   Any act of insubordination;
      3.   Neglect of duty;
      4.   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire
department; or
      5.   Conviction of a felony. (1985 Code § 13-213)
5-2-7: EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY:
   A.   Use Of Equipment Restricted:
      1.   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private
purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away
or conceal any article used in any way by the department.
      2.   No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the department.
   B.   Inventory Of Property: The chief shall prepare and keep a complete
inventory of all property belonging to the fire department, and shall at the
expiration of his term turn over such inventory and all such property to his
successor, together with all books, records, reports and data of the
department. (1985 Code § 13-204)
5-2-8: OPEN BURNING FOR DEPARTMENT TRAINING:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code or of the fire prevention
code, open burning of refuse or other combustible material may be conducted for
fires purposely set for the training of personnel of the fire department when
authorized in advance by the city manager. (Ord. 97-2, 7-1-1997)
5-2-9: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Contracts Authorized: The city is hereby authorized and empowered to
enter into contracts or agreements with individuals, firms, private
corporations or associations, or political subdivisions of the state for fire
protection outside the corporate limits of the city, and to contract to provide
fire protection jointly with other organizations and municipal subdivisions of
the state. (1985 Code § 13-220)
   B.   Contract Terms; Fees For Service:
      1.   Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner,
firm, private corporation, or association for outside aid, or mutual aid for
fire protection, shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private
corporation or association, or political subdivision to the city for such fire
apparatus and personnel at the rate as set by the council.
      2.   All monies received from the calls shall go into the general fund as
may be directed by the city council. (1985 Code § 13-221)
   C.   Authority To Answer Calls: The fire department of the city is hereby
authorized and directed to answer all outside calls in the county unless, in
the opinion of the fire chief, it is inexpedient to do so on account of another
fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous highways, or other
physical conditions. (1985 Code § 13-222)
   D.   Serving Considered In Regular Line Of Duty:
      1.   All firefighters of the fire department of the city attending and
serving at fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of
the city, as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular
line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of
the city.
      2.   The firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any
firefighters' pension and relief fund in the same manner as if the firefighting
or fire prevention work was being done within the corporate limits of the city.
(1985 Code § 13-223)
   E.   Department Considered Agent Of State: The fire department of the city
answering any fire alarm, or call, or performing any fire prevention services
outside the corporate limits of the city shall be considered as an agent of the
state, and acting solely and alone in a governmental capacity, and the city
shall not be liable in damages for any act of commission, omission, or
negligence while answering or returning from any fire, or reported fire, or
doing any fire prevention work under and by virtue of this section. (1985 Code
§ 13-224)
5-2-10: PAYMENT OF VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS:
   A.   Volunteer members of the Okemah fire department who meet the criteria
established herein shall be paid an amount of money as further determined
herein before December 15 of each calendar year, beginning in 2013, for their
participation in required meetings, training and fire runs within the limits of
the city, made for the time period beginning December 1 of the previous year
until November 30 of the current year. This payment shall not be considered a
regular salary such that would disqualify members of the fire department from
being "volunteer firefighters" under the Oklahoma volunteer firefighters act as
codified in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 29-201 et seq.
   B.   In order to qualify for the payment described above, individual members
of the fire department must meet the following criteria:
      1.   Attend all fire meetings held once per month on the first Tuesday of
each month at the Okemah Fire Station or such other location as designated by
the fire chief. Individual members may have no more than two (2) excused
absences during a twelve (12) month period to qualify for payment. The
determination of whether an absence is excused or unexcused shall be made by
the fire chief with the approval of the city manager.
      2.   Attend and complete at least thirty (30) hours of approved training
classes provided by the fire department or otherwise approved by the fire chief
and city manager.
      3.   Participate in at least sixty percent (60%) of the total fire runs
within the limits of the city per year.
   C.   If an individual firefighter meets the criteria as stated in subsection
B of this section, then and in that event, said firefighter shall be paid the
sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per year for the preceding
twelve (12) month period. The fire chief, assistant fire chief, first captain,
and second captain, shall be paid the sum of three thousand six hundred dollars
($3,600.00) per year for the preceding twelve (12) month period. Should any
firefighter not have been a member of the Okemah volunteer fire department for
the full preceding twelve (12) month period, but has otherwise met the required
criteria for payment for the amount of time of actual membership, then the sum
due to said member shall be prorated to reflect the actual number of days the
member has served as a firefighter. Further, should a member be promoted to
fire chief, assistant fire chief, first captain or second captain during the
term of the preceding twelve (12) month period, having otherwise met the
required criteria, then said promoted member shall receive prorated payment at
the rate reflecting the actual time as a firefighter and the actual time as an
officer. Changes in the amount paid per year may be made by resolution of the
city council.
   D.   If an individual firefighter or officer of the fire department
participates in at least fifty percent (50%) of the total fire runs within the
limits of the city per year, and otherwise meets the criteria stated in
subsections B1 and B2 of this section, then and in that event, the firefighter
shall be paid the sum of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00) per
year for the preceding twelve (12) month period, or, if an officer of the fire
department, three thousand two hundred forty dollars ($3,240.00) per year for
the preceding twelve (12) month period.
   E.   If an individual firefighter or officer of the fire department
participates in at least forty percent (40%) of the total fire runs within the
limits of the city per year, and otherwise meets the criteria stated in
subsections B1 and B2 of this section, then and in that event, the firefighter
shall be paid the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year for the
preceding twelve (12) month period, or, if an officer of the fire department,
two thousand eight hundred eighty dollars ($2,880.00) per year for the
preceding twelve (12) month period.
   F.   If an individual firefighter or officer of the fire department attends
and completes in excess of thirty (30) hours of approved training classes
provided by the fire department or otherwise approved by the fire chief and
city manager, each hour of training over and above the minimum thirty (30) hour
requirement shall be credited as one percent (1%) of the participation of the
total fire runs within the limits of the city as required in subsections C, D,
and E of this section.
   G.   This section supersedes any previous pay or allowance made by the city
to the individual firefighters, and no other pay or allowance, other than in
this section, shall be made for the payment of individual firefighters, with
the exception of additional pay provided to the officers of the fire department
for actual services performed by them above and beyond their normal duties as
may be provided by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2013-01, 3-11-2013)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
5-3-1: Emergency Management Organization
5-3-2: Office Of Emergency Management
5-3-3: Director Of Emergency Management
5-3-4: Compensation Of Members; Nonliability Of City
5-3-5: Emergency Powers And Duties
5-3-6: First Response Agencies To Report
5-3-1: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to create an emergency
management organization for the city to be prepared for, and to function in the
event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of the
city.
   B.   Duty: The duty of such emergency management organization shall be the
protection of the lives and health of the citizens of the city and of property
rights, both private and public, and to perform all functions necessary and
incident thereto. (1985 Code § 13-401; amd. 2007 Code)
5-3-2: OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT:
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the
city an office of emergency management which shall consist of:
   A.   A director of emergency management who shall be appointed by the city
manager and serve at his pleasure. The director shall report directly to the
city manager. The emergency management director shall meet the qualifications
promulgated by the Oklahoma department of emergency management (OEM) and of 63
Oklahoma Statutes section 683.11, or other relevant statute.
   B.   Such other volunteer emergency management advisory committees may be
created by the director for the evaluation of technical, professional, or other
phases of the work of the office of emergency management and which may provide
advisory assistance on any matters pertaining to the city's emergency
management. (1985 Code § 13-402; amd. 2007 Code)
5-3-3: DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Administrative Duties: The director of emergency management shall be
the executive head of the office of emergency management and shall be
responsible to the city manager for carrying out the emergency management plan
of the city.
   B.   Compensation: The director may receive compensation as approved by the
city council and shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance
of his duties.
   C.   Powers, Duties And Responsibilities:
      1.   The director shall have all necessary power and authority to form
committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate the chairman or chief
officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such an organization.
      2.   He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for
emergency management within the city and shall maintain liaison with and
cooperate with emergency management agencies of other governmental units, both
within and without the state, including the state and federal government.
      3.   He shall have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities
as may be authorized by this chapter or other law.
      4.   The director shall have general direction and control of the office
of emergency management.
      5.   He is further authorized to formulate written plans and gather
information and keep written records thereof to govern the functions of the
emergency management organization. (1985 Code § 13-403; amd. 2007 Code)
      6.   The director shall develop, maintain and revise, as necessary, an
emergency operations plan for the city. The plan shall address the emergency
management system functions of preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation.
The plan shall be based upon a hazard and risk assessment for the jurisdiction
and shall include provisions for evacuation of all or a portion of the
jurisdiction based upon such risk in the event any disaster, as defined in 63
Oklahoma Statutes section 683.3, necessitates the evacuation of its citizens.
The director shall ensure that there is widespread dissemination of the plan
and information to citizens as to how and when the plan is activated and how
citizens are to participate in evacuating their communities in event of a
disaster. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and be reviewed
annually.
      7.   The director shall: conduct a hazard analysis detailing risks and
vulnerabilities, annually updating the existing all hazard emergency operations
plan (EOP); conduct and arrange for necessary training of all relevant
personnel, conduct annual exercises to evaluate the plan; manage resources;
determine shortfalls in equipment, personnel and training, revise the EOP as
necessary; establish and maintain an office of emergency management,
communications, warnings; conduct or supervise damage assessment and other pre-
and post-disaster related duties. (2007 Code)
5-3-4: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
All members of the emergency management organization created pursuant to this
chapter shall serve without compensation, and the city shall not be liable for
any personal injury received by any member of such organization while acting in
the line of duty. (1985 Code § 13-404; amd. 2007 Code)
5-3-5: EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   In the event of any enemy caused emergency or emergency resulting from
natural causes, the director of emergency management after due authorization
from the city manager, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules
and regulations relating to emergency management and, if necessary, take
control of transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing,
medicine and public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian
population. He shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other
governmental agencies or emergency management organizations and, if required by
the city manager, shall have control over any and all funds allocated from any
source for the purpose of alleviating distress conditions in the city. The
director, with consent and approval of the city manager, shall also have the
power and authority to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to
combat such disaster, protecting the health and safety of persons and property,
and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster.
   B.   The director of emergency management and other members of the emergency
management organization shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws
of the state and the ordinances of the city during the period of emergency and
shall, at such times, have the further power to make arrests for violations of
such laws or ordinances. (1985 Code § 13-405; amd. 2007 Code)
5-3-6: FIRST RESPONSE AGENCIES TO REPORT:
The fire department, police department, and other first response agencies shall
notify the emergency management director of all significant events occurring in
the city's jurisdiction. The director shall promptly report significant events
to the Oklahoma department of emergency management. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Attempts To Commit Offense
5-4-2: Aiding In Offense
5-4-3: Lawful Use Of Force
5-4-4: Penalty
5-4-1: ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself. (1985 Code § 10-101)
5-4-2: AIDING IN OFFENSE:
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular
offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids
another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and
punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. (1985 Code § 10-102)
5-4-3: LAWFUL USE OF FORCE:
To use or to attempt to offer to use force upon or toward the person of another
is not unlawful in the city in the following cases:
   A.   When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of
any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or acting by his
direction.
   B.   When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has
committed any felony, and delivering him to a public officer competent to
receive him in custody.
   C.   When committed either by the party about to be injured, or by any other
person in his aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to prevent an offense
against his person, or any trespass or other unlawful interference with real or
personal property in his lawful possession; provided, that the force used is
not more than sufficient to prevent such offense, and that the same shall be
necessary for the self-defense of his person or property.
   D.   When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by any
guardian, master or teacher, in the exercise of a lawful authority to restrain
or correct his child, ward, apprentice or scholar, provided restraint or
correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child, ward,
apprentice or scholar, or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of such
parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher, and the force used
is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree.
   E.   When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agents or
servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting them at their request, in
expelling from any carriage, interurban car, vessel or other vehicle, any
passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for
the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force
used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with a
reasonable regard to his personal safety. (1985 Code § 10-103)
   F.   When committed by any person in preventing a person who is impaired by
reason of mental retardation or developmental disability, as defined in 10
Oklahoma Statutes section 1430.2, or mentally ill person, insane person or
other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or partially
deprived of reason, from committing an act dangerous to himself or to another,
or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his person or
for his restoration to health, during such period only as shall be necessary to
obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of such person. (1985 Code
§ 10-103; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including the following
articles A through D, is punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 10-701)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Petty Larceny
5-4A-2: Injuring Vehicles
5-4A-3: Destruction Of Buildings And Other Property
5-4A-4: Advertisements
5-4A-5: Throwing Or Shooting Objects And Substances
5-4A-6: Tampering With Or Damaging Public Utilities
5-4A-7: Injuring Plants, Streets And Public Property
5-4A-8: Trespassing
5-4A-9: Parking, Placing Objects On Property Of Another
5-4A-10: Interference With Fire Hydrants
5-4A-1: PETTY LARCENY:
   A.   Definition: "Petty larceny" is the taking of personal property of value
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) accomplished by fraud or stealth
and with intent to deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking
of such property from the "person" of another.
   B.   Prohibited: Petty larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits petty
larceny shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1985 Code § 10-201; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4A-2: INJURING VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, injure, enter,
occupy, or loiter in any automobile or other vehicle belonging to another,
without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. (1985 Code § 10-
202; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4A-3: DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, or deface any structure,
building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or personal, public
or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property wrongfully to the
detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or to interfere
wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person
entitled to its use. (1985 Code § 10-203; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4A-4: ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Placing Signs On Property Of Another: It is unlawful for any person to
place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write or print any sign, poster,
picture, announcement, advertisement, bill, placard, device or inscription upon
any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post,
automobile, other vehicle or other property of another, without the consent of
the owner or person in charge thereof. (1985 Code § 10-204)
   B.   Leaving Advertising Materials On Streets: It is unlawful for any person
to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, left or deposited, upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public area, any handbill, circular, or other
advertising matter. (1985 Code § 10-207)
5-4A-5: THROWING OR SHOOTING OBJECTS AND SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Stones Or Other Objects: It is unlawful for any person to throw or
shoot any stone or other object into or across any street or alley, or in any
place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure
property, or to throw or shoot any stone or other object at any person,
vehicle, structure, electric light or other property of another (whether public
or private), except in case where such is done in defense of oneself, of
another person or of property. (1985 Code § 10-205)
   B.   Injurious Substances: It is unlawful for any person to purposely or
premeditatedly put or throw upon the person or property of another, or upon any
animal, any acid, corrosive or other irritating or harmful substance, or human
or animal waste or urine, with intent to injure or harass the person, property
or animal. (1985 Code § 10-208)
5-4A-6: TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   Unlawful Connection: It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach
any kind of pipe, wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other
conductor carrying gas, water, electricity, telephone or cable television and
belonging to a public utility (whether publicly or privately owned), in such a
manner as to enable him to consume or use the gas, water, electricity,
telephone or cable signals without it passing through the meter or any other
way so as to evade payment therefor. (1985 Code § 10-206)
   B.   Injury Or Destruction: It is also unlawful for any person to damage,
tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of any
public utility, including any telegraph or telephone system. (1985 Code § 10-
206; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4A-7: INJURING PLANTS, STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Plants And Park Property: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully and
without authority cut, pull, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering
plants, shrubs or trees growing in or around any park or public street within
the city, or wilfully or without authority to tear down, remove, cut or
otherwise injure or destroy any gate or fence enclosing any such park or
ground, or wilfully injure or destroy any stand, bench, seat or other property
situated upon such park or ground. (1985 Code § 10-209)
   B.   Public Streets And Trees:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Wilfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city;
         b.   Attach any guywires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or
any other wire to any live tree standing or growing in any of the streets,
alleys or public places within the city;
         c.   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue
or alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under
the supervision or control of the city;
         d.   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street,
road, alley or other public place in the city; or to cut, break or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
         e.   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the city manager or his designee so to do.
      2.   Any such digging, removing, or driveway construction shall be done
under the supervision of the city. (1985 Code § 10-210; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4A-8: TRESPASSING:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
be defined as follows:
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property other than public property.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: That property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
   TRESPASS:
      1.   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other
person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied
consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession.
      2.   "Trespass" shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner
or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the
premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person
in lawful possession of the premises.
      3.   "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private
property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after
having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided,
that the provisions of this subsection A3 shall not apply to persons, including
employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a
person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this
subsection A3 apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such
premises.
      4.   "Trespass" shall also be defined as the act of returning to private
property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next
business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms
of this section.
   B.   Prohibited: It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of
another or into an area or structure on such property (whether such property,
area or structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly
forbidden by signs or otherwise or when the property, area or structure is
enclosed, except when such entrance is in the line of duty, or with the
expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise, by
authority of law or ordinance. (1985 Code § 10-211)
5-4A-9: PARKING, PLACING OBJECTS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof, or when necessary in the performance of a duty, or otherwise by
authority of law or ordinance. (1985 Code § 10-212)
5-4A-10: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Opening, Interfering With Hydrant: It is unlawful for any person except
one duly authorized by the city manager or his designee or a member of the fire
department to open, turn on or off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to,
or connect anything with, any fire hydrant or stopcock belonging to the city.
   B.   Obstructing Access: It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to
any fire hydrant by placing around such hydrant, or thereon, brick, lumber,
dirt, plants or shrubs or other thing, or in any other manner to obstruct
access to a fire hydrant. (1985 Code § 10-213; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND SAFETY
SECTION:
5-4B-1: Assault And Battery
5-4B-2: Disturbing The Peace
5-4B-3: Unlawful Fighting, Assemblies
5-4B-4: Insulting Signs, Literature Or Language
5-4B-5: Fireworks
5-4B-6: Storing Or Keeping Explosives
5-4B-7: Firearms, Weapons And BB Guns
5-4B-8: Noisy Conditions
5-4B-9: Vagrancy
5-4B-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
mean:
   ASSAULT: Any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to
do a corporal hurt to another.
   BATTERY: Any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of
another.
   B.   Prohibition: It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and
battery within the city. (1985 Code § 10-501)
5-4B-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
   A.   Definition: "Disturbing the peace" is the doing of any of the following
in such a manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or
others:
      1.   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct; or
      2.   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb
or alarm the public.
   B.   Prohibition: It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or
others by doing any of the acts set out in subsection A of this section. (1985
Code § 10-301)
5-4B-3: UNLAWFUL FIGHTING, ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Fighting: It is unlawful to engage in a fistic encounter. (1985 Code §
10-308)
   B.   Unlawful Assembly: It is unlawful to hold an unlawful assembly of three
(3) or more persons, including being assembled together and acting in concert,
to do any unlawful act against the peace or to the terror of others, or
preparing for or moving toward such acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or
riotously. (1985 Code § 10-308; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Interrupting Lawful Assembly: It is unlawful to interrupt any lawful
assembly of people by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof.
   D.   Disturbing Assemblage For Religious Worship: It is unlawful to disturb
any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious worship by making
noise; by rude, indecent or improper behavior; by profane, improper or loud
language; or in any other manner, either within the place of worship or within
hearing distance thereof. (1985 Code § 10-308)
5-4B-4: INSULTING SIGNS, LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE:
   A.   Signs: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the
city to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device which, in its common
acceptance, is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the city, and
which is calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach
of the peace or an assault.
   B.   Literature Or Language: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully use,
utter, publish, circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or
insulting language or literature where:
      1.   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault; or
      2.   The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated
to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. (1985 Code § 10-302)
5-4B-5: FIREWORKS 1 :
   A.   Defined Per Statute: The word "fireworks" as used in this section shall
be as defined in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 1622. (1985 Code § 10-303)
   B.   Restrictions:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, proprietor,
manager, employee, or civic group to manufacture, use, discharge, or display
fireworks within the city limits, except as provided in this subsection.
Fireworks may be sold within the city limits if sold in compliance with title
3, chapter 7 of this code, and with state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
      2.   Citizens may possess class C fireworks within the city limits;
provided, that said fireworks are not used, discharged or displayed within the
city limits. (Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
   C.   Displays: Fireworks displays may be authorized by the city in
accordance with the city's fire prevention code 2 . (1985 Code § 10-303)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 7 of this code.
2 1. See section
  9-1-2 of this code.
5-4B-6: STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, proprietor, manager, employee
or civic group to store or keep within the city any nitroglycerin, dynamite,
gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or substance, except that
gunpowder, including class C fireworks for personal use or retail sale, class B
fireworks for a public display approved by the city, or gunpowder used for
personal reloading of ammunition or contained in firearms ammunition, may be
kept if not in violation of any other section of this code or any state or
federal law or administrative rule or regulation. (Ord. 2003-02-06, 6-16-2003)
5-4B-7: FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND BB GUNS:
   A.   Carrying Or Discharging:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his
person any firearms, pistol, revolver, bowie knife, dirk, dagger, metal
knuckle, switchblade knife or other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument,
except when doing so in the line of duty or as may be permitted by state law.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city
except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of
oneself, of another person or of property, or when otherwise authorized by
state law or ordinance.
      3.   It is unlawful to shoot or discharge a BB gun, pellet gun or air
rifle in the city. (1985 Code § 10-305)
   B.   Reckless Conduct: It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless
conduct while having in his possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such
actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability
of death or great bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious
disregard for the safety of another person. (1985 Code § 10-306)
5-4B-8: NOISY CONDITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part of
the city by operating, having operated, or permitting to be operated, any
contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in such a
manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. However, this section shall not
prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other
religious music. (1985 Code § 10-307)
5-4B-9: VAGRANCY:
   A.   Definition; Specific Acts: For the purposes of this section, a
"vagrant" means any person who loiters or remains in or wanders about a public
or private place for any of the following purposes:
      1.   Gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia;
      2.   Engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution or soliciting
for an act of lewdness;
      3.   Engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any building, property
or automobile of another; (1985 Code § 10-309)
      4.   Injuring, destroying, or defacing any property of another; (1985
Code § 10-309; amd. 2007 Code)
      5.   Assaulting any person;
      6.   Begging or soliciting alms; provided, that this section shall not
apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious, charitable or
eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such organizations; and
      7.   Selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise exchanging, procuring or
making available illegal drugs or contraband.
   B.   Prohibition: It is unlawful to be a vagrant within the limits of the
city. (1985 Code § 10-309)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
SECTION:
5-4C-1: Alcohol And Drug Related Offenses
5-4C-2: Prostitution
5-4C-3: Gambling
5-4C-4: Disorderly Houses
5-4C-5: Nudity, Improper Dress, Indecent Exposure
5-4C-6: Obscenity
5-4C-7: Sleeping In Public
5-4C-8: Begging
5-4C-9: Harmful Deception
5-4C-10: False Or Bogus Checks
5-4C-11: Peeping Toms
5-4C-1: ALCOHOL AND DRUG RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Public Intoxication And Drinking:
      1.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, a state of
"intoxication" means the condition in which a person is under the influence of
any alcoholic beverage or low point beer, or of any narcotic, to such extent as
to deprive the person of his or her full physical or mental power. (1985 Code §
10-401; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Appear or be upon or in any street, alley, or other public place
in the City in a state of intoxication.
         b.   Drink alcoholic beverages upon or in any street, alley, or other
public place within the City.
         c.   Use, sell or furnish to another any illegal drug or narcotic in
any place in the City except as legally prescribed by a physician. (1985 Code §
10-401)
   B.   Intoxicating Liquor: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to another any
intoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind except as permitted by law;
      2.   Have in possession or under control any intoxicating liquor or
beverage except as permitted by law, or to transport or in any manner convey
from place to place in the City any intoxicating liquor or beverage, except as
permitted by law;
      3.   Loiter in a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given
away or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
      4.   Keep, maintain, aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place where
intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished in
violation of law. (1985 Code § 10-402)
   C.   Marijuana:
      1.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "marijuana" means all
parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced
from such stalks, oil or cake made from the derivative, mixture or preparation
of such mature stalks (except resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
      2.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to:
         a.   Appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or
other public place while under the influence of marijuana;
         b.   Use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley,
place of business, or other public place within the City;
         c.   Use marijuana in any place within the city except as legally
prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state; or
         d.   Loiter about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished
illegally. (1985 Code § 10-403)
5-4C-2: PROSTITUTION:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
   LETTING PREMISES FOR PROSTITUTION: The granting of the right of use or the
leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of
prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with that
knowledge.
   PROSTITUTION: The giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for
hire or money.
   SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTES: The soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing,
or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of promoting
prostitution.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Be a prostitute;
      2.   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      3.   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      4.   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      5.   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
      6.   Accept or receive the proceeds of any act; or
      7.   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution
within the limits of city. (1985 Code § 10-404)
5-4C-3: GAMBLING:
   A.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or
employee thereof, to do any of the following, unless permitted by state law:
         a.   To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on
or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards, or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value;
         b.   To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
         c.   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
         d.   To knowingly permit his or its premises, houses, lot or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this section.
      2.   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to
play any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein
the element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks
or any other representatives of value. (1985 Code § 10-414)
   B.   Loitering About Gambling Place: It is unlawful for any person to loiter
about in the immediate vicinity where a person or persons are gambling, whether
by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise. (1985
Code § 10-415)
5-4C-4: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
   A.   Definition: A "disorderly house" means any structure or vehicle by
which the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed
by reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following
acts:
      1.   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled
dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is
declared unlawful by state statute;
      2.   The violation of any of the ordinances of the city or statutes of
the state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages, including beer containing more than one- half of one percent (0.5%)
alcohol by volume;
      3.   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute
or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
      4.   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling. (1985 Code § 10-405)
   B.   Maintaining Or Leasing:
      1.   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping
and maintaining a disorderly house.
      2.   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or
corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle,
mobile home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or
otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any
disorderly house; and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building,
structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied
as a disorderly house, no person, partnership or corporation shall continue to
grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house. (1985 Code §
10-406)
   C.   Residents And Visitors: No person shall knowingly reside in, enter
into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this
section, the city shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct
evidence only and not by circumstantial evidence. This subsection shall not
apply to physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional or
official duties. (1985 Code § 10-407)
5-4C-5: NUDITY, IMPROPER DRESS, INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
   B.   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
   C.   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person. (1985 Code § 10-
408)
5-4C-6: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms, when used in this section, shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
   AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC: The matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
   DISSEMINATE: To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
   KNOWINGLY: Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
   MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material
or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial
representation, or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction, or any other articles,
equipment or machines.
   MINOR: Any person under the age of sixteen (16) years.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in
a discernible turgid state.
   OBSCENE: Means that, to the average person applying contemporary community
standards:
      1.   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion;
      2.   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by 21 Oklahoma Statutes; and
      3.   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   PERFORMANCE: Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity.
   PROMOTE: To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
   SERVICE TO PATRONS: The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages; including, but not limited to,
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining. (1985 Code § 10-409)
   B.   Obscene Conduct Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to a minor
obscene material;
      2.   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts to
a minor that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient
appeal;
      3.   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to a minor; or
      4.   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to view of
a minor:
         a.   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region;
         b.   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
         c.   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
         d.   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts. (1985 Code § 10-410)
5-4C-7: SLEEPING IN PUBLIC:
It is unlawful for any person to sleep on any street, in any other public
place, or on any property of another without the express or tacit consent of
the owner or person in charge of such place. (1985 Code § 10-412; amd. 2007
Code)
5-4C-8: BEGGING:
It is unlawful for any person to beg or otherwise ask for or request charitable
donations for any person, organization or agency except an organization or
agency, public or private, whose purpose or one of whose purposes is to aid
persons in need. (1985 Code § 10-413; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4C-9: HARMFUL DECEPTION:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(1985 Code § 10-416)
5-4C-10: FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS:
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or
attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money, property or
valuable thing of the value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less by means
of any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved
instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall include
checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on account
of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer
thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order,
payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of
intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with
such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the
drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or
order shall be presented for payment within thirty (30) days after same is
delivered and accepted. (1985 Code § 10-417; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4C-11: PEEPING TOMS:
Any person who hides, waits or otherwise loiters in the vicinity of any private
dwelling house, apartment building or other place of residence, or in the
vicinity of any locker room, dressing room, restroom or any other place where a
person has a right to a reasonable expectation of privacy, with the unlawful
and wilful intent to watch, gaze, or look upon the occupants therein in a
clandestine manner, is guilty of an offense. (1985 Code § 10-418; amd. 2007
Code)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
SECTION:
5-4D-1: Resisting An Officer
5-4D-2: Resisting, Threatening, Assaulting Public Officials
5-4D-3: Failing To Assist An Officer
5-4D-4: Assault Or Battery Upon Law Enforcement Officials
5-4D-5: Eluding Police Officer
5-4D-6: Escape Or Attempt To Escape Of Prisoners
5-4D-7: Aid In Escape; Rescuing Prisoners
5-4D-8: Impersonating An Officer Or Employee
5-4D-9: False Representation To An Officer; Perjury
5-4D-10: False Alarms
5-4D-11: Removal Of Barricades
5-4D-1: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
   A.   Definitions: When used in this article, the following terms shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
   OBSTRUCTION OF: This term, in addition to its common meaning, shall include:
      1.   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can
restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest;
      2.   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting
officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he
is under arrest; or
      3.   Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity
known to the arresting officer.
   RESISTING AN OFFICER: The intentional opposition or resistance to, or
obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized
by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful
process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the
person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his
official capacity.
   B.   Resisting, Assaulting, Interfering With Officer: It is unlawful to
resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere with the police officer or
any person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is
discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of
the city.
   C.   Warning Or Aiding Another To Flee: It is unlawful for any person to
warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or
evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any
door or barrier in the face of or in front of an approaching officer. (1985
Code § 10-601)
5-4D-2: RESISTING, THREATENING, ASSAULTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to:
   A.   Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police
officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his official duties;
   B.   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or
   C.   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or
indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (1985 Code §
10-610)
5-4D-3: FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER:
   A.   Authority To Call For Assistance: An officer of the city making or
about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or other
process, in accordance with the ordinances of the city or with state or federal
law, or suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly,
may call upon person or persons to assist him in making such arrest, executing
such process or suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   B.   Refusal Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon
thus to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. (1985 Code §
10-602)
5-4D-4: ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to
knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of
a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his
duties. (1985 Code § 10-603)
5-4D-5: ELUDING POLICE OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual
and audible signal, a red light and a siren from a police officer driving a
motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car, directing the
operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who wilfully increases his speed
or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such police officer, or who
does elude such police officer. (1985 Code § 10-611)
5-4D-6: ESCAPE OR ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE OF PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person confined in a place of confinement for the city,
or working upon the streets or other public places of the city in pursuance of
any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by authority of the city, to
escape or attempt to escape from any such place of confinement or custody.
(1985 Code § 10-605; amd. 2007 Code)
5-4D-7: AID IN ESCAPE; RESCUING PRISONERS:
It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue
or attempt to set at liberty any prisoner or prisoners from any officer or
employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from any place of
confinement for the city, or to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape
from such place of confinement or custody either before or after conviction,
including escape from a vehicle of confinement. (1985 Code § 10-604; amd. 2007
Code)
5-4D-8: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (1985
Code § 10-606)
5-4D-9: FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER; PERJURY:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or
official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. (1985 Code § 10-608)
5-4D-10: FALSE ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any
manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or police
department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire
department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run. (1985 Code § 10-607)
5-4D-11: REMOVAL OF BARRICADES:
It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. (1985 Code § 10-609)
CHAPTER 5
MINORS
ARTICLE A. CURFEW
SECTION:
5-5A-1: Purpose And Intent
5-5A-2: Definitions
5-5A-3: Offenses
5-5A-4: Defenses
5-5A-5: Enforcement
5-5A-6: Penalties
5-5A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect juveniles from nocturnal
dangers, enhance parental supervision and responsibility for juveniles, reduce
juvenile criminal activity, reduce criminal activity directed at juveniles and
protect the public at large. (Ord. 95-5, 5-1-1995)
5-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CURFEW HOURS: One minute after eleven o'clock (11:01) P.M. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following day.
One minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight until six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
on any Saturday and Sunday.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances, or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for profit to
which the public is invited, but not limited to any place of amusement or
entertainment.
GUARDIAN:
   A.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
juvenile; or
   B.   A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a
court.
JUVENILE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
KNOWINGLY PERMIT: The "parent", other "responsible adult" or "operator" or any
of them, as defined herein, is aware of the fact the juvenile is in violation
of the curfew hours or that said person, by exercise of reasonable care, would
have known that the juvenile is in violation of the curfew hours.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of
another person.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
common areas of schools, apartment houses, office buildings, hospitals,
transport facilities, and retail establishments.
REMAIN: To:
   A.   Linger or stay; or
   B.   Fail to promptly leave premises when requested by a police officer, or
the owner, operator or authorized person in control of the premises.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: Any person having, assuming or charged with permanent and/or
temporary care and/or custody of a juvenile, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Any legal guardian or adult exercising legal guardianship over a
juvenile.
   B.   An adult who stands in loco parentis to a juvenile.
   C.   Any person to whom legal custody of a juvenile has been given by order
of a court.
   D.   Any adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care or custody of a
juvenile at the request of, or on behalf of, a parent, guardian, loco parentis,
or person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
   E.   Any adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care or custody of a
juvenile at the request of, or on behalf of, another parent. (Ord. 95-5, 5-1-
1995)
5-5A-3: OFFENSES:
   A.   Juvenile: A juvenile commits an offense if he/she remains in any public
place or places or on the premises of any establishment within the corporate
limits of the city during curfew hours.
   B.   Parent Or Responsible Adult: A parent or responsible adult of a
juvenile, or each of them, commits an offense if he/she knowingly permits or
allows the juvenile to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the corporate city limits during curfew hours.
   C.   Business Owner Or Operator: The owner, operator or any employee of an
establishment or establishments commits an offense if he/she knowingly permits
or allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
   D.   Offense On City Property: Any offense defined or created herein within
the city limits shall also be an offense on any property owned by the city
located outside the proper city limits, including, but not limited to, Okemah
municipal airport, Okemah Lake, Okemah water treatment facility and the Okemah
wastewater treatment facility. (Ord. 95-5, 5-1-1995)
5-5A-4: DEFENSES:
   A.   Actions Of Juvenile: It is a defense to prosecution under section
5-5A-3 of this article that the juvenile was at the time in question:
      1.   Accompanied by the juvenile's parent or responsible adult;
      2.   Engaged in any lawful employment activity, or going to or returning
home from a lawful employment activity without any detour or stop;
      3.   Involved in an emergency;
      4.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      5.   Attending, going to or returning home without any detour or stop
from an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by
adults, or an event sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or any
recognized entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
      6.   On an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parents or
responsible adult, without any detour or stop;
      7.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, or other rights protected by the United States or Oklahoma
constitution; or
      8.   Married, or had been married, or otherwise emancipated.
   B.   Business Owner; Notification Of Police: It is a defense to prosecution
under section
5-5A-3 of this article that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment
promptly notifies the police department that a juvenile was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. (Ord.
95-5, 5-1-1995)
5-5A-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Police Action Prior To Issuance Of Citation: Before taking any
enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender's reason for being in the public place. The police officer shall not
issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and, based on circumstances,
no defense in section
5-5A-4 of this article is present. (Ord. 95-5, 5-1-1995)
   B.   Court Jurisdiction: Absent an interlocal agreement with the district
court for the municipal court to exercise jurisdiction over juveniles under
eighteen (18) years of age pursuant to 10 Oklahoma Statutes section 7303-1.2,
subsection E, the municipal court must refer all alleged juvenile violations to
the juvenile bureau of the district attorney's office. (Ord. 95-5, 5-1-1995;
amd. 2007 Code)
5-5A-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed For Violation:
      1.   A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a
separate offense for each day, or part of a day, during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction thereof, is
punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   The court may require community service work in lieu of a fine if
the product of multiplying the number of hours of community service work by the
prevailing wage does not result in a number which exceeds the maximum fine
authorized by law.
   B.   Municipal Court Jurisdiction: The municipal court's jurisdiction over a
juvenile who violates this article shall be expressly subject to Oklahoma
Statutes title 10. (Ord. 95-5, 5-1-1995; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE B. YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
SECTION:
5-5B-1: Definitions
5-5B-2: Unlawful To Sell Or Furnish Tobacco, Nicotine Or Vapor Product To
Persons Under Twenty-One Years Of Age
5-5B-3: Distribution Of Tobacco Product And Vapor Product Samples
5-5B-4: Public Access To Displayed Tobacco, Nicotine Or Vapor Products
5-5B-5: Enforcement
5-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
                         Any product that contains nicotine extracted or
                         isolated from plants, vegetables, fruit, herbs, weeds,
                         genetically modified organic matter, or that is
NICOTINE PRODUCT:        synthetic in origin and is intended for human
                         consumption; provided, however, this term shall not
                         include products approved by the United States Food
                         and Drug Administration for smoking cessation.
PERSON:                  Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership,
                         corporation, trust, or association, however formed.
                         A driver license, license for identification only, or
                         other generally accepted means of identification that
PROOF OF AGE:            describes the individual as twenty-one (21) years of
                         age or older and contains a photograph or other
                         likeness of the individual and appears on its face to
                         be valid.
                         A tobacco product, nicotine product or vapor product
SAMPLE:                  distributed to members of the public at no cost for
                         the purpose of promoting the product;
SAMPLING:                The distribution of samples to members of the public
                         in a public place.
TOBACCO PRODUCT:         Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for
                         human consumption.
                         The process by which a seller checks, by means of a
TRANSACTION SCAN:        transaction scan device, the validity of a driver
                         license or other government- issued photo
                         identification.
                         Any commercial device or combination of devices used
                         at a point of sale or entry that is capable of
TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE: deciphering in an electronically readable format the
                         information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code
                         of a driver license or other government-issued photo
                         identification.
                         Noncombustible products, that may or may not contain
                         nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element,
                         battery, electronic circuit, or other mechanism,
                         regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
                         produce a vapor in a solution or other form. "Vapor
                         products" shall include any vapor cartridge or other
                         container with or without nicotine or other form that
                         is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette,
VAPOR PRODUCT:           electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic
                         pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor
                         cartridge or other container of a solution, that may
                         or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be
                         used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic
                         cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic device.
                         "Vapor products" do not include any products regulated
                         by the United States Food and Drug Administration
                         under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
                         (Ord. 2022-4, 11-14-2022)
 
5-5B-2: UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR FURNISH TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCT TO
PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner
any tobacco product, nicotine product or vapor product to another person who is
under twenty-one (21) years of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco
product, nicotine product or vapor product on behalf of any such person. It
shall not be unlawful for an employee under twenty-one (21) years of age to
handle tobacco products, nicotine products or vapor products when required in
performance of the employee's duties.
   B.   A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products,
nicotine products or vapor products shall demand proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the
basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be less than twenty-one
(21) years of age.
If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products,
nicotine products or vapor products has demanded proof of age from a
prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under twenty-one (21) years of
age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a
violation of this subsection.
   C.   1.   Any violation of subsection A or B of this article is an offense
against the City of Okemah; upon conviction of any such offense, the violator
shall be punished as follows:
         a.   Not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense;
         b.   Not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second
offense within a two-year period following the first offense;
         c.   Not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for the third
offense within a two-year period following the first offense. In addition to
any other penalty, the store's license to sell tobacco products or nicotine
products or the store's sales tax permit for a store that is predominantly
engaged in the sale of vapor products in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental may be suspended for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days;
or
         d.   Not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for a fourth or
subsequent offense within a two-year period following the first offense. In
addition to any other penalty, the store's license to sell tobacco products or
nicotine products or the store's sales tax permit for a store that is
predominantly engaged in the sale of vapor products in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental may be suspended for a period not exceeding sixty
(60) days.
      2.   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied
upon proof of age shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this
section. A person cited for violating this section shall be deemed to have
reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not be found guilty
of the violation if such person proves that: a. the individual who purchased or
received the tobacco product, nicotine product or vapor product presented a
driver license or other government- issued photo identification purporting to
establish that such individual was twenty-one (21) years of age or older, or b.
the person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the driver license
or other government-issued photo identification presented by such individual by
performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device.
Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any person cited
for a violation of this section if the person failed to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture appearing
on the driver license or other government-issued photo identification was that
of the individual who presented it. The availability of the defense described
in this subsection does not affect the availability of any other defense under
any other provision of law. (Ord. 2022-4, 11-14-2022)
5-5B-3: DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT AND VAPOR PRODUCT SAMPLES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute, tobacco
products, nicotine products, vapor products or product samples to any person
under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   B.   No person shall distribute tobacco products, nicotine products, vapor
products or product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park that
is within three hundred (300) feet of any playground, school, or other facility
when the facility is being used primarily by persons under twenty-one (21)
years of age.
   C.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of subsections A or B of this section, the total of
any fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
      1.   Not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
      2.   Not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for the second offense;
and
      3.   Not more than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for a third or
subsequent offense. (Ord. 2022-4, 11-14-2022)
5-5B-4: PUBLIC ACCESS TO DISPLAYED TOBACCO, NICOTINE OR VAPOR PRODUCTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or retail store to display or offer for
sale tobacco products, nicotine products, or vapor products in any manner that
allows public access to the tobacco products, nicotine products or vapor
products without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco products,
nicotine products or vapor products or an employee or the owner of the store.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to retail stores which do not
admit into the store persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of this section, the total of any fines, fees, or
costs shall not exceed Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord.
2022-4, 11-14-2022)
5-5B-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any conviction for a violation of this Article and any compliance
checks by a municipal police officer pursuant to subsection C of this section
shall be reported in writing to the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement (ABLE)
Commission within thirty (30) days of such conviction or compliance check. Such
reports shall be compiled in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
Convictions shall be reported by the Court Clerk or his designee and compliance
checks shall be reported by the Chief of Police or his designee.
   B.   For the purpose of determining second or subsequent violations, both
the offenses penalized by the ABLE Commission as administrative fines and the
offenses penalized by the municipality and reported to the ABLE Commission,
shall be considered together in such determination.
   C.   Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may be enlisted by the
Police Department to assist in compliance checks and enforcement of this
Article pursuant to the rules of the ABLE Commission. (Ord. 2022-4, 11-14-2022)
CHAPTER 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Licensing And Permit Requirements
5-6-3: Restraint Of Animals
5-6-4: Animals At Large
5-6-5: Number Of Animals Allowed In Residential Area
5-6-6: Pasturing In Public Areas
5-6-7: Disturbing The Peace; Noisy Animals
5-6-8: Certain Animals Restricted Or Prohibited
5-6-9: Rabies Vaccination Required
5-6-10: Zoning Requirements
5-6-11: Buildings And Structures For Animals
5-6-12: Removal Of Animal Waste
5-6-13: Impoundment And Redemption; Disposition
5-6-14: Animal Care; Cruelty To Animals
5-6-15: Vicious Animals
5-6-16: Penalty
5-6-17: Spaying And Neutering
5-6-18: Spay Or Neuter Required
5-6-19: Exceptions From Spay Or Neuter
5-6-20: Intact Permit
5-6-21: Revocation Or Nonrenewal Of Intact Permit
5-6-22: Tag To Be Attached To Collar
5-6-23: Permit Records
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined below:
ANIMAL: Every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild.
ANIMAL AT LARGE: Any animal which is not under the restraint of a person
capable of controlling the animal, is not confined by a sufficient restraint on
the owner's property, is not restrained within a fenced yard, or is simply off
the premises of the owner.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated by a humane society, or Municipal agency
or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding animals under the
authority of this chapter or State law for care, confinement, return to owner,
adoption, or euthanasia.
AUCTION: Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or
traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This
chapter does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.
CIRCUS: A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog
auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibition, or boarding or breeding kennel. The premises of an animal hospital
run by a veterinarian licensed to practice medicine by the State of Oklahoma
shall not be considered a "commercial animal establishment".
GROOMING SHOP: A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped,
plucked, or otherwise groomed.
GUARD DOG: Any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an intruder is
present in/or near an area that is being secured.
HUMANE OFFICER OR ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person designated by the State of
Oklahoma, a municipal government, or a humane society as a law enforcement
officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this State.
KENNEL OR CATTERY: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling
dogs or cats, or a location with four (4) or more dogs or cats over six (6)
months of age.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring
one or more animals.
PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION: Any spectacle, display, act, or event, other than
circuses, in which performing animals are used.
PET OR COMPANION ANIMAL: Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an
animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the
habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately
or in connection with another business enterprise (except for a licensed
kennel), that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.
PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL: Any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans,
endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or substantially
interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of
life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall mean and include, but
is not limited to, an animal that:
   A.   Is repeatedly found at large;
   B.   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
   C.   Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby;
   D.   Chases vehicles;
   E.   Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in
close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
   F.   Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the
premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
   G.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the
animal is kept or harbored;
   H.   Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by
virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained;
   I.   Attacks other domestic animals; or
   J.   Has been found by the city manager, city police officer, city animal
control officer or their designee, after notice to its owner, to be a public
nuisance by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare, or safety.
RESTRAINT: Any animal secured by a leash or lead under the control of a
responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the real
property limits of its owner.
RODEO: An event where horses, cattle, donkeys, mules, goats or sheep are used
to provide entertainment for the general public under controlled conditions.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings or
domestic animals without adequate provocation, or which, because of
temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite,
or injure human beings or domesticated animals.
WILD ANIMAL: Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or
raised in captivity, except the following: human beings, domestic dogs
(excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding
hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, captive bred species
of reptiles, amphibians and common cage birds.
ZOOLOGICAL PARK: Any facility operated by a person, partnership, corporation,
or governmental agency, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or
exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-
25-2003; amd. 2007 Code)
5-6-2: LICENSING AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Licenses And Tags For Dogs And Cats: Any person owning, keeping,
harboring or having custody of any dog or cat over four (4) months of age
within the city must obtain a license as hereinafter provided:
      1.   Written application for licenses shall include the name and address
of the applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, and rabies
certificate (dogs and cats) issued by a licensed veterinarian or antirabies
clinic, and shall be made to the licensing authority. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-
2003)
      2.   Application for a license must be made within thirty (30) days after
obtaining a dog or cat over four (4) months of age. This requirement will not
apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the city for not longer than
sixty (60) days.
      3.   License fees shall not be required for certified seeing eye dogs,
hearing dogs, governmental police dogs, or other certified dogs that are
trained to assist the physically handicapped, but a rabies certificate must be
available.
      4.   Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the licensing
authority shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying number. Tags
should be designed so that they may be conveniently fastened to the animal's
collar or harness.
      5.   Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times
when off the premises of the owners.
      6.   The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying
numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public
at all times.
      7.   The licensing period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run
for one year. A license application may be made thirty (30) days prior to the
start of the fiscal year. Persons applying for a license during the licensing
year shall be required to pay a prorated fee as determined by the city manager,
animal control officer or their designees.
      8.   Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time
period specified in this subsection will be subjected to a fine as established
by resolution.
      9.   A license shall be issued after payment of the application fee as
established by resolution.
      10.   A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement
fee as established by resolution.
      11.   No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal
for which it was issued.
   B.   Permits For Commercial Establishments: No person, partnership, or
corporation shall operate a commercial animal establishment or animal shelter
without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this subsection, as
follows:
      1.   Any permit applicant shall provide for humane care of all animals
within its custody and conform with all provisions of this chapter and other
applicable laws.
      2.   After a permit applicant has shown willingness and ability to comply
with this chapter, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the fee as
established by resolution of the city council. Categories are as follows:
         a.   Kennel for ten (10) or fewer dogs or cats.
         b.   Kennel for more than ten (10) but less than fifty (50) dogs or
cats.
         c.   Kennel for fifty (50) or more dogs or cats.
         d.   Pet shop.
         e.   Riding stable.
         f.   Animal auction.
         g.   Zoological park.
         h.   Circus.
         i.   Grooming shop.
      3.   The permit period shall begin with the calendar year and shall run
for one year. Renewal applications may be made thirty (30) days prior to the
start of the calendar year. Persons applying for a permit during the permit
year shall be required to pay a prorated fee as determined by the city manager,
animal control officer or their designees. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003; amd.
2007 Code)
      4.   If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal
establishment, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his
name upon payment of a transfer fee as established by resolution of the city
council, and reinspection of the facility by the city manager or his designee.
      5.   Every facility regulated by this chapter shall be considered a
separate enterprise requiring an individual permit.
      6.   Persons operating kennels for the breeding of dogs or cats may elect
to license such animals individually.
      7.   No animal permit fee is required of any veterinary hospital, animal
shelter, or government operated zoological park.
      8.   Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered in
this subsection shall result in a fine as established by resolution of the city
council.
      9.   Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was
issued shall be subject to reclassification and readjustment of the permit fee.
   C.   License And Permit Issuance And Revocation: After an application is
filed, the city shall inspect the facility prior to issuing the permit. The
city may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the permit or
license refuses or fails to comply with any section contained in this chapter,
the regulations promulgated by the city, any law governing the protection and
keeping of animals; or if any animal is determined by the city manager or his
designee to be a "vicious animal" as defined in section
5-6-1 of this chapter. Compliance with the following is required:
      1.   Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within ten (10)
days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored, in
accordance with state law. No part of the permit or license fee shall be
refunded.
      2.   It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license
that the city shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where
animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is
refused, revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner.
      3.   If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the
application, the city shall refuse to issue a permit or license.
      4.   No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be
issued a permit or license to operate a commercial animal establishment.
      5.   Any person having been denied a license or permit may not reapply
for a period of thirty (30) days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a
fee as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-
2003)
5-6-3: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Restraint Required: All animals kept within the city limits shall be
kept under restraint with proper care and control of said animals to prevent
them from becoming a public nuisance.
   B.   Requirements: Restraint for various animals shall comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   All dogs must be confined in a fenced area or be restrained by a
leash held by a person of sufficient weight and strength to control the animal.
      2.   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-
25-2003)
5-6-4: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   Prohibited: No owner shall allow any animal, including fowl, owned,
harbored or kept by him or any other person to be at large within the city. It
is unlawful for any animal as provided in this section to be at large at any
time within the city.
   B.   Turning Animal At Large Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to open
any enclosure in which any animal is confined or remove any restraint confining
the animal as required by ordinance so as to turn the animal at large, or in
any manner to turn the animal at large. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-5: NUMBER OF ANIMALS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL AREA:
The maximum number of animals allowable in any one location zoned R-1 to R-5,
residential area, is four (4) animals over three (3) months of age. This is
four (4) animals total, whether dogs, cats or other approved species. (Ord.
2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-6: PASTURING IN PUBLIC AREAS:
It is unlawful for any person to stake, confine or pasture any animal on any
public school ground or other public property, federal, state, city or other,
on any railroad right of way, or on any property without the consent of the
person owning or controlling such property. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-7: DISTURBING THE PEACE; NOISY ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog or
other animal which by barking, howling or otherwise, disturbs the peace and
quiet of any person. The keeping of such an animal is hereby declared a public
nuisance. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-8: CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED:
   A.   Wild Or Vicious Animals; Size Restriction: It is unlawful for any
person being the owner of, or having the care, custody, or control thereof, to
keep or suffer to be kept any "wild animal" as defined in section
5-6-1 of this chapter, within the city. Further, no vicious animal, horse,
mule, donkey, pony, cattle, swine, sheep, goat, bear or cat which when grown
will typically exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight may be kept within the city
limits, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Animals Confined In Primary Residence: Animals listed in section
5-6-1 of this chapter as not being "wild animals", specifically, rodents,
captive bred species of reptiles, amphibians and common cage birds, may be kept
within the city only if they are confined within the owner's primary residence
as pets. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-9: RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED:
Any person being the owner of, or having the care, custody, or control of any
dog or cat six (6) months of age or older within the city limits shall have the
dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian every calendar
year, before May 1 thereof. Owners or keepers shall affix, or have affixed, to
the collar or harness of each vaccinated dog or cat a metal disc with
sufficient information thereon that the vaccination certificate covering the
animal may be readily traced. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-10: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Agricultural Zone: The keeping and grazing of animals on property zoned
A-1 (general agricultural) is permitted as long as all other requirements of
this chapter are met.
   B.   Zoning Ordinance Prevails: In case of conflict between this chapter and
the present or any future zoning ordinance, the provisions of the zoning
ordinance shall prevail and supersede the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-11: BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES FOR ANIMALS:
   A.   Construction And Location:
      1.   Every stable or building wherein any swine, horse, mule, donkey,
pony, cattle, goat, sheep, rabbits, furbearing animal or fowl shall be kept
within the city, shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that
it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times. This shall apply to all
existing structures throughout the city on the effective date hereof and
whereby the keeping of animals in nonagricultural areas was "grandfathered in"
as well as any new structures in the A-1 agricultural zone.
      2.   No stable, shed, hutch, dog kennel, chicken coop, dovecote, rabbit
warren, other structure, yard or other location wherein animals are kept shall
be maintained closer than three hundred feet (300') to any tenement or
apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building
used for educational, religious, clinic or hospital purposes.
   B.   Maintenance: Every stable, shed, hutch, dog kennel, chicken coop,
dovecote, rabbit warren, other structure, yard or other location wherein
animals are kept or permitted to be kept shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable
odors.
   C.   Inspection By City Officials:
      1.   The city manager, animal control officer or police officer may
inspect any structure or place where an animal is kept, upon complaint of any
person or on his own initiative.
      2.   He may issue any such reasonable order as he may deem necessary to
the owner of the animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided in this
chapter or in a manner so as not to constitute a public nuisance. Provided,
that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement or
access to any other remedy available against public nuisances as detailed in
title 4, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-12: REMOVAL OF ANIMAL WASTE:
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta
deposited by his animal(s) on public walks, recreational areas, or private
property. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-13: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION; DISPOSITION:
   A.   Animal Shelter Established:
      1.   A city animal shelter is hereby established. It shall be under the
immediate control of the animal control officer or of such other person as may
be officially designated. The person in charge of the animal shelter shall
provide proper sustenance for all animals impounded and shall treat them in a
humane manner.
      2.   The city may contract with another agency for the use of an animal
shelter maintained by the agency.
   B.   Impoundment Of Animals At Large; Right Of Entry:
      1.   The animal control officer, a police officer, or such other officer
or employee of the city as the city manager may authorize shall take into
custody and impound any animal found at large or in violation of any provision
of this code.
      2.   In taking an animal into custody under authority of this chapter,
the animal control officer or other officer or employee may enter into private
property to gain custody of the animal.
   C.   Impoundment, Description, Notice:
      1.   The animal control officer, upon receiving any animal, shall make a
complete registry, entering the type, breed, color, and sex of such animal;
whether or not the animal is licensed; and the date of impoundment. If an
animal is licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the
number of the license tag.
      2.   It is the duty of the animal control officer to keep all animals
impounded for a minimum of seventy two (72) hours unless reclaimed by the owner
as described in subsection F of this section. All inquiries concerning lost or
impounded animals shall be directed to the animal control officer. If an
impounded animal is licensed or if the owner of an impounded animal is known to
the animal control officer, the animal control officer shall send or telephone
notice to the owner that unless the animal is reclaimed as provided in this
chapter, it will be disposed of.
      3.   The animal control officer or his designee shall keep complete and
accurate records for the care, feeding, veterinary treatment, and disposition
of all animals impounded at the shelter.
      4.   Owners of impounded animals may also be proceeded against for
violation of any other section of this chapter.
   D.   Breaking Into Animal Shelter: No unauthorized person shall:
      1.   Break or attempt to break open the animal shelter, or take or let
out any animal therefrom;
      2.   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city any
animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
      3.   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee of the
city in the discharge of his duties relating to the taking into custody and
impounding of animals as provided in this chapter.
   E.   Fees For Impounding:
      1.   The city council, by resolution, shall determine the fees to be
charged for impounding and keeping animals.
      2.   Any person redeeming an impounded animal shall pay the required fees
to the city clerk or his designee and present his receipt therefor to the
animal control officer or person in charge of the pound before the latter
releases the animal.
   F.   Reclamation Of Impounded Animals: Reclamation of impounded animals may
be made as provided below:
      1.   The party desiring to reclaim an animal shall present to the animal
control officer or his designee, satisfactory proof of ownership of the animal
reclaimed and a valid city license for said animal.
      2.   The owner must provide proof that the animal is currently vaccinated
for rabies.
         a.   If the owner cannot provide proof that the animal is currently
vaccinated, he may post a bond with the city clerk or his designee in an amount
established by resolution of the city council and have the animal vaccinated
within three (3) days.
         b.   After the animal is vaccinated as described above, the owner may
provide proof of vaccination to the city clerk or his designee and receive a
refund of the bond amount.
      3.   The owner shall pay the applicable pound fee and show evidence to
the animal control officer or his designee that the fee has been paid. The
animal control officer or his designee shall thereupon release the reclaimed
animal to the party.
      4.   The city shall automatically revoke all licenses issued to animal
owners against whom three (3) or more violations of this chapter have been
assessed in a twelve (12) month period, whether or not the violation involves
the same animal.
   G.   Disposition Of Impounded Animals; Adoption: At the end of the seventy
two (72) hour period prescribed in this section, animals that have not been
claimed and redeemed by their owners shall be disposed of in one of the
following manners:
      1.   The animal shall be placed with a humane society or other animal
shelter facility.
      2.   The animal may be adopted by private individuals upon the following
conditions:
         a.   If residents of the city, procurement of the required license for
the animal.
         b.   Written agreement that if the animal is not already sterilized,
that it will be sterilized within thirty (30) days for adult animals or by a
specified date for pups and kittens, and that the animal will be vaccinated
against rabies within three (3) days for adult animals or within a specified
date for pups and kittens.
      3.   The animal shall be humanely euthanized by sodium pentobarbital, FP-
3, or cooled and bottled carbon monoxide only and the carcass disposed of in an
approved manner. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-14: ANIMAL CARE; CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Animal Care: It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of an animal within
the city to fail to provide his animals with sufficient, wholesome and
nutritious food; water in sufficient quantities; proper air and ventilation;
shelter, space and protection from the weather; veterinary care when needed to
prevent suffering and other humane care and treatment when required.
   B.   Cruelty To Animals:
      1.   It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of an animal within the city
to wilfully, maliciously or knowingly treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane
manner; to knowingly allow another person to treat an animal in a cruel or
inhumane manner; or to neglect an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
Specifically, no person shall:
         a.   Beat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal.
         b.   Cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight,
or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
         c.   Keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between animals.
         d.   Crop a dog's ears or dock a dog's tail, except when done by a
licensed veterinarian.
         e.   Expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or
not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal; provided, that
it shall be lawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat
poison.
      2.   Additionally, any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle,
strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may
be possible and immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner.
In the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall
at once report the accident to the Police Department. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-
2003)
5-6-15: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Vicious Animal Defined: As defined in section
5-6-1 of this chapter, a "vicious animal" is any animal that attacks, bites, or
injures human beings or domestic animals without provocation, or which, because
of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack,
bite, or injure human beings or domesticated animals.
   B.   Keeping Within City Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person being the
owner of or having the care, custody, or control thereof to keep or suffer to
be kept any vicious animal within the City. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-16: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any ordinance or provision of this
chapter, or who violates, or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable
order made by a City official pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2003-02-08, 8-25-2003)
5-6-17: SPAYING AND NEUTERING:
The Okemah City Council finds that each year hundreds of dogs and cats within
the City are euthanized because they are unwanted, and data show that the
number of dogs and cats that must be euthanized is on the increase.
Furthermore, the overpopulation of stray dogs and cats disturbs the quiet
enjoyment of property within the City, affecting the quality of life in
residential neighborhoods. The City Council finds that the overpopulation and
attendant high costs of disposal and enforcement can be significantly reduced
through a spay and neutering program. It is therefore the policy of the City of
Okemah to encourage and promote through appropriate legislation the spaying and
neutering of dogs and cats as a means of responsible pet ownership. (Ord. 2019-
2, 5-13-2019)
5-6-18: SPAY OR NEUTER REQUIRED:
   A.   On or after October 1, 2019, it is unlawful for any person to own,
possess, keep or harbor within the City any dog or cat over the age of six (6)
months that has not been spayed or neutered, except as provided in section
5-6-19 of this chapter.
   B.   The owner of any dog or cat shall furnish upon request of an animal
control officer written evidence showing the sterilization status of the
animal. A valid rabies vaccination certificate listing the subject animal as
being spayed or neutered shall constitute sufficient proof of sterilization.
   C.   The failure or refusal of any person to comply with the requirements of
this section, unless excepted, shall be an offense separate and direct from all
other offenses prescribed in this chapter and shall not for purposes of
enforcement, be considered as lesser included to any other offense herein.
(Ord. 2019-2, 5-13-2019)
5-6-19: EXCEPTIONS FROM SPAY OR NEUTER:
   A.   The owner of a dog or cat shall not be required to spay or neuter the
animal upon demonstrating to the satisfaction of the animal control officer
compliance with any of the following exceptions:
      1.   The animal is medically unsuited to undergo the sterilization
procedure, and a veterinarian signs a written statement specifying the medical
grounds for the exemption.
      2.   The animal suffers from a temporary medical condition so that
sterilization is unsafe or imprudent, and a veterinarian signs a written
statement as to the prognosis of when sterilization may be performed. The date
given on that prognosis shall become the expiration date of the temporary
medical exemption. Upon expiration, sterilization shall be required unless a
veterinarian provides another temporary medical exemption and prognosis in the
same manner.
      3.   The animal is owned, possessed, kept or harbored within the City for
no more than sixty (60) days in any consecutive twelve (12) month period.
      4.   The owner obtains or has made application for an annual intact
permit, for any reason deemed valuable to the owner, and is otherwise in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-2, 5-13-2019)
5-6-20: INTACT PERMIT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who owns, possesses, keeps or harbors
within the City any unspayed or nonneutered dog or cat over the age of six (6)
months, and for which the exceptions enumerated in subsections 5-6-19A1 through
A3 of this chapter do not apply, to fail to obtain an intact permit in his or
her name.
   B.   The City Clerk or duly authorized agents of the City shall issue intact
permits upon payment of a forty dollar ($40.00) fee and approval of an
application made for such purpose. The application shall state the name,
address and telephone number of the owner and the name, breed, color, age and
sex of the dog or cat for which the intact permit is obtained, and such other
information as the City Clerk may require. Neither the City Clerk nor any
authorized agent shall issue an intact permit until the owner presents a
certificate showing the dog or cat has a current rabies vaccination at the time
application is made. The application fee may be amended by resolution of the
City Council.
   C.   Upon approval of the application, the City Clerk or any authorized
agent shall issue the intact permit in an appropriate form and a uniquely
numbered metallic or plastic tag. An intact permit shall expire one year from
the date of issuance and shall be subject to revocation and nonrenewal as
provided in section
5-6-21 of this chapter.
   D.   A current intact permit may be transferred to the new owner of the dog
or cat for which the permit was issued upon application of the new owner.
   E.   In the event a metallic or plastic tag is lost or destroyed, the owner
may obtain a duplicate tag. It is unlawful to use or attempt to use a tag for
which a duplicate tag has been issued.
   F.   It is unlawful to use or transfer an intact permit or tag, or attempt
to use or transfer the same, for or to a dog or cat other than the animal for
which the permit was issued. (Ord. 2019-2, 5-13-2019)
5-6-21: REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL OF INTACT PERMIT:
   A.   The City Manager or his designee may revoke the intact permit for a dog
or cat when, during the current permit year, the owner of the animal for which
the permit is issued is convicted, pleas guilty or nolo contendere to more than
one offense of allowing or permitting such dog or cat to run at large as
provided in section
5-6-4 of this chapter. Prior to revoking the permit, the City Manager shall
provide the owner with reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard.
   B.   Neither the City Clerk nor any authorized agent shall issue or renew a
permit for any dog or cat for which an intact permit has been revoked. The
commencement of revocation proceedings shall temporarily stay the issuance or
renewal of an intact permit pending the outcome of such proceedings. (Ord.
2019-2, 5-13-2019)
5-6-22: TAG TO BE ATTACHED TO COLLAR:
   A.   Upon receipt of the intact permit and tag, the owner shall securely
affix the tag to the collar or harness of the dog or cat for which the permit
is issued. The dog or cat shall wear the tag at all times, except when a
veterinarian provides a medical exemption therefor.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove a tag from
the collar or harness of any dog or cat without the owner's consent. (Ord.
2019-2, 5-13-2019)
5-6-23: PERMIT RECORDS:
   A.   The City Clerk or his designee shall keep a register of all intact
permits issued in which shall be entered the name, address and telephone number
of the owner, a description and other identifying information of the dog or cat
so permitted, and the date of issuance and expiration. (Ord. 2019-2, 5-13-2019)
CHAPTER 7
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-7-1: Policy
5-7-2: Definitions
5-7-3: Administration
5-7-4: Acts Prohibited; Application Of Chapter
5-7-5: Sale Or Rental Of Housing
5-7-6: Financing Of Housing
5-7-7: Brokerage Services
5-7-8: Exemption
5-7-9: Education And Conciliation
5-7-10: Enforcement; Complaint Procedure
5-7-11: Investigations; Subpoenas; Giving Evidence
5-7-12: Enforcement By Private Persons
5-7-13: Interference, Coercion Or Intimidation
5-7-14: Prevention Of Intimidation In Fair Housing Cases
5-7-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for
fair housing throughout the city. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Terms Defined: For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE: An act that is unlawful under the federal
fair housing act, title 42 USC section 3601 et seq.
   DWELLING: Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or
designed or intended for occupation as a residence by one or more families and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY: Includes a single individual.
   PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
   B.   Other Terms: Other terms in this chapter shall be defined by title 42
USC section 3602 of the federal fair housing act. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002;
amd. 2007 Code)
5-7-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   City Manager Authority: The authority and responsibility for
administering this chapter shall be in the city manager.
   B.   Delegation Of Authority: The city manager may delegate any of these
functions, duties and powers to the employees of the city or to boards of such
employees, including functions, duties and powers, with respect to
investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying,
reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this
chapter. The city manager shall, by rule, prescribe such rights of appeal from
the decisions of his hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other
officers in the city, to boards or officers or to himself, as shall be
appropriate and in accordance with law.
   C.   Administration Of Programs, Activities: All executive departments and
agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner to affirmatively further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the city manager to further such purposes.
(Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-4: ACTS PROHIBITED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section and section
5-7-8 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in this section shall apply to:
   A.   Dwellings: All dwellings except as exempted by subsection B of this
section.
   B.   Exceptions: Nothing in section
5-7-5 of this chapter shall apply to:
      1.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that
such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-
family houses at any one time; provided further, that, in the case of the sale
of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in
such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty four (24) month
period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not
own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such
single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this title only
if such house is sold or rented:
         a.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or
of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and
         b.   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection 5-7-5C of this
chapter; however, nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as is necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
      2.   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently
of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his residence.
   C.   Business Of Selling Or Renting Dwellings: For the purpose of subsection
B of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or
renting dwellings if:
      1.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      2.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      3.   He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy
by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-5: SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING:
As made applicable by section
5-7-4 of this chapter, and except as exempted by subsection 5-7-4B and section
5-7-8 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
   A.   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or
deny a dwelling to any person because of race, gender, color, religion,
national origin, age, handicap or familial status.
   B.   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, gender, color, religion,
national origin, age, handicap or familial status.
   C.   To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any
notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, gender, color, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial
status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
   D.   To represent to any person because of race, gender, color, religion,
national origin, age, handicap or familial status or an intention to make any
such preference, limitation or discrimination.
   E.   To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling,
for profit, by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, gender, color,
religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status. (Ord. 2002-01-09,
9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
5-7-6: FINANCING OF HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance because of race, gender, color, religion, national origin, age,
handicap or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him
in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or
prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings
in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or
given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope
or effectiveness of the exception contained in subsection 5-7-4B of this
chapter. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
5-7-7: BROKERAGE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, rental or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him in
the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account
of race, gender, color, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial
status. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
5-7-8: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion
or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion
is restricted on account of race, gender, color, religion, national origin,
age, handicap or familial status. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a
private club not, in fact, open to the public which, as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes, has lodgings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such
lodging to its members or from giving preferences to its members. (Ord. 2002-
01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
5-7-9: EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION:
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the city manager shall
commence such educational activities as will further the purposes of this
chapter. He shall provide information to persons in the housing industry and
other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this chapter
and his suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor, with their
advice, to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. (Ord.
2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-10: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Filing Of Complaint; Investigation; Resolution:
      1.   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person
aggrieved") may file a complaint with the city manager. Complaints shall be in
writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the city
manager requires.
      2.   Upon receipt of such a complaint, the city manager shall furnish a
copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or are about
to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice.
      3.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving a complaint or within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection D of
this section, the city manager shall investigate the complaint and give notice
in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve it.
      4.   If the city manager decides to try to eliminate or correct the
alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference,
conciliation and persuasion, nothing said or done in the course of such
informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the persons
concerned. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
      5.   Any employee of the city manager who shall make public any
information in violation of this provision shall, upon conviction, be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Time Limit For Filing Complaint; Answer To Complaint:
      1.   A complaint under subsection A of this section shall be filed within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which
the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may
be reasonable and fairly amended at any time.
      2.   A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and,
with the leave of the city manager which shall be granted whenever it would be
reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time.
      3.   Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   C.   Complaint Filed With Department Of Housing And Urban Development: If,
within thirty (30) days after a complaint is filed with the city manager, the
city manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this chapter,
the person aggrieved may, within thirty (30) days thereafter, file a complaint
with the secretary of the department of housing and urban development. The city
manager will assist in this filing.
   D.   Civil Action:
      1.   If the city manager has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance
within thirty (30) days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within
thirty (30) days thereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court
against the respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or
protected by this chapter insofar as such rights related to the subject of the
complaint. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
      2.   If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has
occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from
engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Burden Of Proof: In any proceedings brought pursuant to this section,
the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.
   F.   Action At Trial: Whenever an action by an individual shall come to
trial, the city manager shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-11: INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING EVIDENCE:
   A.   Investigation; Access To Records:
      1.   In conducting an investigation, the city manager shall have access
at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and other
evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such
materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as
are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided,
however, that the city manager first complies with the provision of the fourth
amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures.
      2.   The city manager may issue subpoenas to compel his access to or the
production of such materials or the appearance of such persons and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent to the same extent and subject to the same
limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or
served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court for the
district in which the investigation is taking place.
      3.   The city manager may administer oaths.
   B.   Respondent; Subpoenas: Upon written application to the city manager, a
respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of
subpoenas by and in the name of the city manager to the same extent and subject
to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the city manager himself.
Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the
name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at
his request.
   C.   Witnesses:
      1.   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the city manager shall be entitled
to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in United
States district courts.
      2.   Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the
request of a respondent shall be paid by him.
   D.   Petition To Revoke Or Modify Subpoena:
      1.   Within five (5) days after service of a subpoena upon any person,
such person may petition the city manager to revoke or modify the subpoena.
      2.   The city manager shall grant the petition if he finds that: a) the
subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place; b)
that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter
under investigation; c) that it does not describe with sufficient particularity
the evidence to be produced; d) that compliance would be unduly onerous; or e)
for other good reason.
   E.   Refusal To Obey Subpoena: In case of continuance or refusal to obey a
subpoena, the city manager or other person at whose request it was issued may
petition for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district
in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served or
transacts business. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
   F.   Failure To Testify Or Produce Documents:
      1.   Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or
to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other
evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful
order of the city manager, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Any person who, with intent to mislead the city manager, shall make
or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report,
account, record or other document submitted to the city manager pursuant to his
subpoena or other order or shall wilfully neglect or fail to make or cause to
be made full, true and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records or
other documents or shall wilfully mutilate, alter or by any other means falsify
any documentary evidence, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   G.   City Attorney, Litigation: The city attorney shall conduct all
litigation in which the city manager participates as a party or as amicus
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
5-7-12: ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
   A.   Civil Action: The rights granted herein by sections
5-7-4 thorugh
5-7-7 of this chapter may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts
of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred;
provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought
pursuant to this section or subsection 5-7-10D of this chapter from time to
time before bringing it to trial if the court believes that the conciliation
efforts of the city manager are likely to result in satisfactory settlement of
the discriminatory housing practice complained of in the complaint made to the
city manager and which practice forms the basis for the action in court; and
provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance or rental consummated prior to
the issuance of any court order issued under the authority of this chapter
involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant, without actual notice
of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the
provisions of the chapter, shall not be affected.
   B.   Grant Of Relief By Court: The court may grant as relief, as it deems
appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order
or other order and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) punitive damages, together with court costs
and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-13: INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION:
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections
5-7-4 through
5-7-6, and section
5-7-11 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil
action. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002)
5-7-14: PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES:
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force, or threat of
force, wilfully injures, intimidates or interferes with or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   A.   Any person, because of his race, gender, color, religion, national
origin, age, handicap or familial status or has been selling, purchasing,
renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling or applying for or
participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting a dwelling; or
   B.   Any person, because he is or has been or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or class of persons, from:
      1.   Participating without discrimination on account of race, gender,
color, religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status in any of
the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A
of this section; or
      2.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   C.   Any citizen, because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate, without discrimination on account of race, gender, color,
religion, national origin, age, handicap or familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section, or from participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and if bodily injury or death results;
shall be subject to the penalties as provided in the federal and state
statutes. (Ord. 2002-01-09, 9-5-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE, APPLICATION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Short Title
6-1-2: Application Of Title
6-1-3: Adoption Of State Traffic Code
6-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the TRAFFIC
CODE, CITY OF OKEMAH, and may so appear upon all official documents, records or
instruments. (1985 Code § 15-101)
6-1-2: APPLICATION OF TITLE:
Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this title, the traffic
code shall be controlling and apply to the use of city streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, parks, parkways, public parking lots, school driveways, streets,
parking lots, or any other public right of way or municipally owned land,
including streets and other ways that form the boundary line of the city, by
pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self- propelled or otherwise
and whether moving or at rest. (1985 Code § 15-102)
6-1-3: ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE:
The provisions of the state motor vehicle code, 47 Oklahoma Statutes sections
1-101 et seq., and the "Rules Of The Road", 47 Oklahoma Statutes sections 11-
101 et seq., are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and are
enforceable by the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length
herein. At least one copy is on file in the office of the city clerk for public
use, inspection and examination. (1985 Code § 15-104; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Enforcement Of Traffic Laws
6-2-2: Direction Of Traffic
6-2-3: Obedience To Police And Fire Officials
6-2-4: Public Officers And Employees, Compliance
6-2-5: Emergency And Experimental Regulations
6-2-6: Driver And Vehicle License Requirements
6-2-7: Insurance Requirements; Exemptions
6-2-8: Accidents
6-2-9: Permitting Unauthorized Person To Drive
6-2-10: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
6-2-11: Persons Working On Streets, Exceptions
6-2-12: Maintenance And Construction Zones
6-2-13: Pushcarts, Animals And Animal Drawn Vehicles
6-2-14: Coasters, Roller Skates And Similar Devices
6-2-15: Crossing Fire Hose
6-2-16: Child Passenger Restraints Required
6-2-17: Loud Sound Amplification Systems
6-2-18: Citations For Traffic Violations
6-2-19: Violations; Penalties
6-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC LAWS:
   A.   It is the duty of the officers of the police department, or any
officers that are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street
traffic laws of the city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the city.
   B.   Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department
by this title and any other traffic ordinances of the city.
   C.   Officers may issue written notice to appear to any driver of a vehicle
involved in an accident when, based on personal investigation, the officer has
reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed an
offense under the provisions of the traffic code in connection with the
accident. (1985 Code § 15-201)
6-2-2: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC:
   A.   By Police And Fire Officials:
      1.   Officers of the police department or any officers designated by the
chief of police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire
or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
      2.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, or
other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity. (1985 Code § 15-202)
   B.   By Unauthorized Persons: No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt
to direct traffic, except in case of emergency where no officer is present.
(1985 Code § 15-203)
6-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official. (1985 Code § 15-204)
6-2-4: PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Drivers Of Government Vehicles:
      1.   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, any
state, county, city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other
vehicles.
      2.   It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions
of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute.
   B.   Exceptions: This title shall not apply to the military forces of the
United States and organizations of the national guard when performing any
military duty. (1985 Code § 15-208)
6-2-5: EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Adoption Of Regulations; Time Limit: The city manager, subject to any
directions which the city council may give by motion or resolution, is
empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of
the traffic ordinances of the city and to make temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
   B.   Testing Traffic Control Devices: The city manager may have traffic
control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. (1985 Code § 15-205)
6-2-6: DRIVER AND VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Possession Of License Required:
      1.   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his possession at all times, when operating such motor vehicle, an
unrevoked or unsuspended operator's or chauffeur's license as required by the
laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted from such laws
by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this subsection
shall be convicted if he produces in court an operator's or chauffeur's license
issued to him and valid at the time of his arrest.
      2.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation
of any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him
with respect to the type of, or special, mechanical control devices required on
a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the
state may determine. (1985 Code § 15-215)
   B.   Operation Of Vehicle On Invalid License Prohibited: No person shall
operate a motor vehicle when his privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended,
revoked or denied. Any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as
prohibited by this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. (1985 Code §
15-216)
   C.   State Vehicle License Required: It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of
any kind upon a street of the city without a state vehicle license as may be
required by law or to fail to display the state vehicle license as may be
required by law. (1985 Code § 15-217)
6-2-7: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
   COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in 47
Oklahoma Statutes article VI, chapter 7, and section 7-606.
   OPERATOR'S POLICY: An operator's policy of liability insurance which shall
insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law
for damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
   OWNER'S POLICY: An owner's policy of liability insurance which:
      1.   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference
all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
      2.   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person,
except as provided in subsection 3 of this definition, using an insured vehicle
with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from
the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
      3.   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing
laws; and
      4.   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204.
   SECURITY:
      1.   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 7-204;
      2.   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a
policy or bond; or
      3.   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 7-503, having the equivalency of limits required under 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond.
   SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A form, approved by the state board for property
and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by the
compulsory insurance law of the state of Oklahoma.
   B.   Proof Of Insurance Required:
      1.   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall,
while operating or using such vehicle within the city boundaries, carry either
an operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier,
provided the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent
form issued by the state department of public safety, reflecting liability
coverage.
      2.   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in the state and operating
the vehicle within the city boundaries shall carry in such vehicle at all times
a current owner's security verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been used by the state department of public safety
which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by
any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form shall be
shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
   C.   Exemptions: The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or
operator's security verification form or an equivalent form from the state
department of public safety during operation of the vehicle and shall not be
required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes:
      1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof; (1985 Code § 15-228)
      2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes sections 7-600 through 7-610 according to
records of the state department of public safety which reflect a deposit, bond,
self-insurance, or fleet policy;
      3.   Fleet vehicles maintaining current vehicle liability insurance as
required by the Oklahoma corporation commission or any other regulating entity;
(1985 Code § 15-228; amd. 2007 Code)
      4.   Any licensed taxicab; and
      5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   D.   Enforcement And Penalty:
      1.   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the department upon request of any peace officer of the department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be
suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the court.
      3.   Any person producing proof in court that a current security
verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department
reflecting this liability coverage for such person was in force at the time of
the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge.
      4.   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court
clerk shall forward an abstract to the state department of public safety within
ten (10) days reflecting the action taken by the court. (1985 Code § 15-228)
6-2-8: ACCIDENTS:
The following shall be duties of drivers involved in accidents:
   A.   Injury To Or Death Of Persons: The driver of any vehicle involved in an
accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle
or property shall immediately stop his vehicle at the scene of such accident,
or as close thereto as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the
accident until he has given his name, address and the registration of his
vehicle; and shall, upon request, exhibit his driver's license to the person
injured or the driver or occupant of, or person attending, any vehicle collided
with; and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable
assistance, including the carrying or making arrangement for the carrying of
such persons to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical and surgical
treatment if it is apparent that this treatment is necessary or if such is
requested by the injured person. Each such stop shall be made without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   B.   Damage To Property:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an
accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is
apparent that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident
to a police officer or to the police department.
      2.   If a driver makes out a written report of the accident in the office
of the police department as soon as practicable after the accident, which
report is to be forwarded to the state department of public safety in
accordance with state law, the driver shall be deemed to be in compliance with
this section. (1985 Code § 15-219; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-9: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE:
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or under
his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized
under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such vehicle. (1985
Code § 15-218)
6-2-10: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Drivers Of Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this subsection, but subject to
the conditions stated in this subsection.
      2.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the
following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or
ordinance or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm:
         a.   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
         b.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         c.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is
not endangered; or
         d.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specific directions. (1985 Code § 15-211)
      3.   The exemptions granted in this subsection to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red or blue light visible from in front of the vehicle. This
subsection shall not be construed as requiring a peace officer operating a
police vehicle properly and lawfully in response to a crime in progress to use
audible signals.
      4.   The provisions of this subsection shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1985 Code §
15-211; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
      1.   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws
of the state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of
way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
      2.   This subsection shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway. (1985 Code § 15-212)
   C.   Following Emergency Vehicles: The driver of any vehicle other than one
on official business shall not follow any police vehicle, ambulance, civil
defense vehicle, fire apparatus, or other emergency vehicle traveling in
response to an emergency call or request closer than five hundred feet (500'),
or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the emergency vehicle
has stopped in answer to an emergency call. (1985 Code § 15-213)
6-2-11: PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS, EXCEPTIONS:
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title, except those
relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not apply to
persons, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work
upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles, and other
equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or repair of
public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations shall be
protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flag persons. The
provisions of this title shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles
exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work. (1985 Code § 15-
209; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-12: MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Close Streets:
      1.   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the city manager or his
designee, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance, or construction. (1985 Code § 15-210; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel, contractor
or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices
and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to
traffic.
   B.   Driving Restrictions:
      1.   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of
subsection A of this section and traffic control devices or barricades have
been erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through,
under, over, or around such traffic control devices or barricades, or otherwise
to enter the closed area.
      2.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons
entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or property.
      3.   Persons having their places of residence or places of business
within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at
their own risk.
   C.   Construction Under Traffic:
      1.   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or
utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel,
contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic control devices to warn and guide the public.
      2.   Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals,
markings, flag persons, or other traffic control devices which are placed to
regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance
area. (1985 Code § 15-210)
6-2-13: PUSHCARTS, ANIMALS AND ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and
every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(1985 Code § 15-206)
6-2-14: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
   A.   Restrictions: No person upon roller skates, skateboards, or riding in
or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing,
such person shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(1985 Code § 15-207; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Exception, Play Street: This section shall not apply upon any street
while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of the city 1 .
(1985 Code § 15-207)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-4-10 of this title.
6-2-15: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command. (1985 Code § 15-214)
6-2-16: CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Every driver when transporting a child under six (6) years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this state,
shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child
passenger restraint system. For purposes of this section and 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 11-1113, "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or
child passenger restraint system which meets the federal standards as set by 49
CFR section 571.213.
   B.   Children at least six (6) years of age but younger than thirteen (13)
years of age shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or
a seat belt.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      2.   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      3.   A driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use;
      4.   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to
be placed in such devices; or
      5.   The transportation of a child who weighs more than forty (40) pounds
and who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a
lap safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with
combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and
shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who
weigh more than forty (40) pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this
subsection, back seat shall include all seats located behind the front seat of
a vehicle operated by a licensed childcare facility or church. Provided
further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the
weight requirements of this subsection if, at the request of any law
enforcement officer, the licensed childcare facility or church provides the
officer with a written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that
the child weighs more than forty (40) pounds.
   D.   A law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to stop a vehicle if it
appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this
section and to give an oral warning to said driver. The warning shall advise
the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to
install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor
vehicle.
   E.   A violation of the provisions of this section shall not be admissible
as evidence in any civil action or proceeding for damages.
   F.   In any action brought by or on behalf of an infant for personal
injuries or wrongful death sustained in a motor vehicle collision, the failure
of any person to have the infant properly restrained in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be used in aggravation or mitigation of
damages.
   G.   Any person convicted of violating subsection A or B of this section
shall be punished by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall pay all court
costs thereof. Revenue from such fine shall be apportioned to the department of
public safety revolving fund and used by the Oklahoma highway safety office to
promote the use of child passenger restraint systems as provided in 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 11-1113. This fine shall be suspended and the court costs
limited to a maximum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) in the case of the first
offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger
restraint system. Provided, the department of public safety shall not assess
points to the driving record of any person convicted of a violation of this
section. (1985 Code § 15-229; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-17: LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound produced by a sound amplification system from
within the vehicle which can be clearly heard at a distance of fifty feet (50')
or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon
direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible, and base
reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked
or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM: Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human
voice.
   B.   Use Restricted: No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a
street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the
sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the
vehicle.
   C.   Affirmative Defense: It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from
operating the sound amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
      1.   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
      2.   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
      3.   The vehicle was owned and operated by the city, or public or private
utility company;
      4.   The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as
parades, fireworks, sports events, or other activities which have been approved
by the appropriate city official or body. (Ord. 95-2, 1-5-1995)
6-2-18: CITATIONS FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Issuance Of Citations:
      1.   Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons
violating provisions of this title by delivering citations to violators or, in
cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of this
title, by affixing such citations to the vehicles. Such citations, among other
things, shall bear briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of
the vehicle, and shall direct the violator to present the citation at the
police station or other designated place within the time as may be specified
thereon.
      2.   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to abridge the power
of a police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody.
      3.   The city manager may require that the police officers use citations
furnished by the city clerk and that such citations are serially numbered, and
may regulate the use and handling of the citations. (1985 Code § 15-220; amd.
2007 Code)
   B.   Citation Deemed Lawful Complaint: In the event the form of citation
provided herein includes information and is sworn to, then such citation, when
filed with the municipal court, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for
the purpose of prosecution under this title. (1985 Code § 15-221)
   C.   Failure To Obey Citation: It is unlawful and an offense for any person
to violate his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance
of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which
citation was originally issued. (1985 Code § 15-222)
   D.   Failure To Comply With Citation Attached To Parked Vehicle:
      1.   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking
under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic
citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of days as specified on
the citation, the clerk of the municipal court may send to the owner of the
motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him
of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded
for the specified period of days, a warrant of arrest may be issued.
      2.   On any occasion where two (2) or more such traffic citations have
been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been
disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued without sending the letter
provided in this subsection. (1985 Code § 15-223)
   E.   Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking:
      1.   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
      2.   The presumption in subsection E1 of this section shall apply only
when the procedure as prescribed in this section has been followed. (1985 Code
§ 15-224)
   F.   Illegal Cancellation Of Citations: It is unlawful for any person to
cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other
than is provided by this section. (1985 Code § 15-225)
   G.   Disposition And Records Of Citations, Warrants And Complaints:
      1.   Every police officer, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of the state or any traffic
law of the city, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the
citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to
be delivered to the municipal court.
      2.   Upon the filing of the original citation in the municipal court, the
citation may be disposed of only by the city attorney, or by trial in the court
or by other official action by a judge of the court, including forfeiture of
bail or by payment of a fine.
      3.   The chief of police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued
by the municipal court which are delivered to the police department for
service, and of the final disposition of the warrants.
      4.   No member of the police department or other officer or public
employee shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy
thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation,
complaint, or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this section.
(1985 Code § 15-226)
   H.   Court Records, Abstract Sent To State:
      1.   The municipal judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation
deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of every
official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in reference
thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a
person upon a charge of violating any provision of this title or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the municipal judge or clerk
of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall
prepare and immediately forward to the state department of public safety a
certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
      3.   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state
department of public safety and shall include the name and address of the party
charged, the number of his operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration
number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing,
the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine
or forfeiture. (1985 Code § 15-227)
6-2-19: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Obedience To Traffic Code:
      1.   Fine For Noncompliance: It is an offense against the city for any
person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this
title. Further, it is also an offense against the city for any person, while
within the limits of the city, to violate any statute of the Oklahoma motor
vehicle code, as codified in title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes, regardless of
whether said statute is specifically codified herein as an ordinance in this
title. Any such violation resulting in a conviction thereof may be punished by
fine, including court costs, up to the maximum amount allowed by statute for
the same offense, if said fine has not previously been set by resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 2003-01-04, 4-28-2003)
      2.   Parental Responsibility: It is an offense against the city for the
parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this title.
      3.   Responsibility For Vehicle Related Violations: It is an offense for
any person to authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in his or
her name to be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this title. (1985 Code § 15-1401)
   B.   General Penalty Imposed: Except as otherwise provided in this title,
any person violating any of the provisions of this title containing the traffic
laws of the city, or who performs any unlawful act as defined in this title, or
who fails to perform any act required by this title, shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined or punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 15-1402)
CHAPTER 3
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Speed Regulations And Restrictions
6-3-2: Changing Lanes
6-3-3: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway; Exceptions
6-3-4: Overtaking And Passing Vehicles
6-3-5: No Passing Zones
6-3-6: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
6-3-7: Following Too Closely
6-3-8: Parades, Funeral And Other Processions
6-3-9: Passing In School Zones
6-3-10: Passing School Bus Or Church Bus
6-3-11: Driving On Sidewalks, Through Safety Zones
6-3-12: Limitations On Backing Vehicle
6-3-13: Clinging To Vehicles
6-3-14: Entering And Leaving Controlled Access Highways
6-3-15: Reckless, Careless And Negligent Driving
6-3-16: Driving In Careful And Prudent Manner
6-3-17: Driving Under Influence Of Drugs Or Alcohol
6-3-18: Starting Parked Vehicle
6-3-19: Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors
6-3-20: Obstructions To Driver's View Or Driving Mechanism
6-3-21: Boarding Or Alighting From Vehicle
6-3-22: Allowing Passenger To Ride Outside Passenger Compartment
6-3-23: Unlawful Riding On Vehicle
6-3-24: Service Drives
6-3-25: Entering Highway From Private Road Or Driveway
6-3-26: Vehicle Entering Traffic From Parking
6-3-27: Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building
6-3-28: Stop When Traffic Obstructed
6-3-29: Driving Certain Vehicles Over Curbs, Permit
6-3-30: Truck Routes; Regulations
6-3-1: SPEED REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Speed Limits Generally:
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than twenty five (25)
miles per hour upon any street or highway within the city, except:
         a.   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this
title;
         b.   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted;
or
         c.   When a different speed limit is established in this title.
      2.   The city manager, subject to such direction as the city council may
give by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase the speed limits provided
in this title, and when he does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such
streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit. (1985
Code § 15-401)
   B.   School Zones: No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that
posted speed per hour between the hours posted on any street adjacent to any
school in a designated school zone on days when school is in session, unless a
different speed limit or time is otherwise designated and posted. (1985 Code §
15-402)
   C.   Reasonable And Prudent Speed: No person shall drive a vehicle at a
speed greater or less than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then
existing, taking into consideration, among other things, the condition of the
vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or width, the amount of light or
darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the
obstruction of view. No person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than
will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(1985 Code § 15-403)
   D.   Minimum Speed Requirements; Exception: No vehicle shall be driven at
such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to the effective maximum speed
allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere with the normal movement of
other traffic, except when the slow speed is unavoidable. (1985 Code § 15-404)
   E.   Obedience To Maximum And Minimum Speed Limits: Where official signs and
markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed limits in effect on any
street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess of the maximum nor slower
than the minimum, except as required by an authorized officer or in obedience
to posted official signs. (1985 Code § 15-405)
   F.   Speed Contests Prohibited:
      1.   No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed
contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
      2.   No person shall, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an
incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any
manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or
highway.
      3.   When three (3) or more persons assemble to witness or participate in
an unlawful speed contest, such assembly is an unlawful assembly, and any
person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense.
(1985 Code § 15-528)
6-3-2: CHANGING LANES:
   A.   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this
subsection, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and has signaled for a
change of course.
   B.   Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles
shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as
practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side
unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or
making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled for a change
of course.
   C.   Upon a roadway which has been divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
   D.   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway. Drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (1985 Code § 15-501)
6-3-3: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven to the
right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement; (1985 Code § 15-502)
      2.   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard; (1985 Code § 15-502; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      4.   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   B.   All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or highways
which are divided into two (2) roadways. (1985 Code § 15-502)
   C.   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right hand lane when available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, and may be
temporarily driven upon the right hand shoulder for the purpose of permitting
other vehicles to pass. This subsection shall not apply when overtaking and
passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for
a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. (1985 Code §
15-502; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-4: OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES:
   A.   Overtaking On Right:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
         a.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn;
         b.   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied
by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction; or
         c.   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
      2.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled
portion of the roadway. (1985 Code § 15-503)
   B.   Overtaking On Left:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear of
the overtaken vehicle.
      2.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-504)
      3.   Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, which requires moving his vehicle from one lane of traffic to
another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety and shall
proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or mechanical device.
(2007 Code)
   C.   Limitations On Overtaking On Left; Exception:
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every instance, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of
the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
      2.   No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the
roadway under the following conditions:
         a.   When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the
street or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is
obstructed; or (1985 Code § 15-505)
         b.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge,
viaduct or tunnel or when approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or
traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing, unless otherwise
indicated by traffic control devices. (1985 Code § 15-505; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions: Drivers of vehicles
proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon
roadways having a width for not more than one line of traffic in each
direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) the main
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (1985 Code § 15-506)
6-3-5: NO PASSING ZONES:
   A.   Authority To Designate:
      1.   The Oklahoma department of highways or other designated authorities,
as regards state and federal highways, and the city manager as regards all
other streets, are hereby authorized to determine those portions of any highway
or street where overtaking and passing to the left would be especially
hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate
the beginning and end of such zones. (1985 Code § 15-509; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an
ordinarily observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   B.   Compliance With Signs Or Markings: Where signs or markings are in place
to define a no passing zone as set forth in subsection A of this section, no
driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within the no
passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark the
no passing zone throughout its length. (1985 Code § 15-509)
6-3-6: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:
   A.   Authority To Designate: The city manager, subject to any directions
given by the city council by motion or resolution, may designate any road,
street, alley, or highway, or any separate roadway under their jurisdiction for
one-way traffic and shall cause appropriate signs giving notice thereof to be
erected.
   B.   Posting Of Signs: Whenever the city manager designates any street or
alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley, the city manager shall have
placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall
be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   C.   Direction Of Travel:
      1.   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and
parts of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic
shall move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction
of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in
the opposite direction is prohibited.
      2.   Upon roadways designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   D.   Rotary Traffic Island: A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island
shall be driven only to the right of such island. (1985 Code § 15-507)
6-3-7: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. (1985 Code §
15-508)
6-3-8: PARADES, FUNERAL AND OTHER PROCESSIONS:
   A.   Permit Required For Parades: No funeral, procession, or parade
containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or more vehicles,
except the military forces of the United States and the military forces of this
state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street, except in accordance
with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are
set forth herein which may apply. (1985 Code § 15-529)
   B.   Driving Through Processions: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between
the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in
this title. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (1985 Code § 15-510)
   C.   Drivers Within Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and
shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (1985 Code §
15-511)
   D.   Funeral Processions Identified: A funeral composed of a procession of
vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each
vehicle of such identifying insignia as may be determined and designated by the
police department. (1985 Code § 15-512)
6-3-9: PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONES:
   A.   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion
and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours
posted on all days when schools are in session.
   B.   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the
right half of the roadway has been divided into two (2) or more lanes, or on
one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being
driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane
movement. (1985 Code § 15-513)
6-3-10: PASSING SCHOOL BUS OR CHURCH BUS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus or a church
bus that is stopped to take on or discharge passengers, and on which the red
loading signals are in operation, shall stop his vehicle before it reaches the
school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then
proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due
caution for the safety of such passengers. Passengers of any school bus or
church bus, whether being received or discharged, shall have the right of way
when crossing the roadway immediately upon entering or leaving the school bus
or church bus. The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways
need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different
roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus or church
bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway
and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. The provisions of
this subsection shall be applicable only if the school bus or church bus meets
the requirements of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 12-228. Any person convicted
of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (1985 Code § 15-514; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Visual signals, meeting the requirements of 47 Oklahoma statutes
section 12-228, shall be actuated by the driver of said school bus or church
bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging passengers, stopping at railroad crossings,
or at any other time the said driver is required to actuate the visual signals
by ordinance, federal regulation or state statute.
   C.   If the driver of a school bus or a church bus witnesses a violation of
the provisions of subsection A of this section, within twenty four (24) hours
of the alleged offense, the driver shall report the violation, the vehicle
color, license tag number, and the time and place such violation occurred to
the municipal police department. The chief of police shall issue a letter of
warning on the alleged violation to the person in whose name the vehicle is
registered. The office of the attorney general shall provide a form letter to
the police department for the issuance of the warning provided for in this
subsection. Such form letter shall be used by the police department in the
exact form provided for by the office of the attorney general. A warning letter
issued pursuant to this subsection shall not be recorded on the driving record
of the person to whom such letter was issued. Issuance of a warning letter
pursuant to this section shall not preclude the imposition of other penalties
as provided by law. (2007 Code)
6-3-11: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, THROUGH SAFETY ZONES:
   A.   Sidewalks: No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (1985 Code § 15-516)
   B.   Safety Zones: No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within
a safety zone or island. (1985 Code § 15-530)
6-3-12: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE:
No vehicle shall be backed upon any street or highway except for such distance
as may be necessary to permit the vehicle to enter the proper driving lane from
a parked position. Such backing shall be done only after the driver of said
vehicle has ascertained that such movement can be made without endangering
other traffic. No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection. (1985 Code §
15-517; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-13: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorized scooter, coaster, roller skates,
sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle
upon a roadway. (1985 Code § 15-520; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-14: ENTERING AND LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority. (1985 Code § 15-
521)
6-3-15: RECKLESS, CARELESS AND NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
   A.   Reckless Driving: Any person who drives any vehicle in a wanton manner
without regard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless
driving and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 15-522)
   B.   Careless Or Negligent Driving Or Parking: It is unlawful for any person
to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked, or stop any vehicle:
      1.   In a careless manner;
      2.   In a negligent manner;
      3.   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or
      4.   In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful
movement of traffic or use of the streets. (1985 Code § 15-523)
6-3-16: DRIVING IN CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER:
   A.   Attention To Driving Required: The operator of every vehicle, while
driving upon the streets and highways of the city, shall devote full time and
attention to such driving. (1985 Code § 15-524)
   B.   Manner Of Driving: Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way
shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner and at a careful and
prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having
due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the public way and any other
conditions then existing. (1985 Code § 15-525)
6-3-17: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF DRUGS OR ALCOHOL:
Any person charged with a violation for driving under the influence of alcohol
or other intoxicating substances, or combination thereof, in the city, shall be
subject to the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 751 et seq., as
amended. (1985 Code §§ 15-526, 15-527; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-18: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1985 Code § 15-
531)
6-3-19: OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers. (1985 Code § 15-532)
6-3-20: OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM:
   A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   B.   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-533)
6-3-21: BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE:
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion. (1985 Code § 15-534)
6-3-22: ALLOWING PASSENGER TO RIDE OUTSIDE PASSENGER COMPARTMENT:
No operator of a motor vehicle shall allow a passenger to ride outside the
passenger compartment of the vehicle on the streets, alleyways or highways of
the city; provided, this section shall not apply to passengers riding on the
bed of a pickup truck or to persons so riding on private property or for
parades or special events. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of
this section shall be punished by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) and shall pay
court costs of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (2007 Code)
6-3-23: UNLAWFUL RIDING ON VEHICLE:
No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. Any person convicted of
violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of ten
dollars ($10.00) and shall pay court costs of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (1985
Code § 15-535; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3-24: SERVICE DRIVES:
It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle through a service drive
situated at a street intersection within the city unless the operator of such
vehicle transacts business on the premises where such service drive is located.
(1985 Code § 15-536)
6-3-25: ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a
private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway. (1985 Code § 15-549)
6-3-26: VEHICLE ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING:
Any vehicle attempting to reenter traffic while parked at the curb shall yield
the right of way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the rear.
The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver
has given the appropriate signal which indicates his intention of turning from
the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the
line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists. (1985
Code § 15-550)
6-3-27: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision; and,
upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway. (1985 Code § 15-551)
6-3-28: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (1985 Code § 15-552)
6-3-29: DRIVING CERTAIN VEHICLES OVER CURBS, PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation without permit as
required herein shall drive or cause to be driven across any curb in the city,
any vehicle which has an axle load in excess of two thousand (2,000) pounds per
axle. (1985 Code § 14-301)
   B.   Application; Deposit:
      1.   If any person, firm or corporation desires to secure a permit to
drive a vehicle which is in excess of the weight limit set forth in subsection
A of this section, across the curbs of the city, he shall make written
application for such permit to the city clerk, who shall transmit the
application to the city manager.
      2.   The city manager shall require that an amount of money estimated by
him to be adequate to compensate the city for replacing or repairing the curb
if the same is damaged by the vehicle crossing the curb, be deposited with the
city clerk. After such deposit is made, the mayor shall issue the permit. The
deposit or any balance thereof, if not needed to compensate the city for
replacing or repairing the curb, shall be returned to the applicant. (1985 Code
§ 14-302)
6-3-30: TRUCK ROUTES; REGULATIONS 1 :
   A.   Truck Driving And Route Restrictions:
      1.   The city manager may prescribe routes through the city for the use
of trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds, or other vehicles which are
not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city.
      2.   Appropriate and adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so
that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so
erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route
has been prescribed, as provided above, while passing through the city, shall
keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency.
Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also
when driving within the city and not merely through the city. (1985 Code § 15-
537)
   B.   Loads On Vehicles:
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except
that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or
other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
      2.   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
      3.   This subsection shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock,
poultry or agricultural products only, except baled agricultural products;
provided, that any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent
such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. (1985 Code § 15-538)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 6-5-7 of this title for truck parking restrictions.
ARTICLE A. TURNING MOVEMENTS
SECTION:
6-3A-1: Turning Markers Or Indicators
6-3A-2: Designation Of Restricted Turns
6-3A-3: Obedience To No Turn Signs
6-3A-4: U-Turns
6-3A-5: Position And Method Of Turning
6-3A-6: Turning Movements And Required Signals
6-3A-7: Giving Turn Signals
6-3A-1: TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS:
   A.   Authority To Place Markers: The city manager or his designee, subject
to any directions given by the city council by motion, resolution, or
ordinance, is authorized to place markers or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be
other than as prescribed by law.
   B.   Compliance Required: When authorized markers, signs, or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indications. (1985 Code § 15-901; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3A-2: DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS:
   A.   Authority To Determine: The city manager or his designee is hereby
authorized to determine those street intersections at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make right, left or U-turns, and shall have proper signs placed at
the intersections.
   B.   Restrictions During Certain Hours: The making of the turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. Where
turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section, the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are
permitted. (1985 Code § 15-902; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3A-3: OBEDIENCE TO NO TURN SIGNS:
Whenever authorized signs, markers, or other indicators are erected indicating
that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not
disobey the directions of any such sign, marker, or other indicator. (1985 Code
§ 15-903; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3A-4: U-TURNS:
   A.   Prohibited When Posted: The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city
at any location where an official "no U-turn" has been placed and is
maintained. (1985 Code § 15-904)
   B.   Manner Of Making U-Turns: A U-turn may be made only when it can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic. No person shall make a U-
turn except at an intersection and then only in the following manner: (1985
Code § 15-904; amd. 2007 Code)
      1.   By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right
curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal
for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn across
the intersection;
      2.   In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle;
      3.   By yielding the right of way at all times to all vehicles until such
turn in completed; and
      4.   Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other
vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-904)
6-3A-5: POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
   A.   Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
   B.   Left Turns:
      1.   On Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is permitted
to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, the
approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the centerline
where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      2.   On Other Than Two-Way Roadways: At any intersection where traffic is
restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a
vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the
intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearby as
practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (1985 Code § 15-905)
   C.   Turning On Curve Or Crest Of Grade Prohibited: No vehicle shall be
turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the
approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by
the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five
hundred feet (500'). (2007 Code)
6-3A-6: TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS:
   A.   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the roadway as required in section
6-3A-5 of this article, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway,
or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
   B.   A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop, when
required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred
feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping.
   C.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
the signal. (1985 Code § 15-906)
   D.   When any person is properly preparing for, attempting or executing a
left turn, as described in subsection A of this section, no other person
operating another vehicle immediately following the turning vehicle shall pass
or attempt to pass the turning vehicle to the left. Such other person shall
come to a complete stop if necessary, at a safe distance behind the person
preparing for, attempting or executing the turn, or may proceed to the right of
the turning vehicle as provided by section
6-3-4 of this chapter. (2007 Code)
6-3A-7: GIVING TURN SIGNALS:
   A.   Means Of Giving Signals:
      1.   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either
by means of hand and arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of
a type approved by the Oklahoma department of public safety, except as provided
in subsection A2 of this section. (1985 Code § 15-907)
      2.   A vehicle in use on the streets, highways or alleyways of the city
shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lamps
or devices when:
         a.   The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects
twenty four inches (24") or more to the left of the center of the steering
wheel;
         b.   Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be
visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or
         c.   The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any
vehicle projects fourteen feet (14') or more beyond the center top of the
steering post. (1985 Code § 15-907; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Method Of Giving Hand And Arm Signals: All signals herein required
given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally;
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; and
      3.   Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear. (1985 Code § 15-908)
ARTICLE B. INTERSECTIONS; STOP OR YIELD STREETS
SECTION:
6-3B-1: Approaching Or Entering Intersection
6-3B-2: Turning Left At Intersection
6-3B-3: Approaching Yield Right Of Way Sign
6-3B-4: Entering Through Highway
6-3B-5: Facing Stop, Slow, Warning Or Caution Signal
6-3B-6: Through Streets
6-3B-7: Intersections Where Stop Or Yield Required
6-3B-8: Stop Or Yield Sign Construction And Placement
6-3B-9: Entering Stop Or Yield Intersections
6-3B-1: APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION:
   A.   When two (2) vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection
from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the
vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right
unless otherwise stated in this title; however, the driver of vehicle on a
street which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with
a state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right of way to a vehicle
which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   B.   The right of way rule declared in subsection A of this section is
modified at through highways unless otherwise stated in this title. (1985 Code
§ 15-539)
6-3B-2: TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION:
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this title, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of
all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction
shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn. (1985 Code §
15-540)
6-3B-3: APPROACHING YIELD RIGHT OF WAY SIGN:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a "Yield Right Of Way" sign shall slow to a
reasonable speed or stop, as required for existing conditions of traffic and
visibility, yielding the right of way to all vehicles on the intersecting
street or highway which have entered the intersection or which are so close as
to constitute an immediate hazard. (1985 Code § 15-541; amd. 2007 Code)
6-3B-4: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY:
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this title at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard. (1985 Code § 15-542)
6-3B-5: FACING STOP, SLOW, WARNING OR CAUTION SIGNAL:
   A.   Rules: If two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution
signs or signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the
intersection at the same time, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   If each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right of way.
      2.   If each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right of way.
      3.   If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from
the right shall have the right of way.
      4.   If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution,
the one required to take caution shall have the right of way.
   B.   Right Of Way, Generally: In any event, a vehicle which has already
entered the intersection shall have the right of way over one which has not
entered the intersection. (1985 Code § 15-543)
6-3B-6: THROUGH STREETS:
   A.   Authority To Designate: The city manager or his designee, subject to
such direction as the city council may give, may designate any street or part
of a street a through street.
   B.   Placement Of Signs:
      1.   Whenever the city manager or his designee designates and describes a
through street, the stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall
be placed and maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or
intersecting that portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic control signals.
      2.   At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the
intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated,
stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may
be determined by the city manager if deemed desirable. (1985 Code § 15-544;
amd. 2007 Code)
6-3B-7: INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED:
The city manager or his designee, subject to any directions given by the city
council by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and
designate intersections upon other than through streets where particular
hazards exist and to determine whether:
   A.   Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place a stop is required; or
   B.   Vehicles shall yield the right of way to vehicles on a different street
as provided in this title, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield
sign at every place where yield is required. (1985 Code § 15-545; amd. 2007
Code)
6-3B-8: STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT:
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this title shall bear the word
"Stop" or "Yield" in letters not less than eight inches (8") in height for a
stop sign and not less than seven inches (7") in height for a yield sign. Every
stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign,
or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or
yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk,
then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(1985 Code § 15-546)
6-3B-9: ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS:
   A.   Stop Intersections:
      1.   Except when directed by a police officer or traffic control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop
sign, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection. In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection. If there is no
marked stop line, then the driver shall stop at the point nearest the
intersecting road where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on an
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
      2.   A driver, after having stopped, shall yield the right of way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or road, or
which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard; but the driver
having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield the right of way to the vehicle so
proceeding. (1985 Code § 15-547)
   B.   Yield Intersections:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
observance of such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
condition or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard. The driver having so yielded may then proceed
and drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to
the vehicle so proceeding.
      2.   A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has or
causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein.
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not release the drivers of
other vehicles approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to
constitute immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a
collision.
      4.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection before entering the intersection. If there is no crosswalk,
the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; or if there is no stop
line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. (1985 Code § 15-548)
CHAPTER 4
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Authority To Install
6-4-2: Uniform Traffic Control Devices
6-4-3: Obedience To Official Traffic Control Devices
6-4-4: Devices Required For Enforcement Purposes
6-4-5: Traffic Control Signal Legend
6-4-6: Pedestrians; Signal Indicators
6-4-7: Flashing Signals
6-4-8: Unauthorized Devices Prohibited
6-4-9: Defacement Of Devices
6-4-10: Play Streets
6-4-11: Crosswalks And Safety Zones
6-4-12: Traffic Lanes
6-4-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
The city manager or his designee, subject to any directions given by the city
council by motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic
control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic
ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and
may have placed and maintained such additional traffic control signs, signals,
and devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic
ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. (1985
Code § 15-601; amd. 2007 Code)
6-4-2: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   State Manual: All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall
conform to the manual of uniform traffic control devices approved by the state
department of public safety.
   B.   Uniformity: All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a
particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and
relative location throughout the city. All traffic control devices erected, and
not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title, shall be
official traffic control devices. (1985 Code § 15-602)
6-4-3: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of
this title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject
to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
title. (1985 Code § 15-603)
6-4-4: DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES:
No provision of this title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a
particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (1985 Code § 15-604)
6-4-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians:
   A.   Green Alone, "Go":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right of way over such vehicular traffic.
      2.   Pedestrian traffic facing a green signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a "walk" signal
indicator is operating.
   B.   Steady Yellow Or Amber Alone, "Caution":
      1.   The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the "red" or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.
      2.   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the "caution" signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the "red" signal flashes.
   C.   Red Alone, "Stop":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone. Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right
traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right of
way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection, and the turn shall
be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green
signal indication on the cross street.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
"go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "walk" signal.
   D.   Steady Red With Green Arrow:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic lane
may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by
the arrow, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement
indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only
on the red with green arrow signal.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "walk"
signal.
   E.   Green Arrows Alone: Whenever vehicular traffic movements are controlled
by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal indication,
vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by the green
arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed. (1985 Code § 15-605)
6-4-6: PEDESTRIANS; SIGNAL INDICATORS:
   A.   Special Pedestrian Signals: Special pedestrian control signals
exhibiting the words "walk", "wait" or "don't walk" shall regulate pedestrian
movement as follows:
      1.   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
      2.   Wait Or Don't Walk: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the "walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone
while the "wait" signal is showing. (1985 Code § 15-606)
   B.   Pedestrian Activated School Crossing Signals: Whenever a pedestrian
activated school crossing signal is provided, it requires obedience by
vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows:
      1.   Flashing yellow:
         a.   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection
or pass such signal only with caution.
         b.   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
activate the signal control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal.
      2.   Steady yellow alone:
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the
signal when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited.
         b.   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which
the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown.
      3.   Steady red:
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and shall remain standing
until flashing yellow is shown alone.
         b.   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal,
and shall be given the right of way by the drivers of all vehicles.
      4.   Steady red and steady yellow combined:
         a.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone.
         b.   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is
about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing shall
proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the right
of way by the drivers of all vehicles. (1985 Code § 15-608)
6-4-7: FLASHING SIGNALS:
   A.   Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it shall
require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      1.   Flashing Red: When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      2.   Flashing Yellow: When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   B.   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. (1985 Code §
15-607)
6-4-8: UNAUTHORIZED DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit
upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   C.   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information which are
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   D.   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device may be removed without
notice. (1985 Code § 15-609)
6-4-9: DEFACEMENT OF DEVICES:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or
in fact alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down,
remove or have in his possession any traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal or an inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any of the following
persons when acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      1.   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any governmental agency; or
      2.   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company. (1985 Code § 15-
610)
6-4-10: PLAY STREETS:
   A.   Authority To Establish: The city manager or his designee, subject to
any directions given by the city council, shall have authority to declare any
street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or
devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. (1985 Code §
15-611; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Use Restricted: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having
businesses or whose residences are within such closed area; and then any such
driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or
portion thereof. (1985 Code § 15-612)
6-4-11: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
The city manager or his designee, subject to any directions given by the city
council, may:
   A.   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there
is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other
places as he may deem necessary.
   B.   Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (1985
Code § 15-613; amd. 2007 Code)
6-4-12: TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   The city manager or his designee, subject to any directions given by
the city council, may be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the
roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   B.   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or as otherwise authorized by
ordinance. (1985 Code § 15-614; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
6-5-1: Illegal Parking Declared Public Nuisance
6-5-2: Application Of Parking Regulations
6-5-3: Parking Time Limits Established, Signs
6-5-4: Parking More Than Forty Eight Hours
6-5-5: Setting Brakes; Turning Off Motor
6-5-6: Angle And Parallel Parking
6-5-7: Truck Parking Prohibited In Certain Areas
6-5-8: Parking Within Spaces Marked
6-5-9: Permit For Loading Or Unloading At Angle To Curb
6-5-10: Hazardous Or Congested Places
6-5-11: Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-5-12: Blocking Of Intersection Or Crosswalk
6-5-13: One-Way Roadways
6-5-14: Adjacent To Schools
6-5-15: Intersections
6-5-16: Extending Too Far Into Street
6-5-17: Narrow Streets
6-5-18: Parking In Alleys, Blocking Driveways
6-5-19: Entry On Private Property; Trespass
6-5-20: Double Parking
6-5-21: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
6-5-22: Negligent Parking
6-5-23: Handicapped Parking, Enforcement On Public Or Private Property
6-5-24: Loading Regulations
6-5-1: ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this title governing,
limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or
public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and
each separate traffic citation issued as authorized in this title for such
violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator
of such vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-701)
6-5-2: APPLICATION OF PARKING REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not be applicable when it is necessary for a
vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. (1985 Code §
15-702)
6-5-3: PARKING TIME LIMITS ESTABLISHED, SIGNS:
   A.   Authority To Establish; Signs Required:
      1.   The city manager or his designee, subject to any directions given by
the city council by motion or resolution, may establish parking time limits or
prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have appropriate
signs placed on the streets.
      2.   When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle in violation of the sign.
      3.   No such time limits shall be effective unless a sign is erected and
in place at the time of the alleged violation.
   B.   Illegal Parking; Fine: Leaving a vehicle parked in a regulated parking
zone for a period of time in excess of that established by the city manager or
his designee for such zone shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine. Each separate violation of the time limit shall
constitute a separate violation. In no event shall the fine for parking a
vehicle in a regulated parking zone exceed an amount set by the city in any one
twenty four (24) hour period.
   C.   Enforcement: The chief of police, under directions from the city
manager, shall have charge of the enforcement, supervision and control of the
parking regulations established by the city manager and shall be responsible
for the enforcement of all ordinance and code provisions relating to parking in
regulated zones, and is hereby authorized to adopt and implement procedures
necessary to supervise and enforce the parking limits established by the city
manager, including the marking of tires of vehicles parked in a regulated
parking zone.
   D.   Interference With Enforcement: Any person who interferes with the
enforcement of the parking regulations established by the city manager,
including the removal, erasure or defacing of and markings made on the tires of
a vehicle while parked in a regulated parking zone shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1985 Code § 15-703; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-4: PARKING MORE THAN FORTY EIGHT HOURS:
No person shall park a vehicle on any street in the business district of the
city, as defined in state statute, for a period of time longer than forty eight
(48) hours. The parking of such a vehicle in the business district for more
than forty eight (48) hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of
abandonment of the vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-704; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-5: SETTING BRAKES; TURNING OFF MOTOR:
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. (1985 Code
§ 15-705)
6-5-6: ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING:
   A.   Angle Parking:
      1.   Determination; Signs Or Markings: The city manager, subject to any
directions given by the city council by motion or resolution, shall determine
upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and
shall have such streets marked or signed. (1985 Code § 15-706)
      2.   Obedience To Angle Parking Signs: On those streets which have been
so signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such
signs or markings. (1985 Code § 15-707)
   B.   Parallel Parking:
      1.   Method Of Parking: Except as otherwise provided in this title, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall
be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to
and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or
parked upon the left hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent
curbs shall be parked or stopped with the left hand wheels parallel to and
within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb. (1985 Code § 15-724)
      2.   Right Of Way To Parallel Parking Space:
         a.   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking
space where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by
another vehicle shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until
the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be
deemed to have the right of way to such parking space over any other vehicle
attempting to park therein.
         b.   The first of two (2) or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary
of an unoccupied parallel parking space, where a backing movement is necessary
to occupy, shall be deemed to have the right of way to such parking space.
(1985 Code § 15-726)
6-5-7: TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS 1 :
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to park any
of the following vehicles which exceed a weight limit of one ton or a length
greater than eighteen feet (18') on any street or alley in any residence
district of the city for a period in excess of one hour on any day except while
actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or
materials:
   A.   Truck;
   B.   Bus;
   C.   Tractor;
   D.   Trailer;
   E.   Truck trailer, semitrailer, or combination of any of the above; or
   F.   Any other commercial vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-721)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 6-3-30 of this title for truck regulations.
6-5-8: PARKING WITHIN SPACES MARKED:
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. (1985 Code § 15-708)
6-5-9: PERMIT FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB:
   A.   Special Permits:
      1.   The city manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
      2.   Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the
privilege as therein stated and authorized herein.
      3.   The city manager may revoke such permits at any time.
   B.   Violating Terms Of Permit: It is unlawful for any permittee or other
person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
(1985 Code § 15-709)
6-5-10: HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
   A.   Authority To Determine: The city manager is hereby authorized to
determine and regulate by proper signs the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would create an especially
hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
   B.   Compliance With Official Signs: When official signs are erected at
hazardous or congested places, as authorized in subsection A of this section,
no person shall violate such signs. (1985 Code § 15-710)
6-5-11: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Specified Places: No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
except in emergencies or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control
device in any of the following places:
      1.   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the
street.
      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.
      3.   Within an intersection.
      4.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant except in a parking
space officially marked.
      5.   On a crosswalk.
      6.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      7.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length has been indicated by signs or markings.
      9.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      10.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance when properly
signposted.
      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      13.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      14.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   B.   Illegal Parking: No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his
control into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb.
(1985 Code § 15-711)
6-5-12: BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed. (1985 Code § 15-712)
6-5-13: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS:
   A.   General Restrictions:
      1.   If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
      2.   The city council may determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof. (1985 Code § 15-713)
   B.   Left Hand Side Of Street: The city manager may have signs erected upon
the left hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of
vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle
in violation of any such signs. (1985 Code § 15-714)
6-5-14: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
   A.   The city manager may have signs erected indicating no parking upon
either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation.
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. (1985
Code § 15-715)
6-5-15: INTERSECTIONS:
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be prohibited
fifteen feet (15') in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection. (1985 Code § 15-716)
6-5-16: EXTENDING TOO FAR INTO STREET:
   A.   Angle: No vehicle shall be parked at an angle on a street so that it or
its load will extend more than fifteen feet (15') from the curb or edge of the
roadway towards the center of the roadway.
   B.   Parallel: No vehicle shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of
the roadway so that it or its load shall extend more than nine feet (9') from
the curb or edge towards the center of the roadway. (1985 Code § 15-717)
6-5-17: NARROW STREETS:
   A.   The city manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty
feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the
width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
   B.   When such signs are so erected and in place, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. (1985 Code § 15-
718)
6-5-18: PARKING IN ALLEYS, BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than twenty feet (20') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position
as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1985 Code § 15-719)
6-5-19: ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; TRESPASS:
   A.   Trespass Prohibited: No person shall make an entry with any vehicle
upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or
occupant's consent, except where such private property is provided as public
parking and the general use of the property is not restricted by signs or
proper markings.
   B.   Burden Of Proof That Permission Exists: Where entry is made upon real
property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's
consent, except on unrestricted public parking, and is complained of by the
owner or legal occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the person
making the entry to show that permission for such entry was given. (1985 Code §
15-720)
6-5-20: DOUBLE PARKING:
   A.   Prohibition; Conditions: No driver shall double park or double stop a
vehicle under the following conditions:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of an intersection except alley
intersections, within ten feet (10') of an alley intersection.
      2.   Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the
street.
      3.   When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or
interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic.
      4.   When parking space adjacent to the curb is available.
      5.   When directed by a police officer to move on.
      6.   In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two feet
(2') of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb.
   B.   When Allowed:
      1.   A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as authorized
in this section. There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is
double parked or double stopped.
      2.   A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject,
however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out.
      3.   A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject,
however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out.
   C.   Time Limit For Double Parking: No such vehicle shall be double parked
longer than ten (10) minutes. (1985 Code § 15-722)
6-5-21: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
   A.   Displaying the vehicle for sale.
   B.   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things.
   C.   Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (1985 Code § 15-723)
6-5-22: NEGLIGENT PARKING:
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any vehicle
as follows:
   A.   In a careless or negligent manner.
   B.   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property.
   C.   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or
use of the streets. (1985 Code § 15-725)
6-5-23: HANDICAPPED PARKING, ENFORCEMENT ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking
space on private property accessible to the public and where the public is
invited, or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area
for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person, unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as under the provisions of 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 15-112, and such insignia is displayed as provided in
said section 15-112 or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (1985 Code § 15-
727; amd. 2007 Code)
6-5-24: LOADING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE:
      1.   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner
or his business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used during
normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight
and which bears a regular state commercial license tag.
      2.   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during
normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight,
and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear
of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued to the vehicle.
   FREIGHT LOADING ZONES: All curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade,
shipment or resale.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONES: All loading zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers, except bus stops,
taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles. (1985
Code § 15-801)
   B.   Curb Loading Zones:
      1.   Designation:
         a.   The city manager, subject to any directions given by the city
council by motion or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and
freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate
signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of
this section are applicable.
         b.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs
erected in accordance with this subsection.
         c.   If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the
signs shall not be placed until the applicant pays to the city an amount of
money estimated by the city council to be adequate to reimburse the city for
all costs of establishing and signing the same. (1985 Code § 15-801)
      2.   Zone Used For Designated Purpose: No curb loading zone authorized
and established as a passenger loading zone shall be used as a freight loading
zone, and no freight loading zone shall be used as a passenger loading zone,
except as may be specifically provided by law. (1985 Code § 15-803)
      3.   Passenger Curb Loading Zone: No person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or period of time
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the
hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective,
and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. (1985 Code § 15-
804)
      4.   Commercial Curb Loading Zone:
         a.   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial
curb loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes. Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the
licensing requirements and regulations provided by this title.
         b.   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone. (1985
Code § 15-805)
   C.   Public Carrier Stops And Stands:
      1.   Designation: The city manager may establish loading zones for common
carriers, including, but not limited to, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands
and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public
streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall
be designated by appropriate signs. (1985 Code § 15-806)
      2.   Use Of Stands Restricted: No person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab
stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and the
appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. (1985 Code § 15-
807)
      3.   Parking Of Buses And Taxicabs:
         a.   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
         b.   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street
at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage, except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided
herein, except in case of an emergency.
         c.   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or
passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with
the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches (18")
from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to
unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
         d.   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle
upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab
from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. (1985 Code § 15-808)
CHAPTER 6
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
SECTION:
6-6-1: Vehicles Injurious To Streets
6-6-2: Obstructive And Dangerous Vehicles
6-6-3: Equipment
6-6-4: Mufflers And Cutouts
6-6-5: Width, Height, Length And Load
6-6-6: Inspection Of Vehicles
6-6-1: VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS:
No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street, shall be driven or moved on any street. (1985 Code § 15-301)
6-6-2: OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so
loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. (1985 Code §
15-302)
6-6-3: EQUIPMENT:
Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city
which is not equipped as required by law, or to fail to use such equipment in
the manner required by law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by law. It is
further unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law
upon a street of the city. (1985 Code § 15-303)
6-6-4: MUFFLERS AND CUTOUTS:
No motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine shall be operated within
the city unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable and
sufficient muffler. No muffler cutout or exhaust or vacuum whistle shall be
used on any motor vehicle while operating within the city, except that exhaust
whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles. (1985 Code § 15-304;
amd. 2007 Code)
6-6-5: WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH AND LOAD:
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
height, length, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the chief of
police. (1985 Code § 15-305)
6-6-6: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Requirements: No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or
highway of the city any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers,
semitrailers, or pole trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma tax
commission and operated on the streets or highways of the city, or any
combination thereof, unless the vehicle is in good working order and adjustment
and is in such safe mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver or other
occupants.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any house
trailer, which requires a permit to be moved upon the highways of this state.
(1985 Code § 15-306; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Pedestrians Subject To Traffic Control Signals
6-7-2: Right Of Way At Crosswalks
6-7-3: Using Right Half Of Crosswalk
6-7-4: Crossing At Right Angles
6-7-5: Yielding By Pedestrians
6-7-6: Walking Along Roadways
6-7-7: Soliciting Rides, Business Or Donations
6-7-8: Drivers Exercise Due Care
6-7-9: Crossing Prohibited
6-7-1: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
   A.   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided for
in this title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those
rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this title. (1985 Code §
15-1001)
   B.   Every person operating a wheelchair or motorized wheelchair shall have
all the rights and all of the duties applicable to a pedestrian contained in
this chapter and in 47 Oklahoma Statutes chapter 11 except when those
provisions which by their nature can have no application. (2007 Code)
6-7-2: RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
   A.   Yield By Driver Of Vehicle:
      1.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way slowing down or stopping,
if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when:
         a.   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
         b.   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge
of the roadway as to be in danger.
      2.   The provisions of this subsection are not applicable under
conditions where pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this title.
   B.   Yield By Pedestrian: No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other
place of safety or walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close
that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   C.   Vehicle Approaching Stopped Vehicle: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at
a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked crosswalk, or at an intersection, to permit
a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from the rear shall not overtake to pass such stopped vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-
1002)
6-7-3: USING RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK:
Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk. (1985 Code § 15-1003)
6-7-4: CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
crosswalk. (1985 Code § 15-1004)
6-7-5: YIELDING BY PEDESTRIANS:
   A.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   B.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   C.   The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian
crossings are prohibited. (1985 Code § 15-1005)
6-7-6: WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   A.   Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   B.   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway, or
its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction,
and shall yield to approaching vehicles. (1985 Code § 15-1006)
6-7-7: SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS OR DONATIONS:
No person shall:
   A.   Stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, donations,
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   B.   Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and
engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or
the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a
street.
   C.   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle.
   D.   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill or any political literature, or any sample, souvenir or
gift.
   E.   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt
to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose.
(1985 Code § 15-1007)
6-7-8: DRIVERS EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, every driver shall exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person on
the roadway. (1985 Code § 15-1008)
6-7-9: CROSSING PROHIBITED:
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the center
thereof, except in a crosswalk. (1985 Code § 15-1009)
CHAPTER 8
MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR SCOOTERS AND BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Limitations On Use
6-8-2: Motorcycle Equipment; Headgear
6-8-3: Bicycles
6-8-1: LIMITATIONS ON USE:
   A.   Carrying Passengers: No driver of a two (2) wheel or three (3) wheel
motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person upon or within such
vehicle on any street or highway, except as provided in this section:
      1.   If any two (2) wheel or three (3) wheel motor vehicle with a wheel
diameter of twelve inches (12") or greater or any bicycle shall have either a
double seating device with double footrests or a sidecar attachment providing a
separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding
therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the
sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age
of sixteen (16) or older to carry a passenger; and
      2.   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is
permissible.
   B.   Riding On Sidewalks: No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden
upon any sidewalk of the city.
   C.   Holding Onto Moving Vehicles: No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or
motor scooter shall hold onto any moving vehicle for the purpose of being
propelled.
   D.   Riding On Permanent Seat: A person operating a motor scooter,
motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motor bicycle shall ride only on the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   E.   Passing Other Vehicles: No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter
shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same
direction. Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted from the provisions of
this subsection.
   F.   Age And Hour Restrictions: No person under the age of sixteen (16)
shall operate any motorcycle, motor bicycle, or motor scooter within the city
between and during the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of one day and four
o'clock (4:00) A.M. of the next day. (1985 Code § 15-518)
6-8-2: MOTORCYCLE EQUIPMENT; HEADGEAR:
   A.   Miscellaneous Equipment: In addition to all other requirements,
including, but not limited to, 47 Oklahoma Statutes sections 12-601 et seq.,
motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with the following: (1985 Code
§ 15-519; amd. 2007 Code)
      1.   Handlebars: Handlebars which do not exceed twelve inches (12") in
height, measured from the crown or point of attachment.
      2.   Mirrors: Two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not
less than three inches (3") in diameter, mounted one on each side of the
vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway
for a distance of two hundred feet (200') to the rear of his vehicle.
      3.   Brakes:
         a.   Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop
and hold the vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes.
One means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to
the front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the
rear wheels.
         b.   All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear
of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color
between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than one hundred
feet (100') to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon
application of the service brake.
      4.   Speedometer: A properly operating speedometer capable of registering
at least the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided.
      5.   Fenders: A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type
provided by the manufacturer.
      6.   Lights:
         a.   One lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at
least three hundred feet (300') in the direction in which the vehicle is
proceeding, and one taillamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall
emit a red light plainly visible from at least three hundred feet (300') to the
rear.
         b.   The lights required by this subsection shall be burning whenever
the vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half (1/2) hour after
sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to
insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles
on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') ahead.
      7.   Windshield Or Goggles: A windshield of sufficient quality, size and
thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the
windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and
design to protect him from foreign objects.
   B.   Headgear: No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall operate or
ride upon any vehicle covered under this section unless the person is equipped
with and wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured
for use by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of
lining, padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view
of the driver.
   C.   Muffler; Noise Control: No person may operate a motorcycle or motor
scooter with the exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased
greater than that of the original muffler equipment provided by the
manufacturer of the vehicle. (1985 Code § 15-519)
6-8-3: BICYCLES:
   A.   Application Of Bicycle Regulations: The provisions of this title shall
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public way; or
upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those
exceptions stated in this title. (1985 Code § 15-1101)
   B.   Application Of Traffic Laws To Bicycles: Every person riding a bicycle
upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state and the
traffic provisions of this code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to special regulations in this title, and except as to those provisions of
laws and ordinances which by their nature are inapplicable to such persons.
(1985 Code § 15-1102)
   C.   Obedience To Traffic Control Devices:
      1.   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
      2.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to the pedestrians. (1985 Code § 15-1103)
   D.   Riding On Bicycles:
      1.   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
      2.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped. (1985 Code § 15-1104)
   E.   Riding On Roadways And Bicycle Paths:
      1.   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near
to the right hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
      2.   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
(2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
      3.   If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway. (1985 Code §
15-1105)
   F.   Speed: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (1985 Code § 15-
1106)
   G.   Emerging From Alley Or Driveway: The operator of a bicycle emerging
from an alley or driveway shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area
extending across the alley or driveway, yield the right of way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area. Upon entering the
roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadways. (1985 Code § 15-1107)
   H.   Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one
hand on the handlebars. (1985 Code § 15-1108)
   I.   Parking: No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, or against the building, or at the curb in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1985 Code § 15-1109)
   J.   Riding On Sidewalks:
      1.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
      2.   The city council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have
erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same.
      3.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (1985 Code § 15-1110)
   K.   Lamps And Equipment:
      1.   Bicycles in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least one thousand
feet (1,000') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from six hundred feet (600') when directly in front of lawful
upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') to the rear may be used
in addition to the red reflector. This subsection shall not apply to a street
or alleyway with a speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour or less.
Provided, however, every bicycle shall be equipped with a red reflector which
shall be visible for six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front
of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. Provided, further, that
every bicycle in use at night shall be equipped with reflective material of
sufficient size and reflectivity to be visible from both sides for six hundred
feet (600') when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle.
      2.   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell
or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least
one hundred feet (100').
      3.   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any
siren or whistle.
      4.   Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake or brakes which will enable
the driver to stop the bicycle within twenty five feet (25') from a speed of
ten (10) miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. (1985 Code § 15-1111;
amd. 2007 Code)
   L.   Penalty: It is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not less than
one dollar ($1.00) nor more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for any person to
do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this section. A
conviction for the violation of any offense in this section shall not be
recorded on the driving record of the person.
   M.   Parental Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of any child or
the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 9
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
6-9-1: Purpose And Effect
6-9-2: Place And Duration Of Impoundment
6-9-3: Police Authority To Impound
6-9-4: Disabled Vehicles
6-9-5: Vehicles On Bridge
6-9-6: Arrest And Detention Of Driver
6-9-7: Vehicle Constituting Traffic Hazard
6-9-8: Illegal Trespass By Vehicle
6-9-9: Overtime Parking
6-9-10: Blocking Fire Exits Or Hydrants
6-9-11: Vehicles Parked In Intersection
6-9-12: Stolen Vehicles, Recovery By Police
6-9-13: Vehicles With Outstanding Traffic Citations
6-9-14: Duration; Release; Impound Fee
6-9-1: PURPOSE AND EFFECT:
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public
peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property; and shall be used
generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and
abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection
of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions
placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and
protecting recovered stolen vehicles. (1985 Code § 15-1301)
6-9-2: PLACE AND DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Place: Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this
chapter shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping
designated by the city and to no other place. (1985 Code § 15-1302)
   B.   Duration:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the
authority of this chapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for
its release is received from an officer of the traffic violations bureau 1  or
other proper police officer.
      2.   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned
upon the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment
costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle. (1985 Code §
15-1303)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-9-10 of this code.
6-9-3: POLICE AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND:
Members of the police department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an
authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required
in this chapter. (1985 Code § 15-1304)
6-9-4: DISABLED VEHICLES:
A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
   A.   If left unattended and improperly parked on a street or highway and
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
or
   B.   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to
such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(1985 Code § 15-1305)
6-9-5: VEHICLES ON BRIDGE:
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube
or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard,
may be impounded. (1985 Code § 15-1306)
6-9-6: ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER:
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest
and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leave
or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be
impounded. (1985 Code § 15-1307)
6-9-7: VEHICLE CONSTITUTING TRAFFIC HAZARD:
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic shall be impounded. (1985 Code § 15-1308)
6-9-8: ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE:
   A.   Filing Of Complaint: An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of
this title may be impounded when the required complaint has been properly made
and filed as provided in this section.
   B.   Signing And Verification Of Complaint:
      1.   If a violation of the provisions of this title occurs, the owner or
legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking
the vehicle on the owner's or legal occupant's property, or if the identity of
the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may be filed
against the registered owner of the vehicle.
      2.   The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the
complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the
vehicle is parked or standing.
   C.   Authority To Impound: Upon filing of the complaint by the property
owner or legal occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the
provisions of this title have been violated, the police department shall cause
the vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. (1985 Code
§ 15-1309)
6-9-9: OVERTIME PARKING:
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in excess
of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of this title, regarding more than forty eight (48)
hours, shall be impounded. (1985 Code § 15-1310)
6-9-10: BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS:
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded. (1985 Code § 15-1311)
6-9-11: VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTION:
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. (1985 Code § 15-
1312)
6-9-12: STOLEN VEHICLES, RECOVERY BY POLICE:
   A.   Inability To Identify Registered Owner: Whenever a stolen vehicle is
located by police and the registered owner cannot be found within a reasonable
time not exceeding one hour, or cannot be determined from the registration
papers or other identifying media in the vehicle or from records or information
available from reports of stolen cars, the vehicle may be removed to the
nearest authorized place of impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle
shall be notified of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as
possible by the police department.
   B.   Registered Owner Identified: If the registered owner is identified,
located and notified of the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be
given the right to make his own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle
within the period of one hour from the time he is actually notified of its
recovery, and if the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within
the time specified, the vehicle may be impounded. (1985 Code § 15-1313)
6-9-13: VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
Any vehicle for which two (2) or more citations have been issued, for violation
of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if
parked in violation of any provision of this title. (1985 Code § 15-1314)
6-9-14: DURATION; RELEASE; IMPOUND FEE:
   A.   Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted herein shall be
stored and held safely until a written order for its release, signed by an
authorized officer of the city, has been issued. For vehicles impounded under
the authority of Sections
6-9-4,
6-9-5,
6-9-6,
6-9-7,
6-9-8,
6-9-9,
6-9-10,
6-9-11,
6-9-12, or
6-9-13, such order of release shall be conditioned upon the payment of an
impound fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by the person to
whom the release is issued. The impound fee shall be independent of any fines
costs or fees which may be assessed from citations issued to any person for
violation of traffic laws or other ordinance violations involving the impounded
vehicle and in addition to any fees owed to the towing service for the
impoundment and storage. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to adopt
rules and regulations consistent with this Chapter to implement this section.
   B.   There is hereby created within the police fund, a special account into
which all impound fees shall be deposited from which expenditures may be used
for enforcement of traffic safety and administration of this Chapter. (Ord.
2025-1, 2-24-2025)
CHAPTER 10
GOLF CARTS AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Licensing
6-10-2: Regulations
6-10-1: LICENSING:
   A.   The operation of golf carts and all-terrain vehicles on local streets
of the City of Okemah and at Okemah Lake shall be allowed only by a licensed
driver and after a permit for use of a golf cart or all-terrain vehicle has
been obtained from the City Clerk. The permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per year. The term of the permit shall be from January 1 to December
31 of each year.
   B.   The issuance of the permit is subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The applying party must execute an indemnification agreement whereby
the applying party will be bound to indemnify the City of Okemah from any
damages suffered by the applying party and any third party for personal
injuries or injuries or damage to property resulting from a golf cart and/or
all-terrain vehicle.
      2.   Each vehicle requires a separate permit.
      3.   The applying party shall not operate a golf cart or all- terrain
vehicle on any property leased by third parties.
      4.   The vehicles shall be inspected for safety by a police officer.
      5.   Current and valid insurance must be submitted with permit
application.
      6.    The permit shall be displayed on the golf cart or all-terrain
vehicle in an open and conspicuous manner. (Ord. 2018-5, 10-11-2018; amd. Ord.
2019-8, 8-26-2019; amd. Ord. 2019-10, 10-17-2019)
6-10-2: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Golf carts and all-terrain vehicles may be operated, with a permit, on
the City streets of the City of Okemah and on the roadways at Okemah Lake
during daylight hours only. This prohibition shall not apply to police officers
of the City of Okemah while on duty during nighttime hours.
   B.   Golf carts and all-terrain vehicles may not be operated on State
highways within the City of Okemah except for the purpose of making a
perpendicular crossing of a State highway within the boundaries of the City of
Okemah.
   C.   The operation of golf carts and all-terrain vehicles within the
corporate limits of the City of Okemah is prohibited for persons under sixteen
(16) years of age.
   D.   Each golf cart or all-terrain vehicle and driver must have at least a
combined height of at least four feet (4'). Any vehicle and driver less than
four feet (4') must have a seven foot (7') safety pole with an orange topper so
they can be easily seen.
   E.   Golf carts and all-terrain vehicles must be operated by a driver with a
current valid driver license. (Ord. 2018-5, 10-11-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-8, 8-26-
2019; amd. Ord. 2019-10, 10-17-2019)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Trees And Shrubbery
7-1-2: Obstructing Sidewalks And Streets
7-1-3: Washing Vehicle On Street; Drainage From Filling Stations
7-1-4: Property Owner Allowing Hazardous Conditions
7-1-5: Cleaning And Maintaining Sidewalks And Gutters
7-1-6: Drainage Ditches
7-1-7: Penalty
7-1-1: TREES AND SHRUBBERY:
   A.   Trimming:
      1.   Required:
         a.   The owner of any premises abutting on any street in the city
shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parkway, between the sidewalk
and the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any
part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such
manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient
passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys.
         b.   When such premises are occupied by some person other than the
owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as
hereinafter required of the owner.
         c.    Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest
branches or foliage shall not be lower than fifteen feet (15') above the
roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than ten feet (10') above the sidewalk.
      2.   Failure To Trim: Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or
neglect to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in this section, after
receiving five (5) days' notice from the head of the department in charge of
streets to do so, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. Every day
that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees or
shrubbery, after the expiration of the five (5) days' notice, shall be a
separate offense. (1985 Code § 14-101)
   B.   Injuring: It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery
on a street or alley in the city; provided, that this shall not prohibit the
lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. (1985 Code §
14-102; amd. Ord. 2019-9, 9-23-2019)
7-1-2: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS AND STREETS:
It is unlawful:
   A.   Merchandise: For any person, firm or corporation to place upon or
permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the
city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and
leave same thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or
trade. (1985 Code § 14-103)
   B.   Interference With Pedestrian Or Vehicular Traffic: For any person, firm
or corporation to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as
to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the
streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with
lawful traffic and parking thereon. (1985 Code § 14-104)
   C.   Depositing Or Sweeping Trash: For any person, firm or corporation to
deposit, throw or sweep into or upon the streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks
of the city any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash,
crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind. (1985 Code § 14-105)
   D.   Playing: For any person to play on the sidewalks, alleys, or upon the
main traveled portion of the streets and alleys of the city, except as may be
authorized by ordinance. (1985 Code § 14-106)
   E.   Interfering With Drainage: For any person, firm or corporation to
obstruct any street, sidewalk, or alley, by placing any approach driveway or
other obstruction or substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the
natural flow of water, into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as
to back any water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or gutter. (1985 Code §
14-111)
7-1-3: WASHING VEHICLE ON STREET; DRAINAGE FROM FILLING STATIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in
any street of the city is hereby prohibited. (1985 Code § 14-107)
   B.   Mud Or Other Substances Draining Onto Street: No automobile or other
vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city where the water, dirt, mud
or other substances removed therefrom by or during the washing thereof shall
drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the city. (1985 Code § 14-108)
   C.   Drainage From Filling Stations, Other Businesses: It is unlawful for
any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any
agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or other fluid to
flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking, street, alley
or other public way. (1985 Code § 14-109)
7-1-4: PROPERTY OWNER ALLOWING HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk
area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become
a hazard to persons using the sidewalk, or sidewalk area. (1985 Code § 14-110)
7-1-5: CLEANING AND MAINTAINING SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   Occupant Responsibility: It is the duty of the occupant of any lot or
piece of ground abutting upon any street where there is a sidewalk or gutter on
the street to keep such sidewalk or gutter clean and to remove therefrom all
hay, straw, papers, stone, snow or ice, dirt, filth, weeds, refuse, rubbish or
hazards of any kind and to keep the sidewalk and gutter in good repair.
   B.   Owner Responsibility: If there is no such occupant of any such lot
other than the owner, it is the duty of the owner to do the same. (1985 Code §
14-112)
7-1-6: DRAINAGE DITCHES:
   A.   Obstructing Prohibited: Any person, firm or corporation, or their
agents or employees, are hereby prohibited from placing any obstruction in
drainage ditches or drains along the streets and alleys of the city, and are
prohibited from doing any act which will obstruct the flow of water along such
ditches or drains, including the driving of automobiles or other vehicles
across the drainage ditches or drains when such action will in any way obstruct
the flow of water along the same. (1985 Code § 14-201)
   B.   Placement Of Culverts: Any person placing a tin horn, culvert or other
drainage material in the drainage ditches shall place the same in the ditches
in such manner that it will not obstruct the flow of the water along such
ditches, and same shall be erected and constructed in such manner that the same
will meet with the approval and requirements of the city manager or his
designee. (1985 Code § 14-202; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Repair Of Defective Drainage Materials:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation, which now has a tin horn or culvert
or other drainage material, constructed in such manner so that it interferes
unduly with the flow of water along the drainage ditch, shall repair such tin
horn, culvert or other drainage material in such manner so that the same will
not interfere with the flow of such water along such streets and alleys.
      2.   The city manager or his designee is hereby directed to notify such
person of the defective tin horn, culvert or drainage material and request that
the same be repaired.
      3.   Upon failure of the person, firm or corporation to make such repairs
within four (4) weeks after being so notified, then such person, firm or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1985 Code § 14-203; amd.
2007 Code)
7-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter
by doing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to
be an offense or misdemeanor thereby, or who shall fail to do any act required
by any such provision, or who shall fail to do any act when such provision
declares such failure to be unlawful or to be an offense or misdemeanor, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 14-601)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS; STREET ALTERATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Excavation Permit And Inspection
7-2-2: Street Surface Alterations
7-2-3: Penalty
7-2-1: EXCAVATION PERMIT AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Permit, Application And Deposit:
      1.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to make an opening in a street or sidewalk without a permit as provided herein.
      2.   Application For Permit; Payment Of Inspection Fee:
         a.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to make an opening in a
public street or sidewalk of the city is hereby required to make written
application with the city clerk for permit to make such opening, and shall be
required to pay the fee as set by the city council to the city clerk as an
inspection fee. (1985 Code § 14-401)
         b.   The city clerk shall transmit the application to the city
manager, who shall issue a permit therefor, if he thinks the request reasonable
under the circumstances, and that the street or sidewalk will be properly and
promptly restored. If the city manager refuses a permit, the applicant may
appeal within thirty (30) days to the city council; and the city manager shall
issue the permit if the council approves the application. The council's
decision shall be final.
      3.   Deposit For Street Restoration: Before the permit is issued, either
the city manager or the council may require the applicant to deposit with the
city clerk an amount of money estimated by the city manager or council to be
adequate to compensate the city for restoring the street or sidewalk properly
if the applicant fails to do so promptly. If the applicant restores the street
or sidewalk promptly and properly, the amount deposited shall be returned to
him. (1985 Code § 14-401; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Restoration; Inspection And Fee:
      1.   Requirements:
         a.   After the person, firm or corporation has made such opening in
the public streets or sidewalks, the same shall be replaced in such manner as
may be prescribed by the city manager.
         b.   After such replacement has been made, the person, firm or
corporation making the opening in the street or sidewalk shall notify the
office of the city clerk that the same is ready for inspection. Within twenty
four (24) hours after such notification, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, the city manager or such person as is designated by the city manager
shall inspect such replacement and either approve or reject the same. If the
same is rejected as not having conformed to the rules and regulations
prescribed by the city, such rejection shall be communicated to the person
having made the replacement in conformity with the rules and regulations
prescribed by the city. (1985 Code § 14-402; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Inspection Fee: The inspection fee which is required shall go into
the general fund of the city. (1985 Code § 14-403)
7-2-2: STREET SURFACE ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Changing Grade Lines: No person, firm or corporation without a permit,
as required in section
7-2-1 of this chapter, shall change, alter or otherwise vary or disturb the
grade line as now existing upon any street, alleyway or park within the city.
(1985 Code § 14-501)
   B.   Plans And Approval Required: It is unlawful for any public utility to
alter, open, or cause to be opened, the surface of any street, alley or other
public passage or causeway without first having supplied the city clerk with
plans designating the proposed project and securing prior approval from the
city manager. (1985 Code § 14-502)
7-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter
by doing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to
be an offense or misdemeanor thereby, or who shall fail to do any act required
by any such provision, or who shall fail to do any act when such provision
declares such failure to be unlawful or to be an offense or misdemeanor, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 14-601)
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Library Established
7-3-3: Library Board
7-3-4: Librarian; Policies And Duties Of Board
7-3-5: Financial And Statistical Report
7-3-6: Appropriations
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
It is the desire and intent of the city council to provide free public library
service to the residents of the city, for the benefit of the city, the state,
and the nation. (1985 Code § 11-501)
7-3-2: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
The public library is hereby established. (1985 Code § 11-502)
7-3-3: LIBRARY BOARD:
   A.   Appointment; Compensation:
      1.   The public library shall be governed by a board of seven (7) members
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Appointments to
the library board shall be made on the basis of ability, understanding of the
total responsibilities and objectives of public libraries, and an active
interest in the attainment of these goals.
      2.   All library board members shall serve thereon without compensation.
(1985 Code § 11-503)
   B.   Terms And Vacancies:
      1.   Board members shall hold office as follows:
         a.   Initial appointments shall be two (2) members for one year terms;
         b.   Two (2) members for two (2) year terms; and
         c.   Three (3) members for three (3) year terms.
      2.   Subsequent appointments shall be for three (3) year terms except in
the case of an appointment to fill a vacancy, which appointment shall be for
the remainder of the unexpired term which is vacant. No person shall serve more
than two (2) full, successive terms. All terms of initial and succeeding
appointees shall expire on June 30 of the designated year. (1985 Code § 11-504;
amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Removal Of Board Members: Any board member may be removed by the
appointing authority for misconduct, failure to attend board meetings, or other
neglect of duty. (1985 Code § 11-505)
   D.   Officers; Regulations:
      1.   Immediately after the initial appointments and annually thereafter,
the library board members shall meet and organize by an election of one of
their number as chairman, and by the election of such other officers as they
deem necessary.
      2.   The board may adopt such laws, rules and regulations for its own
guidance and for the government of the library as may be expedient and not
inconsistent with this chapter and the laws of Oklahoma. (1985 Code § 11-506)
7-3-4: LIBRARIAN; POLICIES AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The library board shall appoint a librarian and shall recommend an annual
budget to the city council. It shall set the policies of the library, accept or
decline gifts, and administer the expenditure of funds received from
appropriations, gifts and grants. The library board may contract for and
receive funds available to it for library purposes from the United States, the
state of Oklahoma, and any agency or instrumentalities of these entities. (1985
Code § 11-507)
7-3-5: FINANCIAL AND STATISTICAL REPORT:
The library board shall submit an annual financial and statistical report to
the mayor and city council and to the Oklahoma department of libraries for each
fiscal year ending June 30. The report shall include an accounting for monies
received and expended and such other statistics about library use, collections
and staff which may be deemed necessary to account for their trust. (1985 Code
§ 11-508)
7-3-6: APPROPRIATIONS:
The mayor and city council shall annually appropriate to the library board from
funds available to the city such monies as are deemed necessary to operate and
maintain the public library for the education and cultural enrichment of the
citizens of the city. (1985 Code § 11-509)
CHAPTER 4
PARKS AND RECREATION
SECTION:
7-4-1: Park Board
7-4-2: City Parks, Acts Prohibited Or Restricted
7-4-2-1: Park Hours Of Operation
7-4-3: Swimming Pool, Prohibited Acts
7-4-1: PARK BOARD:
   A.   Appointment; Terms; Compensation:
      1.   Board Created; Appointment: A park board is hereby created which
shall consist of five (5) members, all adult citizens and residents of the
city, appointed by the city council.
      2.   Terms:
         a.   The terms of the members first appointed shall expire as follows:
One member at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. on the first Monday in July
2001;
Two (2) members at that time in 2002;
Two (2) members at that time in 2003.
         b.   The terms of their respective successors shall be three (3) years
and shall expire at that time every third year; provided, that members shall
serve until their respective successors have been appointed and qualified.
      3.   Vacancies And Removals:
         a.   The council shall fill all vacancies as they occur by proper
appointment.
         b.   Any member of the board may be removed by the council for cause.
      4.   Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 10-02-2000, 10-16-2000)
   B.   Meetings; Officers:
      1.   At the first meeting of such board following their appointment and
at the first meeting in July of each year, or as soon thereafter as practical,
the board shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary. The board
shall meet at least twice each year; and the mayor, the chairman or any three
(3) members thereof may call special meeting of the board. (1985 Code § 11-122)
   C.   Powers:
      1.   The park board may consider any matter relating to parks and
recreation programs of or pertaining to the city, and provide information and
make recommendations thereon to the city council and the city manager, as the
board deems desirable.
      2.   The board shall be advisory only and the city council shall not be
obligated to approve recommendations of the board.
      3.   Among the matters which the park board shall consider are the
following:
         a.   Acquisition;
         b.   Disposal;
         c.   Enlargement;
         d.   Improvement;
         e.   Maintenance;
         f.   Operation; and
         g.   Financing
of municipal parks and municipally sponsored recreational programs, or any
other matter delegated to said board by the city council. (Ord. 10-02-2000, 10-
16-2000)
7-4-2: CITY PARKS, ACTS PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED:
   A.   Signs And Bills: No person, firm or corporation shall erect any sign or
post or maintain any bills, posters or notices upon any building, tree, fence,
or other object in the city parks; provided, that this subsection shall not
prohibit any person, firm or corporation from painting or displaying,
unobtrusively, his or its name upon any bench, seat or other permanent fixture
furnished by him or it for the convenience of the public. (1985 Code § 11-101)
   B.   Dumping Refuse: No person, firm or corporation shall place or dump any
refuse or trash in the city parks or on any of the streets leading thereto.
(1985 Code § 11-102)
   C.   Burning Restricted; Permit For Bonfires:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall build any fire in the city
parks unless said fire is contained in a grill or other similar apparatus
designed for the purpose of cooking food.
      2.   Campfires may be built at campsites at Okemah Lake, subject to the
rules and regulations of the Okemah utilities authority.
      3.   The park board may, in its discretion, issue permits for the
construction and ignition of a bonfire at Noble Park for special occasions;
provided, that said bonfire be attended by at least two (2) members of the
Okemah fire department present with fire equipment to control and extinguish
said fire. (Ord. 10-02-2000, 10-16-2000)
   D.   Offensive Conduct: No person shall conduct himself in any way, while
within the parks of the city, in such a way as to offend or cause embarrassment
to any other person in use of the parks, and all persons shall have due regard
for the rights of others in their peaceable use thereof. (1985 Code § 11-104)
7-4-2-1: PARK HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   The hours of operation for any park within the limits of the city, with
the exception of the park at Okemah Lake, shall be from sunrise to sunset on
all days. The time of sunrise and sunset, for the purpose of this section, is
that time for each day as determined by the national oceanic and atmospheric
administration (NOAA). It is unlawful and an offense for any person to be
present at, or enter upon, any park within the limits of the city outside its
hours of operation without a permit, as detailed herein.
   B.   The city manager or his designee may, in his discretion, issue permits
for organized parties and groups after operating hours at Noble Park upon
payment of a fee to be set by resolution.
   C.   The hours of operation for the park at Okemah Lake may be set by
resolution of the Okemah utilities authority. (Ord. 2013-03, 11-14-2013)
7-4-3: SWIMMING POOL, PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to swim, wade or throw any objects
in the swimming pool belonging to the city, when the same is not regularly open
for business, authorized and prescribed by the city council or by lessee
thereof. (1985 Code § 11-106)
CHAPTER 5
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Sale Of Lots
7-5-2: Burials
7-5-3: Rules And Regulations
7-5-4: Prohibited Or Restricted Activities
7-5-5: Penalty
7-5-1: SALE OF LOTS:
All the lots in the cemeteries shall be sold by the city clerk, and deeds
thereto issued by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. (1985 Code § 11-
201)
7-5-2: BURIALS:
   A.   Deed Required; Supervision: No body shall be buried in any cemetery
until some authorized person has first procured a deed to the lot or burial
place necessary therefor, and no body shall be buried therein until the
cemetery sexton shall have been notified thereof, and all burials shall be
under the direction of the cemetery sexton.
   B.   Interment Of Caskets: All caskets must be interred inside an enclosed
concrete box or equivalent container. (1985 Code § 11-202)
   C.   Digging Of Graves: No grave shall be dug in the city cemeteries except
under the direction and supervision of the cemetery sexton. (1985 Code § 11-
203)
7-5-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council by motion or resolution is authorized to make such rules and
regulations, not in conflict with the provisions hereof, as shall be deemed
necessary for the control and improvement of the city cemeteries, and all such
rules and regulations shall govern all cemetery matters. (1985 Code § 11-206;
amd. 2007 Code)
7-5-4: PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Markers And Improvements: Erect, or labor on the erection or
installation of any tombstone, monument, vault, retaining wall, walk or other
marker or improvement upon any burial lot or space in the cemeteries until
plans therefor have been submitted to and approved by the cemetery sexton. No
upright markers shall be erected at the foot of the grave. (1985 Code § 11-204;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Trees And Shrubs: Plant or set out any tree or shrub or permit any tree
or shrub to grow upon any lot in the city cemeteries in violation of or
contrary to the general plan of beautification of the city cemeteries adopted
by the city council, and when any tree or shrub has heretofore been planted,
and thereafter by reason of its growth becomes in violation of the plans and
rules, the same shall be removed. (1985 Code § 11-205)
   C.   Trash And Refuse: Place or deposit any trash or refuse in any of the
streets or walks or elsewhere in the city cemeteries. (1985 Code § 11-207)
   D.   Fires: Build any fire in the city cemeteries, except as authorized by
the sexton; and no such fire shall be left unattended so long as it shall
remain burning. (1985 Code § 11-208)
   E.   Hours: Be within the city cemeteries during the night, after dark or
before daylight, except upon necessary business connected with the cemeteries
or the burial of some person therein. (1985 Code § 11-209)
7-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-210)
CHAPTER 6
LAKE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Purpose And Scope
7-6-2: Okemah Lake Regulations
7-6-3: Rules And Regulations Set By Resolution
7-6-4: Traffic Regulations, Speed Limit
7-6-5: Peace And Quiet
7-6-6: Destruction Of Buildings Or Property
7-6-7: Trash And Rubbish
7-6-8: Camping
7-6-9: Penalty
7-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of rules and regulations
to control activity on the city lake. Except as hereinafter modified or
amended, all ordinances of the city shall apply to the premises of the city
lake. (1985 Code § 11-401)
7-6-2: OKEMAH LAKE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Rules And Regulations:
      1.   The Okemah utilities authority, a public trust, is hereby given full
authority to make rules and regulations concerning the use, care and management
of the Okemah Lake, including the authority to promulgate rules and regulations
regarding the use thereof for all recreation purposes, with specific authority
to issue licenses and permits for hunting, fishing, skiing, camping and
picnicking, charging a reasonable fee therefor.
      2.   The rules and regulations developed by the authority are adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and at least one copy shall be on file with
the city clerk. (1985 Code § 11-107)
   B.   Recreation, Campsites And Fishing Restrictions:
      1.   The Okemah utilities authority is hereby granted authority to
designate certain areas of the lake wherein the various forms of recreation may
be permitted or denied, and may designate certain areas about the lake for use
of the public as campsites and recreation areas, and may prohibit the use of
other areas, as it may deem necessary or beneficial to the proper use of the
lake and to promote the maximum use and enjoyment thereof, as well as to
protect the lake from harmful use thereof.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to catch or take from Okemah Lake any
large mouth bass which measures between twelve (12) and fifteen inches (15") in
length. (1985 Code § 11-108)
   C.   Leasing Of Cabin Sites: The Okemah utilities authority is hereby
granted the right to make regulations concerning the leasing of cabin sites,
the term thereof and the consideration to be charged therefor, with the general
purpose of promoting the development of the lake and enjoyment thereof. (1985
Code § 11-109)
7-6-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS SET BY RESOLUTION:
Specific rules, regulations, rates and charges for Lake Okemah shall be as set
by resolution, which resolution shall be and remain on file in the office of
the city clerk for public inspection. (2007 Code)
7-6-4: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS, SPEED LIMIT:
All of the traffic ordinances of the city shall apply to the premises of the
city lake, except that the speed limit on the premises shall be fifteen (15)
miles per hour. (1985 Code § 11-402)
7-6-5: PEACE AND QUIET:
To ensure peace and adequate rest, no person shall so conduct himself that he,
in a disorderly manner, disturbs others between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., daily. Without limiting the
foregoing, no person shall shout, sing, play radios, phonographs, television,
instruments, or other such electronic or mechanical instruments in such manner
that same emits sound beyond the immediate area between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., daily. (1985 Code § 11-403;
amd. 2007 Code)
7-6-6: DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS OR PROPERTY:
No person shall destroy, injure, or deface any structure, building,
outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or personal, public or private,
belonging to another. (1985 Code § 11-404; amd. 2007 Code)
7-6-7: TRASH AND RUBBISH:
No person shall leave, deposit, drop, or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes,
wastepaper, cans, or other rubbish, except in receptacles designated for that
purpose; or, in the event no receptacles are available, all such items shall be
packed out of the area. (1985 Code § 11-405)
7-6-8: CAMPING:
   A.   Daily Fees: Daily fees for campsites with power outlets and water, and
other campsites as well, shall be as set by the Okemah utility authority. The
daily fee covers use of facilities from five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on the day of
payment until five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on the following day.
   B.   Cleanliness Of Camp Space: Each camper or park user shall be
responsible for keeping the designated space clean. (1985 Code § 11-406; amd.
2007 Code)
7-6-9: PENALTY:
   A.   The City Manager in his discretion shall have the authority to
temporarily or permanently order any person, firm or corporation off of the
City Lake and its surrounding premises for violations of the Okemah Lake Rules
and Regulations promulgated by the Okemah Utilities Authority and/or the
prohibited acts in the foregoing sections.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who refuses to leave the City Lake
after being ordered to do so by the City Manager shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. The Okemah Police Department has the authorization and duty
to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all
violators of this section pursuant to section
5-1-2 of this Code. (Ord. 2022-2, 6-27-2022)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Okemah Utilities Authority
8-1-2: Rules And Regulations
8-1-3: Penalty
8-1-4: Utilization Of City Water, Sewer And Trash Services
8-1-5: Utility Collection Fees
8-1-1: OKEMAH UTILITIES AUTHORITY:
The city has leased its water and sanitary sewer systems to the Okemah
utilities authority, a public trust. The trust has power to set water and sewer
rates and otherwise to regulate the water and sewer systems. The motions and
resolutions adopted by the trust replace ordinances which the city has relating
to these matters. For the motions and resolutions passed by the public trust,
refer to the minutes of the Okemah utilities authority. For ordinances adopted
by the city related to water and sewer systems, see the provisions of this
title. A copy of the trust indenture for the Okemah utilities authority shall
be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk. (1985 Code § 17-101;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Okemah utilities authority is hereby granted the right and authority to
make and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the use by the
public of the sewer and water facilities and to provide reasonable charges for
all services rendered. It is further granted all necessary powers to ensure
that the utilities are so utilized as to provide for proper compliance with the
terms of the bond indenture heretofore entered into and authorized by the
voters of the city by which the facilities were constructed. (1985 Code § 17-
102)
8-1-3: PENALTY:
Any violation by any person, firm or corporation of any of the reasonable rules
and regulations promulgated by the Okemah utilities authority shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 17-103)
8-1-4: UTILIZATION OF CITY WATER, SEWER AND TRASH SERVICES:
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation and health of the City of
Okemah, all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated in the City of Okemah, shall
connect and utilize the City of Okemah's water, sewer and trash (refuse)
utility services. It shall be the duty of every person occupying or having
control of the occupancy of any premises within the City of Okemah to notify
the City of Okemah's utilities authority at the beginning of such occupancy and
to request, accept and use the City's water, sewer and trash services. The
failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to make such
request shall not prevent or in any way impair or impede the City of Okemah's
utilities authority from adding the address of such premises to the records and
providing such service and otherwise enforcing, the regulations approved by the
City Council, and causing the fees or charges to be paid.
Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with any regulation,
requirement or provision of this section or any other regulation of the City
Manager duly promulgated hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor with
a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 2021-9, 6-28-
2021)
8-1-5: UTILITY COLLECTION FEES:
A collection fee of thirty-five percent (35%) of utility penalties, fees in
cases in which the Consumer has failed to satisfy a monetary obligation imposed
by the Authority shall be added to any such case which is referred to a
collection agency for collection. (Ord. 2024-3, 4-8-2024)
CHAPTER 2
OKEMAH WATER DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: District Established
8-2-3: City Powers And Jurisdiction
8-2-4: Laws Applicable
8-2-5: Inspectors
8-2-6: Unlawful Discharges; Privies And Cesspools
8-2-7: Prohibited Discharges, Activities; Location Of Waste Producers
8-2-8: Location Of Dwellings
8-2-9: Reporting Sickness To Health Authorities
8-2-10: Burial Of Dead Animals Or Dead Bodies
8-2-11: Oil And Gas Activities
8-2-12: Removing Water From Reservoir
8-2-13: Penalty
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section:
HIGH WATER LINE: The margin of Okemah Lake if it is referred to, when the
surface thereof is at an elevation of 794.5 feet above sea level.
LINEAR DISTANCE: The "linear distance" of a structure or object from the
reservoir or from a watercourse means the shortest horizontal distance from the
nearest point of the structure or object to the high water line of the
reservoir, lake, or watercourse.
RESERVOIR: Okemah Lake, together with the sedimentation basin and that portion
of the Buckeye Creek, or any tributaries, directly emptying into the Okemah
Lake, and Airport Lake or Sportsman's Lake.
WATERCOURSE: Means and includes every ditch, pond, spring, stream, water
bearing sand, or other channel or course of every kind, the waters of which,
when running, either continuously or occasionally, eventually flow or may flow
into Okemah Lake. (1985 Code § 11-305)
8-2-2: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
Pursuant to an act of the legislature of the state authorizing any city
securing its water supply from a stream or reservoir to establish a water
district for the protection thereof, there is hereby created, established and
designated a water district for the sanitary protection of the water supply of
the city. Said water district shall be known as the "Okemah water district",
and shall embrace all of the lands in the county of Okfuskee, within the
descriptions which are attached to and made a part of the ordinance
establishing the district, and are on file in the city clerk's office. Airport
Lake or Sportsman's Lake, at the east side of the city, are declared to be
within the water district. (1985 Code § 11-301)
8-2-3: CITY POWERS AND JURISDICTION:
   A.   Generally: Under and by virtue of the laws of the state, the police
power of the city is hereby extended over all lands embraced within the water
district as described in section
8-2-2 of this chapter. The jurisdiction of the various city officials shall
extend to and apply over the entire water district for the protection of the
health of the inhabitants of the city and the purity of the water supply of the
city. (1985 Code § 11-302)
   B.   Reservoir: Insofar as the city is concerned, the operation, maintenance
and control of the reservoir and all city property adjoining or adjacent
thereto shall remain and be under the jurisdiction of the Okemah utilities
authority. Any other city department desiring to make any use whatsoever of any
space or ground in the area shall first present its plan of construction and
operation to the Okemah utilities authority and obtain its approval thereof.
(1985 Code § 11-313)
8-2-4: LAWS APPLICABLE:
All rules and regulations of the state, county, and city, or the Okemah
utilities authority or officials thereof, now in force, are hereby extended to,
and shall apply and have full force and effect with, the water district. All
such rules and regulations that may lawfully be made in the future, either by
the state, county or city, or Okemah utilities authority, shall extend to, and
have the same effect with, the water district as within the city limits. (1985
Code § 11-303)
8-2-5: INSPECTORS:
The mayor, with the concurrence of the chairman of the Okemah utilities
authority, shall have the power to appoint such inspectors as may be necessary,
who shall be empowered with police authority to oversee and inspect the water
district and enforce the rules, regulations and laws applicable thereto. (1985
Code § 11-304)
8-2-6: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES; PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS:
No human excrement shall be deposited or discharged into Okemah Lake or into
any "watercourse" as defined in section
8-2-1 of this chapter; and no cesspool, privy, or other receptacle for the
deposit of human excrement shall be located, constructed or maintained within
the water district, unless such cesspool, privy or other receptacle be
constructed under and with the approval of the Okemah utilities authority and
the state department of health, and constructed so that no portion of its
contents can escape or be washed into such waters, and shall not be located
closer than six hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water mark of the
reservoir. (1985 Code § 11-306)
8-2-7: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES, ACTIVITIES; LOCATION OF WASTE PRODUCERS:
   A.   Prohibited Substances:
      1.   No human excrement or composite containing human excrement or
contents of any privy, cesspool, sewer, or other receptacle for the reception
of storage of human excrement, shall be deposited or discharged within the
water district, or upon or into the ground at a place from which the excrement
or composite thereof may flow or be washed or carried into any watercourse.
      2.   No house slops, sink wastes, water which has been used for washing
or cooking, or any other polluted water shall be discharged into the reservoir
described herein, or into any watercourse, in the water district within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water line of the reservoir.
      3.   No garbage, manure, or putrescible matter whatsoever shall be put
into the reservoir, or into any watercourse emptying into the reservoir, nor
shall any garbage, manure or putrescible matter whatsoever be put upon the
ground in the water district within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the high
water line of the reservoir, or any "watercourse" therein, as defined in
section
8-2-1 of this chapter.
      4.   No stable, pigsty, henhouse, barnyard, hogyard, hitching or standing
place for horses, cattle, or animals or other place where animal manure is
deposited or accumulated shall be located, constructed or maintained in the
water district, any part of which is within six hundred sixty feet (660') of
the high water line of the reservoir or the high water line of any watercourse
emptying into the reservoir.
      5.   No refuse, industrial waste, or other waste products or polluting
liquids, or other substance of a nature poisonous or injurious, either to human
beings or animals, or of such nature as would impart an objectionable taste or
odor to any water into which it might be discharged, shall be discharged
directly into, or any place from which it may flow or be washed or carried
into, the reservoir mentioned in this chapter, or into any watercourse emptying
into the reservoir.
   B.   Certain Activities, Sewers And Waste Producers Restricted:
      1.   No system of sewers or other works for the collection, conveyance,
disposal or purification of domestic or manufacturing sewage wastes, or
drainage or other putrescible matters whatsoever shall, except in accordance
with the plans first approved in writing by the state health department and the
Okemah utilities authority, be constructed, placed or maintained at any place
within the city water district. No private or separate sewers shall be
constructed or maintained in the water district having an outlet upon or in the
ground within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water line of the
reservoir mentioned in this chapter, or of the high water line of any
watercourse emptying into the reservoir.
      2.   No public or private hospital, or other place intended for the
reception or treatment of persons afflicted with contagious or infectious
disease, shall, until the location and construction thereof have been approved
in writing by the state health department and the Okemah utilities authority,
be located or constructed at any place within the water district.
      3.   No manufacturing establishment at which more than five (5) persons
are employed, and no slaughterhouse or rendering establishment shall be located
within the water district, unless the construction and manner of operation
thereof is first approved in writing by the state board of health and the
Okemah utilities authority.
      4.   No gasoline drips, pumps, or waste oil drips, or drain pipe drips
shall be allowed to be placed or used within the water district. (1985 Code §
11-307)
8-2-8: LOCATION OF DWELLINGS:
No human habitation, cottage, tent, campsite, or residence of any kind, either
temporary or permanent, shall be hereafter built, set up, or constructed upon
any lands within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the high water line of the
reservoir, or any watercourse emptying into the reservoir, unless the person,
firm or corporation desiring to effect such construction shall first file with
the Okemah utilities authority and the state health department application in
writing, together with plans and specifications for the proposed construction.
No person may proceed with such construction except in accordance with the
plans first approved in writing by the state health department and the Okemah
utilities authority. The city or the Okemah utilities authority may construct
and maintain such structures within such prohibited territory as may be
necessary in the furtherance of the protection of the reservoir from
contamination and pollution or for the development of any of the facilities
thereof. (1985 Code § 11-308)
8-2-9: REPORTING SICKNESS TO HEALTH AUTHORITIES:
In the event a case of sickness of any kind is encountered by an inspector, or
any city official or employee or by any person residing on or adjacent to the
water district, within the district, it shall be immediately reported to the
city or county health department who shall promptly take such action as may be
required. (1985 Code § 11-309)
8-2-10: BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS OR DEAD BODIES:
No owner or occupant of land or premises within the water district shall permit
the carcass, or any part of any dead animal, to remain on land under his
control within such district. From and after the effective date hereof, no more
burials or interments shall be made within the boundaries of the district and
no more burials or interments of human bodies shall be made within the
boundaries of the district. (1985 Code § 11-310)
8-2-11: OIL AND GAS ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Water Pollution: No person, association, firm or corporation shall
permit or cause any waste matter from oil or oil wells, or any salt water or
other substance of any nature whatsoever that would pollute the water of the
reservoir to flow across, over or under any land in the water district in such
a manner that the waste matter, salt water or other substance will flow
directly or ultimately into the reservoir or into any watercourse or drain that
empties into the reservoir. (1985 Code § 11-311)
   B.   Well Drilling Application To State; Hearing; Regulations: No well for
the testing or production of oil or gas shall be drilled within the area of the
water district until an application therefor shall first be made to the
corporation commission of the state of Oklahoma, and due notice of the hearing
thereof be given the city, the state planning and resources board, and the
state department of environmental quality; and after a hearing thereon and
proper rules and regulations for the drilling and operation of the well or
wells be promulgated by proper authorities for the protection of the public
health and safety of the waters and streams of the state and the purity of the
waters of the reservoir. After the allowance thereof, such well or wells, in
addition to such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the corporation
commission, shall be drilled, operated and maintained in the following manner:
(1985 Code § 11-311; amd. 2007 Code)
      1.   Surface pipe shall be set at least fifty feet (50') below the lowest
fresh water sand likely to be encountered in the area, in order to adequately
protect all fresh water strata, and such surface casing shall be cemented from
top to bottom.
      2.   If a cellar is to be used, it shall be cemented to at least one foot
(1') above the ground.
      3.   The bottoms and walls of all slush pits used in drilling or
operating shall be treated with mud or be constructed with some impermeable
substance.
      4.   Upon the completion of each well, the slush pits shall be filled
level with the surface of the ground as soon as practical operation will
permit, and debris, oil, and basic sediment above the well shall be cleaned up
and removed from the water district.
      5.   All tank batteries and well locations shall be protected with
earthen walls or dams constructed so as to prevent the escape of oil, debris,
or other substance, into any watercourse or drain leading into the reservoir.
      6.   No salt water in any amount shall be stored behind any earthen dam
or in any surface pond; and in the event any well produces salt water in any
amount, the well shall be immediately shut down and cease to be operated until
such time as adequate means are had for the disposal of such salt water, the
facilities thereof to be subject to the approval of the Okemah utilities
authority.
      7.   All wells must be equipped during the full period of drilling
operations and during the installing or removing of tubing with adequate
blowout preventers.
      8.   During the period of cleaning a well, a metal slush box must be
provided sufficiently large to hold oils, sands, or basic sediment, or other
substances, removed from the well or the casing, and all of such removed
material shall be deposited outside the water district and drainage area.
      9.   All producing wells shall be equipped with tubing properly installed
and all production shall be through such tubing.
      10.   All pipe lines conveying oil, gasoline, gas, salt water, fresh
water and mud, or other substances shall be installed and operated only after
the plans and specifications therefor have been submitted to and approved by
the Okemah utilities authority. (1985 Code § 11-311)
8-2-12: REMOVING WATER FROM RESERVOIR:
It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to take or
remove any water from the reservoir without having first secured a legal permit
from the city clerk. (1985 Code § 11-312)
8-2-13: PENALTY:
   A.   Violations: Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
any of the rules and regulations now in force, or that may hereafter be
promulgated by the state department of environmental quality, the state
commissioner of health, the county or city department of health, in accordance
with law, shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable in the manner and to
the extent as provided in state law. (1985 Code § 11-314; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation, either as principal
or agent, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any
person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1985 Code § 11-314)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-3-1: Objectives; Application Of Chapter
8-3-2: Abbreviations
8-3-3: Definitions
8-3-4: New Sewers And Connections
8-3-5: Abandoning Sewers And Connections
8-3-6: Prohibited Discharges
8-3-7: Grease Traps, Interceptors And Separators
8-3-8: Pretreatment Required, Actions By City
8-3-9: Monitoring Or Inspection
8-3-10: Corrective Actions Required For Noncompliance
8-3-11: Permits And Other Forms
8-3-12: Fees And Charges
8-3-13: Penalties
8-3-1: OBJECTIVES; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
   A.   Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operations; and
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works being
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works; and
      3.   To ensure the quality of sludge, thereby allowing its use and
disposal in compliance with state and federal laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject; and
      4.   To provide control over hauled sludge by means of a manifest
describing owner, origination point(s), transporting party's name and Oklahoma
permit number, date and time of possession of sludge; and
      5.   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by the wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public; and
      6.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works; and
      7.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
      8.   To enable the Okemah utilities authority to comply with its national
pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other state and federal laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject.
   B.   Application Of Chapter: This chapter shall apply to all users of the
publicly owned treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes disposal requirements; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-2: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
Ag    Silver
As    Arsenic
BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand (5 day test)
Cd    Cadmium
CFR   Code of federal regulations
Cn    Cyanide
COD   Chemical oxygen demand
Cr    Chromium
Cu    Copper
DEQ   Oklahoma department of environmental quality
DO    Dissolved oxygen
EPA   U.S. environmental protection agency
gpd   Gallons per day
Hg    Mercury
mg/l  Milligrams per liter
NH3   Ammonia
Ni    Nickel
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
Pb    Lead
Phe   Phenol
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC   Standard industrial classification
SWDA  Solid waste disposal act, 42 USC section 6910 et seq.
TKN   Total Kjeldahl nitrogen
TSS   Total suspended solids
ug/l  Micrograms per liter
USC   United States Code
Zn    Zinc
 
(Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device or other acceptable means to prevent
public sewer from flowing backwards into a building.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. environmental protection
agency or any other duly authorized official of said agency.
GREASE TRAP: A pretreatment device designed to remove solids and food grade
grease and oils from the commercial food establishments waste stream.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operation of the sludge processes, use or disposal.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL: Any apartment, duplex, trailer court, or other housing
unit where more than one single-family housing unit is connected to the same
water meter and no units are used for business purposes.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
OKEMAH UTILITIES AUTHORITY: A public trust of the city of Okemah established to
own and operate the water and sewer systems.
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, may be a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions measured in grams per liter of solution and expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED CONNECTION: Any connection which allows storm water or ground water
to enter into the sanitary sewer system; including, but not limited to, area
drains, driveway drains, window well drains, basement drains, sump pumps, roof
drains, stairwell drains, and similar connections.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances; including, but not limited to,
those prohibited in section
8-3-6 of this chapter.
PUBLIC SEWER OR SEWER MAIN: A sewer line that belongs to the city of Okemah,
serves more than one residence or business and is constructed on city property
or easement.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A "treatment works" as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
RESIDENTIAL/NONRESIDENTIAL:
Nonresidential: A structure not used primarily as a residence (e.g., business,
office, school, industry, restaurant, club, warehouse, etc.).
Residential: A structure used as a residence (where someone actually lives).
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (e.g., household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
   A.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
   B.   A user that:
      1.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater); or
      2.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%)
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
      3.   Is designated as such by the Okemah utilities authority on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   C.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Okemah
utilities authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a "significant
industrial user".
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section
8-3-6 of this chapter.
STORM WATER: Any rain or snow runoff that comes into contact with an industrial
facility or is contaminated by overburden, raw material, products, or wastes,
whether the water is intentionally channeled or collected. "Storm water" also
may be defined as surface runoff, ground water, water from underground springs,
street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration
(other than infiltration contaminated by seepage from sanitary sewers or by
other discharges), and snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of
the POTW, holding the proper license with the Oklahoma department of
environmental quality, and charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this chapter or his duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or
is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOXIC: A poison; poisonous substance.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and/or water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which
is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
(Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-4: NEW SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
Any new sewer connections or any reconnection to a city sewer main line shall
comply with the following conditions and requirements. Before any person shall
connect to the Okemah sewer system, they shall complete an "application to
connect" and obtain a permit from the Okemah utilities authority. All
installations must be preapproved by the Okemah utilities authority inspector
or his designee as to design before installation, and the installation must be
approved before connection. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
   A.   Compliance With Codes And Regulations:
      1.   The connection of the building sewer into the city sewer and all
sewer construction and fixtures shall be accomplished by a licensed Oklahoma
plumbing contractor in accordance with all city codes or regulations, state
codes or regulations and the international plumbing code.
      2.   All new sanitary sewage works shall be designed and constructed by a
licensed Oklahoma plumbing contractor in accordance with all city codes or
regulations, state codes or regulations and the international plumbing code.
      3.   The actual sewer connection, building lateral installations,
cleanouts, etc., shall be constructed by a licensed Oklahoma plumbing
contractor in accordance with all city codes or regulations, state codes or
regulations and the international plumbing code. Installation must be approved
by the Okemah utilities authority inspector or his designee as to design and
installation.
   B.   Backflow Prevention Devices, Cleanouts:
      1.   All new sanitary sewage connections shall include installation of an
approved backflow prevention device and installation of cleanouts providing
access to the private sewer line in both directions.
      2.   Connection to existing sewer lines shall include installation of an
approved backflow prevention device and installation of cleanouts providing
access to the private sewer line in both directions.
   C.   Connection Of Building Sewer To City Sewer: When a city sewer line
becomes available (within 150 feet), the building sewer shall be connected to
the city sewer within one hundred eighty (180) days.
   D.   Sewer Pipe Strength: Sewer pipe placed in a city easement (alley or
street) must be equivalent in strength or stronger than schedule 40 PVC. (Ord.
2006-03-01, 3-13-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
8-3-5: ABANDONING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
Sewer line discontinuation or abandonment within the city shall meet the
following rules and requirements:
   A.   Notify City Of Plan For Sealing:
      1.   When sewer service is discontinued or abandoned within the city,
regardless of the reason, the owner of the property shall immediately notify
the proper officials concerning the plan for sealing the existing connection.
Sealing is required to prevent inflow, damage, harm or other adverse effects to
the city sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
      2.   Sealing of the sewer service line shall be accomplished by a
licensed Oklahoma plumbing contractor in accordance with all city codes or
regulations, state codes or regulations and the international plumbing code.
Installation, replacement or repair must be approved by the Okemah utilities
authority inspector or his designee as to design and installation. (Ord. 2006-
03-01, 3-13-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Inspection: The plan referred to in subsection A of this section can be
temporary or permanent but must define the time and method of sealing this
connection and provide the Okemah utilities authority with ample notification
for inspection of the abandonment to assure that a proper seal is accomplished.
   C.   Temporary Abandonment: If the abandonment is to be temporary, the owner
shall provide a permanent method of identifying and locating the abandoned
service point to the satisfaction of the Okemah utilities authority.
   D.   Permanent Abandonment: If the abandonment is permanent, the owner must
accomplish the seal at the point of connection with the city sewer main in such
a manner as to assure that the city sewer main is not adversely affected.
Installation, replacement or repair must be approved by the Okemah utilities
authority inspector or his designee as to design and installation. (Ord. 2006-
03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-6: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
The city hereby lists the following discharges as prohibited from being
introduced into the city sewer system as stated below. All discharges are
subject to the restrictions and requirements as set forth in this section.
   A.   General Prohibitions: No user shall cause to be introduced into the
POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through, interference,
upset, or affects the safety of workers. These general prohibitions apply to
all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any of the following pollutants, substances or
wastewater:
      1.   Nondomestic wastewater to the city sanitary sewers, except as
authorized by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage or any water, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, water from drains, yard fountains, ponds, septic tanks or lawn
sprays into any sanitary sewer, unless specifically authorized by the
superintendent.
      3.   Pollutants which create fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      4.   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW
or equipment, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than
9.0.
      5.   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, including, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastic, wood, whole blood, paunch, excrement other than human, hair and
fleshing, entrails, lime slurry, lime residue, slops, chemical residues, paint
residues, fiberglass, or bulk solids including unshredded garbage.
      6.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference with the POTW.
      7.   Heat (whether liquid or vapor) in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat
at the point of connection in excess of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F) which is sixty five degrees centigrade (65°C) or heat which would cause
the temperature of influent at the POTW to exceed one hundred four degrees
Fahrenheit (104°F) which is forty degrees centigrade (40°C).
      8.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin.
      9.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety
problems.
      10.   Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas, which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of causing
objectionable odors or hazards to life and property, which forms solids in
concentrations exceeding limits established herein or creates any other
condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual
facilities, attention, or expense to handle such materials.
      11.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the POTW (nonhazardous liquid waste or grease).
      12.   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the Okemah utilities authority NPDES permit.
      13.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
those in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      14.   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
      15.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit.
      16.   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
   C.   Quantities Or Concentrations Restricted: Except in quantities, or
concentrations, or with provisions as stipulated herein, it shall be unlawful
for any person, corporation, or individual to discharge waters or wastes to the
sanitary sewers of the Okemah utilities authority containing:
      1.   Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average
of fifty milligrams per liter (50 mg/l) (417 pounds per million gallons) of
either or both or combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the
opinion of the utilities authority, it appears probable that such wastes:
         a.   Can deposit grease or oil in the sanitary sewer lines in such
manner as to clog the sanitary sewers;
         b.   Can overload the collection system's or treatment plant's
skimming and grease handling equipment;
         c.   Are not amenable to biological oxidation and will therefore pass
to the receiving waters without being affected by normal wastewater treatment
processes; or
         d.   Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the
excessive quantities; (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
         e.   All businesses, institutions, or organizations (not residences)
that cook with grease must install a grease trap that complies with the
international building code. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Domestic wastewater which exceeds two hundred milligrams per liter
(200 mg/l) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration or two hundred
milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) total suspended solids (TSS).
      3.   Salts of the heavy metals, in solution or suspension, in
concentrations toxic to biological wastewater treatment processes, or adversely
affecting sludge digestion or any other biochemical, biological, or other
wastewater treatment process, or adversely affecting the biology of the stream
receiving the effluent that the wastewater treatment facility discharges to, or
exceeding the local limits as expressed in section
8-3-8 of this chapter.
      4.   Pollutants exceeding the limits as set forth in section
8-3-8 of this chapter for certain specific pollutants.
      5.   A volume of a single toxic industrial waste discharge, or the
combined toxic industrial waste discharge of a group of industries within a
single contributory area, so large as to raise a question of the ultimate
concentration of toxic substances entering a treatment plant or a receiving
stream. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-7: GREASE TRAPS, INTERCEPTORS AND SEPARATORS:
The city requires that grease traps, interceptors and separators be installed
according to the conditions and requirements in chapter 10 of the international
plumbing code or when any of the following conditions exist: (Ord. 2006-03-01,
3-13-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   A.   A nonresidential (restaurant, motel, hotel, church, school, hospital,
daycare center, nursing home, etc.) or multi-unit residential (apartment house,
etc.) connection that does any type of food preparation or cooking.
   B.   A nonresidential or multi-unit residential connection that has a shop
or sink that may contribute metals to the sewer system.
   C.   A nonresidential or multi-unit residential connection that does
laundry.
   D.   A car wash/truck wash business.
   E.   Automobile, truck, small engine or farm equipment service centers or
repair shops where grease or oil is present or produced. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-
13-2006)
8-3-8: PRETREATMENT REQUIRED, ACTIONS BY CITY:
   A.   National Pretreatment Standards: The national categorical pretreatment
standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are
hereby incorporated.
      1.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of pollutant in wastewater, the
superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      2.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
      3.   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
      4.   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
   B.   Oklahoma Pretreatment Standards: The Oklahoma pretreatment standards of
the Oklahoma pollutant discharge elimination system act found in 27A Oklahoma
Statutes section 2-6-201 et seq., and promulgated by the Oklahoma department of
environmental quality are hereby incorporated. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006;
amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Local Limits On Pollutants:
 DescriptionTotals    
 Description  Totals    
Total arsenic  10   ug/l
TSS            250   mg/l
BOD            200   mg/l
Total lead     5   ug/l
Total cadmium  1   ug/l
Total copper   10   ug/l
Total selenium 5   ug/l
Total silver   2   ug/l
pH             <6.5   or >9.0
DO             <1.0   mg/l
COD            200   mg/l
Total zinc     20   ug/l
 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless
indicated otherwise. The city manager, sewer superintendent or their designees
may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration
based limitations listed in this subsection. Notice of imposition of mass
limitations shall be given in writing by the Okemah utilities authority to
affected individuals or companies.
   D.   Reservation Of Right For More Stringent Standards: The city reserves
the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more
stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ord. 2006-03-
01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-9: MONITORING OR INSPECTION:
   A.   Right Of Inspection: The Okemah utilities authority shall have the
right of inspection of all sewer lines within the city (both public and
private). The city manager, sewer superintendent or their designees shall have
the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all the requirements of this chapter and other chapters that may
be applicable. All users shall allow the city manager, sewer superintendent or
their designees ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, record examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
   B.   Devices For Sampling: The city manager, sewer superintendent or their
designees shall have the right to set on the user's property such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation.
   C.   Delays In Allowing Entrance Upon Property: Unreasonable delays in
allowing the city manager, sewer superintendent or their designees access to
the user's property shall be a violation of this chapter.
   D.   Right To Establish Fees And Charges: The Okemah utilities authority
shall have the right to establish fees and charges for the monitoring and
inspection activities as described in this section. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-
2006)
8-3-10: CORRECTIVE ACTIONS REQUIRED FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
When an instance of noncompliance is discovered or when a sewer problem is
identified requiring corrective action, whether by a complaint, inspection,
permit application or other means, the city manager, sewer superintendent or
their designees shall investigate the problem immediately. After full
investigation by the city manager, sewer superintendent or their designees, the
corrective actions shall occur according to the following schedule: (Ord. 2006-
03-01, 3-13-2006)
   A.   Surfacing Sewer: If surfacing sewer is identified, the problem shall be
corrected immediately (within 24 hours). If the problem is on city property or
in the city's sewer mains, the Okemah utilities authority shall correct the
problem. If the problem is on private property or in the individual connection
to the city's sewer main, the owner of the property shall correct the problem.
All private sewer repair or replacement shall be accomplished by a licensed
Oklahoma plumbing contractor in accordance with all city codes or regulations,
state codes or regulations and the international plumbing code. Installation,
replacement or repair must be approved by the Okemah utilities authority
inspector or his designee as to design and installation.
   B.   Sewer Lines, Cleanouts, Backflow Prevention Devices: If any private
sewer lines or fittings are determined to be damaged, deteriorated, constructed
of unapproved materials, or improperly installed, the problem shall be
corrected within twenty one (21) days. The authority shall notify the property
owner in writing and identify the corrections required. The property owner
shall notify the authority when work is completed. All sewer repair shall be
accomplished by a licensed Oklahoma plumbing contractor in accordance with all
city codes or regulations, state codes or regulations and the international
plumbing code. Installation, replacement or repair must be approved by the
Okemah utilities authority inspector or his designee as to design and
installation.
   C.   Prohibited Connections: If any private sewer lines or fittings are
determined to constitute a prohibited connection, or allow the entry of storm
water into the sanitary sewer system, the problem shall be corrected within
twenty one (21) days. The authority shall notify the property owner in writing
and identify the corrections required. The property owner shall notify the
authority when work is completed. All sewer repair shall be accomplished by a
licensed Oklahoma plumbing contractor in accordance with all city codes or
regulations, state codes or regulations and the international plumbing code.
Installation, replacement or repair must be approved by the Okemah utilities
authority inspector or his designee as to design and installation. (Ord. 2006-
03-01, 3-13-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Grease Traps, Interceptors And Separators: If it is determined that a
grease trap, interceptor, separator or any combination of these is required on
an existing sewer, the owner of the property shall be notified of the problem
in writing by the Okemah utilities authority. In the notice, the authority
shall identify the corrections required and request a meeting with the property
owner. At the meeting, a plan and schedule for correction will be discussed
allowing the property owner a reasonable time to accomplish installation not
shorter than ninety (90) days, nor in any instance longer than one year.
   E.   Multiple Connections/Users: If it is determined that more than one user
or more than one type of user is attached to the same private sewer line, the
utilities authority shall notify the property owner(s) in writing identifying
the problem. In the notice, the authority shall identify the corrections
required and request a meeting with the property owner. At the meeting, a plan
and schedule for correction will be discussed allowing the property owner a
reasonable time to accomplish correction not shorter than ninety (90) days, nor
in any instance longer than one year. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-11: PERMITS AND OTHER FORMS:
The city hereby authorizes the Okemah utilities authority to create, develop or
change any permit or application required in this chapter, or create, develop
or change any other form necessary for the enforcement of this chapter by
resolution of the Okemah utilities authority. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-12: FEES AND CHARGES:
The city hereby authorizes the Okemah utilities authority to establish all fees
and charges necessary for the enforcement of this chapter by resolution of the
Okemah utilities authority. (Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
8-3-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person or company who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, is punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each day or portion of a day during which any violation
of this chapter or any ordinance in relation thereto occurs. Each day or any
portion of a day during which any violation of this code or of any ordinance in
relation hereto shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-
03-01, 3-13-2006; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Criminal And Civil Remedies: In addition to proceeding under subsection
A of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other
ordinances against a person or company continuing to violate any portion of
this chapter.
   C.   Termination Of Service: The city reserves the right to immediately
terminate water and sewer service to any person or company who violates any
portion of this chapter.
   D.   Injunctive Relief: The city reserves the right to seek injunctive
relief for noncompliance.
   E.   City Actions: The remedies and penalties provided for in the provisions
of this chapter are not exclusive. The city manager, or his designee, may take
any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
(Ord. 2006-03-01, 3-13-2006)
CHAPTER 4
REFUSE AND TRASH HAULING SERVICE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Service Established
8-4-2: Charges For Refuse Removal
8-4-3: Placement Of Trash For Pick Up
8-4-4: Limit On Number Of Containers
8-4-5: Placing Refuse On Streets Or Property Belonging To Others
8-4-6: Ownership And Repair Of Dumpsters
8-4-7: Restrictions On Use Of Receptacles
8-4-8: Penalty
8-4-1: SERVICE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established within the city a trash and refuse hauling service.
The service shall be conducted only by persons authorized by the city council
by appropriate resolution. (Ord. 2001-01-10, 10-1-2001)
8-4-2: CHARGES FOR REFUSE REMOVAL:
   A.   Generally: The city shall levy a charge for trash and refuse removal,
which shall be set by resolution of the city council. The council shall also
levy reasonable charge for additional pick up of household waste, bulky waste
or yard waste, to be set by the city council by resolution and be based on the
estimated amount (cubic yards) of material to be removed.
   B.   Additional Charge For Bulky Or Yard Waste: There is hereby established
an additional charge on bulky waste or yard waste placed at the residential
curbside location. This additional charge shall be set by resolution of the
city council and be based on the number of cubic yards of material as
determined by the sanitation department workers, pursuant to subsection A of
this section. (Ord. 2001-01-10, 10-1-2001)
8-4-3: PLACEMENT OF TRASH FOR PICK UP:
   A.   Residential Customers: Every person maintaining a residence within the
city shall be required to place their refuse in trash bags or approved
containers at a curbside location designated by the city manager or his
designee.
   B.   Businesses:
      1.   Every person, firm or corporation operating or maintaining a
business establishment within the city shall be required to place their dry
trash and refuse in a suitable receptacle at a location designated by the city
manager or his designee. Said location shall be readily available to those
persons authorized to haul the same.
      2.   The city manager or his designee may increase or decrease the number
of pick ups per week required for a business based on actual need. (Ord. 2001-
01-10, 10-1-2001)
8-4-4: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF CONTAINERS:
There is hereby established a limit of five (5) bags or containers not
exceeding twenty (20) gallons each, or a total of one hundred (100) gallons. An
additional charge for picking up bags or containers above this limit shall be
determined based on the number of cubic yards of material as determined by the
sanitation department workers. See section
8-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-01-10, 10-1-2001)
8-4-5: PLACING REFUSE ON STREETS OR PROPERTY BELONGING TO OTHERS:
   A.   Placement Prohibited: It is unlawful for anyone to place refuse, trash,
bulky waste or yard waste upon the public streets, alleys, roadways, curbs,
gutters and sidewalks of the city or upon any real property owned or occupied
by another, except as specified in this chapter.
   B.   Authorizing Others To Place Refuse: It is unlawful for any resident to
permit, encourage or authorize others outside of their own household to place
refuse, trash, bulky waste, yard waste or any of the items described in
subsection 8-4-7B of this chapter on property owned or occupied by them. (Ord.
2001-01-10, 10-1-2001)
8-4-6: OWNERSHIP AND REPAIR OF DUMPSTERS:
   A.   Business Establishment:
      1.   Every person, firm or corporation operating or maintaining a
business establishment within the city is required to furnish a receptacle
approved by the city manager or his designee as compatible with the trucks
authorized to remove the refuse.
      2.   All such receptacles provided for use of patrons shall be
manufactured of plastic or metal, constructed in such manner so that trash
deposited therein will not escape, and shall be fixed with hinged or swinging
doors at the top.
      3.   Every person, firm or corporation operating or maintaining a
business establishment within the city shall ensure that waste receptacles
placed outside the building are not allowed to overflow resulting in littering
the premises or surrounding areas.
      4.   All such receptacles placed outside the building shall be kept in an
enclosed or screened in area sufficient to prevent such receptacles from being
visible from city streets or residences in order to prevent accumulated garbage
and rubbish from spreading through the city and endangering citizen health, and
to enhance the city's appearance. Screening in of a receptacle may be
accomplished through a full or partial enclosure, a six feet (6') opaque fence
at the establishment's property line or between the receptacle and viewer's
location, or year-round landscaping maintained to a minimum height of six feet
(6'), or by fixing them with hinged or swinging doors at the top. Churches are
exempt from this requirement.
      5.   If trash does escape from any receptacle, the business establishment
is responsible for clean-up.
      6.   Repair or replacement of the receptacle is required when the city
manager or his designee determines that use of the receptacle is either unsafe
or unsanitary. When the city requires repair or replacement, the owner of the
receptacle shall have the option of repairing or replacing the receptacle, or
transferring ownership of the receptacle to the city within thirty (30) days.
   B.   City:
      1.   Following the transfer of ownership to the city, the city shall
either repair or replace the receptacle as required and the rightful user shall
no longer be responsible for the receptacle. The rightful user shall then pay
an additional monthly container charge, which may be fixed by appropriate
resolution of the city council from time to time.
      2.   The city manager or his designee may replace the receptacle with one
(1) of greater or lesser volume as required by the needs of the business. (Ord.
2001-01-10, 10-1-2001; amd. Ord. 2022-1, 2-14-2022)
8-4-7: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Items Allowed In Dumpsters: Businesses may place all dry trash and
refuse created in the normal operation of a business including, but not limited
to, items containing paper, cardboard, plastic, glass and materials, provided
said items are not excluded by subsection B of this section.
   B.   Items Prohibited: It is unlawful for the following items to be placed
in receptacles: tires; batteries; mattresses, furniture, or appliances; carpet
or vinyl floor coverings; building materials or debris; flammable items; brush,
limbs, grass, or other yard waste; metal scraps; dead animals or parts of dead
animals; or hazardous chemicals.
   C.   Use Of Receptacle Belonging To Business: It is unlawful for anyone
other than the rightful user to place any refuse in a receptacle belonging to a
business. This action shall be considered a violation of section
4-2-6 of this code.
   D.   Authorizing Use Of Receptacle By Others: It is unlawful for a business
(rightful user of a receptacle) to permit, encourage or authorize others to
place refuse, trash, bulky waste, yard waste or any of the items described in
subsection B of this section in the receptacle provided their business. (Ord.
2001-01-10, 10-1-2001)
8-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation doing any of the acts prohibited by this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided for in section
1-4-1 of this code, unless otherwise stated herein. (Ord. 2001-01-10, 10-1-
2001)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Code
9-1-2: Fire Code
9-1-3: Residential Code
9-1-4: Plumbing Code
9-1-5: Private Sewage Disposal Code
9-1-6: Mechanical Code
9-1-7: Fuel Gas Code
9-1-8: Energy Conservation Code
9-1-9: Property Maintenance Code
9-1-10: Electrical Code
9-1-11: Existing Building Code
9-1-1: BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as The International
Building Code, 2021 Edition (IBC 2021), as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the
Uniform Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the building code
of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and
for the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use, and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building
code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
as prescribed in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
 
Section 101.1  City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 1612.3 City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 1612.3 January 1, 1987
Section 3412.2 October 8, 1981
 
(Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-2: FIRE CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as The International Fire
Code, 2021 Edition (IFC 2021), as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the Uniform
Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the code of the city for
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city; providing for
the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as
prescribed in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
 
Section 101.1 City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 109.3 Misdemeanor offense
Section 109.3 $500.00
Section 109.3 0 days (no imprisonment)
Section 111.4 $500.00
Section 111.4 $500.00
 
   C.   Limits For Storage Of Flammables: The limits referred to in certain
sections of the international fire code, the most recent edition, are hereby
established as follows:
Section 3204.3.1.1 The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers is prohibited within 50 feet from buildings and combustible storage.
Storage:
Section 3406.2.4.4 (Limits in which the storage of class I or class II liquids
in aboveground tanks is prohibited shall be the same as ground storage tanks
shown in section 3406.2.4.3.)
(Ord. 03-02-2002, 2-21-2002; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; Ord.
2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-3: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as The International
Residential Code, 2021 Edition (IRC 2021), as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the
Uniform Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the code of the
city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more
than three (3) stories in height in the city; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as prescribed in
Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
 
Section R101.1    City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section R301.2(1) See table for values
Section P2603.6.1 12 inches
Section P2603.6.  12 inches
 
(Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-4: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as The International
Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition (IPC 2021), as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the
Uniform Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the code of the
city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city; providing for the
issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as
prescribed in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1   City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 106.6.2 See current resolution
Section 106.6.3 See current resolution
Section 108.4   Misdemeanor offense
Section 108.4   $500.00
Section 108.4   0 days (no imprisonment)
Section 108.5   $500.00
Section 108.5   $500.00
Section 305.6.1 12 inches
Section 305.6.1 12 inches
Section 904.1   24 inches
 
(Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-5: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE:
   A.   Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in
the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the international
private sewage disposal code, the most recent edition, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the code of the
city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of sewage systems in the city, and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said international private
sewage disposal code, the most recent edition, are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
 
Section 101.1   City of Okemah
Section 106.4.2 See current resolution
Section 106.4.3 See current resolution
Section 108.4   See current resolution
Section 108.5   See current resolution
 
(Ord. 06-02-2002, 2-21-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
9-1-6: MECHANICAL CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition (IMC 2021), as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the
Uniform Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the code of the
city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as
prescribed in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1   City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 106.5.2 See current resolution
Section 106.5.3 See current resolution
Section 108.4   Misdemeanor offense
Section 108.4   $500.00
Section 108.4   0 days (no imprisonment)
Section 108.5   $500.00
Section 108.5   $500.00
 
(Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-7: FUEL GAS CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel
Gas Code, 2021 Edition (IFGC 2021), as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the
Uniform Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the code of the
city for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, as prescribed in Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1   City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 106.6.2 See current resolution
Section 106.6.3 See current resolution
Section 108.4   Misdemeanor offense
Section 108.4   $500.00
Section 108.4   0 days (no imprisonment)
Section 108.5   $500.00
Section 108.5   $500.00
 
(Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-8: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
   A.   Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in
the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the international
energy conservation code, the most recent edition, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the code of the
city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power
systems in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said international energy conservation code, the most
recent edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following section is hereby revised:
 
Section 101.1 City of Okemah
 
(Ord. 09-02-2002, 2-21-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
9-1-9: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as The International
Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition (IPMC 2021), as published by the
International Code Council, Inc, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Okemah, in the State of Oklahoma for regulating
and governing the conditions of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code
on file in the office of the City of Okemah are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection
B of this section.
   B.   The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code
are hereby revised:
   Section 111.1. The words "board of appeals" is removed and replaced with
"May receive Notice to appear before the Municipal Court."
   Section 111.2. Delete section.
   Section 111.2.1. Delete Section.
   Section 111.2.2. Delete Section.
   Section 111.2.3. Delete Section.
   Section 111.2.4. Delete Section.
   Section 111.2.5. Delete Section.
   Section 111.3. Delete Section.
   Section 111.4. Delete Section.
   Section 111.4.1. Delete Section.
   Section 111.5. Delete Section.
   Section 111.6. Delete Section.
   Section 111.6.1. The word "board" is removed and replaced with "Court."
   Section 111.6.2. The word "board" is removed and replaced with "Court."
   Section 111.8. Delete.
(Ord. 10-02-2002, 2-21-2002; amd. 2007 Code; Ord. 2021-4, 3-22-2021; Ord. 2022-
3, 9-12-2022; Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-10: ELECTRICAL CODE:
That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city
clerk, being marked and designated as The National Electrical Code, 2011
Edition (NEC 2011), as published by the National Fire Protection Association,
and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma, acting through the Uniform Building
Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted as the code of the city for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to use or maintenance of electrical systems in the city; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section. (Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
9-1-11: EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Adoption: That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International
Existing Building Code, 2021 Edition (IEBC 2021), as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., and as adopted by the State of Oklahoma,
acting through the Uniform Building Code Commission, be and hereby is adopted
as the code of the city for regulating and governing the repair, alteration,
change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as prescribed in
Subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
 
Section 101.1  City of Okemah, state of Oklahoma
Section 1301.2 January 1, 1987
 
(Ord. 2012-05, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 2
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Permit Required; Application; Fee
9-2-2: Bond Requirements And Conditions
9-2-3: Time Limit; Days And Hours
9-2-4: Requirements And Restrictions
9-2-5: Notice To City Officials; Approval; Escort
9-2-6: Liability Of House Mover
9-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee And Bond:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
individual to move or cause to be moved on the streets or alleys of the city
any house or building, or part thereof, or any similar structure without having
first obtained from the city clerk a permit therefor. The applicant for a
permit shall pay the city clerk a sum as set by the city council for each such
permit, and shall deposit with the city clerk a good and sufficient bond as
required in this chapter.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
individual to move or cause to be moved any house or building, or part thereof,
or any similar structure, on the streets or alleys of the city without having
first obtained such permit, paid such permit fee, and deposited such bond with
the city clerk. (1985 Code § 5-601)
   B.   Application For Permit: The permit shall be obtained by making
application therefor in writing. The written application shall recite the
character of the thing or object to be moved and transported along or through
and upon the streets and avenues, the proposed route of such transportation,
and the place where any equipment used in effecting such transportation shall
be placed and secured. (1985 Code § 5-602)
9-2-2: BOND REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Required: No permit shall be issued by the terms of this chapter until
such time as the applicant therefor shall have deposited with the officer
issuing such permit, a cash or approved bond in such sum as may be reasonably
necessary to protect the city and cover all loss from damage occurring to it or
its citizens by reason of any negligence or improper occupancy of the streets,
sidewalks and any and all property therein. (1985 Code § 5-603)
   B.   Amount; Conditions: Any negligence or improper occupancy of the
streets, sidewalks or other public places shall be provided against in the bond
and such bond shall be deposited upon the understanding that it is to cover all
of the conditions as set forth in this subsection. All such persons as
described herein, engaged as principals in the business herein described, shall
file a surety bond to be approved by the city in the sum of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) conditioned that such person shall save, indemnify, and
keep harmless the city against any and all liabilities, judgments, damages,
costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city, in consequence
of the granting of such permit or while acting under the same, and will under
all circumstances strictly comply with the terms of such license and permit.
Any such surety bond shall not be in any manner affected by the fact of the
cash deposit and bond required hereunder. (1985 Code § 5-603; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Passageway For Vehicles: Any such person as referred to herein or his
laborer, servant, agent or employee shall cause a sufficient passageway to be
kept open for vehicles to pass on one side or both sides of any building,
structure, edifice, object or thing, while the same is being moved upon any
street, avenue or alley and, when possible, the same shall be kept moving each
day unless the actual elements render this impossible. (1985 Code § 5-603)
9-2-3: TIME LIMIT; DAYS AND HOURS:
   A.   Time Limit; Penalty For Extra Time Taken:
      1.   At the time of application for a permit, it is the duty of the mover
of any building or structure to estimate the reasonable time required for the
moving of the building from its present location to its proposed location and
shall state in his application for permit what he deems to be such reasonable
time.
      2.   The mover shall bind himself to pay a sum as set by the city per day
for each and every day, all or any part of which, the building or structure
remains on the street in excess of the number of days allowed in the permit,
and his cash deposit in addition to his bond shall be made liable for the
payment of the amount. Nothing but an act of God shall be a defense against the
payment of the sums. (1985 Code § 5-608)
   B.   Days Restricted:
      1.   The clerk shall not issue any permit on any day which, according to
the estimated number of days required to move the building or structure, shall,
when counted from the date of the permit, include a Sunday or legal holiday;
provided, that this shall apply where the permit includes and provides that the
persons moving such house shall begin on the day of the permit.
      2.   When a day is set on which the person moving the building shall
begin to move the same and the day is different from the date of issuing the
permit, then no permit shall be issued in such a way to include a Sunday or
holiday within the time allowed for moving the building.
      3.   Where the number of days shall exceed five (5), the provisions of
this subsection shall not apply. (1985 Code § 5-609)
   C.   Hours For Moving: No building shall be moved within the city between
the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. the
following day or between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and six thirty
o'clock (6:30) P.M., unless approved by the chief of police or city manager.
(1985 Code § 5-614; amd. 2007 Code)
9-2-4: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Limit To Size Of Building: No permit shall be issued to move any
building which, in the judgment of the building official or city manager, might
by any chance result in an injury to pavements, bridges, conduits or other
street improvements within the city. (1985 Code § 5-607)
   B.   Protection Of Trees And Overhead Structures:
      1.   The person who may have a permit to move a building or structure
over any street within the city shall by virtue of such permit derive no right
to injure or impair the condition or usefulness of any shade tree, electric
light, telephone or telegraph poles or lines.
      2.   No tree of any kind shall be cut, bruised, or scarred under any
circumstances without the expressed permission in writing of the owner of the
same and with the permission of the city.
      3.   In all cases where necessary to remove any electric light, telephone
or telegraph construction, it shall be the duty of the person moving such
building or structure to give not less than forty eight (48) hours' notice,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, to the public utility company or
person owning or operating the same, which notice shall state the place, the
construction which is necessary to be removed, or temporarily changed or
altered, and the day on which it is desired to have such clearance made, as
well as the amount of time it will be necessary to keep such space clear. (1985
Code § 5-605; amd. 2007 Code)
      4.   It is the duty of the person moving the building or structure to
deposit an amount of money estimated necessary to cover the cost of the
changing or moving of public utility overhead construction and replacing the
same in its former condition in a sum as set by the city with the city clerk.
Upon such deposit being made with the city clerk and such notice being
delivered to the owner or operator of the telephone or telegraph line
construction, it is the duty of the person owning or operating the overhead
construction to make such temporary changes as are reasonably necessary to
comply with the representations set forth in the notice made and delivered to
him. (1985 Code § 5-605)
   C.   Warning Lights And Caution Signs:
      1.   Caution Signs: It is the duty of the permittee to place approved
warning lights or signals plainly visible for not less than two hundred feet
(200') on each and every side of the building or structure which is being moved
at the close of each day and to keep same on throughout the entire night and
until one hour after sunrise on the morning following. Such lights or signals
shall be so placed and maintained that the view of same will not be in any
sense obstructed. If necessary, as many additional lights or signals as may be
necessary shall be placed at such other points on the building or structure as
will enable any person of reasonable and ordinary prudence to take notice of
the obstruction. (1985 Code § 5-604)
      2.   Guards Against Danger: It is the duty of the house mover to station
sufficient persons on guard and to establish such notices by placards or boards
in the immediate vicinity of the moving activities as will be necessary to
apprise any reasonable person of any potential danger that might be incurred by
coming closer to the moving operations or buildings being moved or the
instruments or agencies used in the moving of the same. (1985 Code § 5-606)
9-2-5: NOTICE TO CITY OFFICIALS; APPROVAL; ESCORT:
   A.   Notify Fire And Police Departments: Any person desiring to move any
building shall show his permit to the chiefs of the fire and police
departments. If for any reason any delay is occasioned by any unforeseen
contingency, it is his duty to inform the fire and police chiefs of such fact,
to the end that the fire and police chiefs may keep accurate and recent
information on the true conditions of the streets and alleys for fire
prevention purposes. (1985 Code § 5-610)
   B.   Route Approval: No permit for the moving of any building shall be
issued until the route and time of such removal has been approved by the chief
of police. (1985 Code § 5-612)
   C.   Police Escort: If, in the judgment of the chief of police or his
designee, the moving of any building may create a traffic hazard, the chief of
police may require the person moving such building to provide a police escort
for the purpose of regulating traffic along the route upon which such building
is being moved. Any such police escort shall be at the expense of the house
mover paid at a rate as set by the city council. (1985 Code § 5-613)
9-2-6: LIABILITY OF HOUSE MOVER:
No provision or condition of this chapter shall be construed so as to limit the
liability civilly of any person moving any house on or over the city streets,
avenues and alleys from any and all damages which may result as the proximate
cause of such acts to any person or his property or to the city. (1985 Code §
5-611)
TITLE 10
PLANNING, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE A. PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
10-1A-1: Commission Created; Membership; Compensation
10-1A-2: Terms Of Office; Vacancies
10-1A-3: Meetings; Organization And Rules
10-1A-4: Employment And Compensation Of Staff
10-1A-5: Powers And Duties
10-1A-6: Planning Commission Act As Zoning Commission
10-1A-7: Zoning Regulations
10-1A-8: Zoning District Reclassification And Special Exceptions
10-1A-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Creation; Membership: There is hereby created within and for the city a
planning commission, which shall consist of five (5) citizens of the city,
nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the council. The members of the
commission shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their
fitness and without reference to party affiliation, and shall serve without
compensation except as may be otherwise provided.
   B.   Ex Officio Members: The mayor and the city manager shall be ex officio
members of the city planning commission, but shall receive no compensation
other than their affixed salary as such officials. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000;
amd. 2007 Code)
10-1A-2: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
Members of the city planning commission shall hold office for a term of three
(3) years, with the exception that in the first instance two (2) shall be
appointed to serve a term of one year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and
one appointed for a term of three (3) years. Appointments thereafter shall be
made for a term of three (3) years; except, when a vacancy occurs, the
appointment shall be made to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
10-1A-3: MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
   A.   Meetings; Officers; Bylaws: The members of the city planning commission
shall meet within two (2) weeks after their appointment and confirmation, and
organize by electing from their members a chairman, vice chairman, and
secretary; and shall adopt from time to time such bylaws, rules, and
regulations and amendments thereto as may be necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this article.
   B.   Quorum: Three (3) members of the city planning commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
10-1A-4: EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION OF STAFF:
   A.   Preparation Of Plans: It is the duty of such commission to prepare from
time to time plans for the systematic development and betterment of the city as
a place of residence or for business.
   B.   Employment Of Staff: The commission shall have the power and authority
to employ engineers, attorneys, clerks and a secretary, or other help deemed
necessary, subject to the approval of the city manager.
   C.   Compensation: The salary and compensation of such employees shall be
fixed by the city manager and shall be paid out of the city treasury as other
officers and employees, and the necessary expenses incurred by the commission
shall be paid out of the city treasury as other legal expenses of the city
government. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1A-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   The planning commission may consider and investigate any subject
matter tending to the development and betterment of the city, and make
recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof to any
department of the municipal government, and for any purpose make, or cause to
be made, surveys, maps or plans.
      2.   Before final action shall be taken by the city council, or any
department of the city government, on the location and design of any public
building, statue, memorial, park, parkway boulevard, street and alley,
playgrounds, public grounds, bridge, or the change in location of or the
closing of any street, alley, or easement, or the grade thereof, such question
shall be submitted to the city planning commission for investigation and
report.
   B.   Subdivision Of Land:
      1.   The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the city
council the adoption of rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land
within the corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats, or other portions of
the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use within the corporate
limits of the city shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its
recommendation, approval, or rejection.
      2.   The disapproval of any such plan, plat, or replat by the city
council shall be deemed a refusal of the purported dedication shown thereon.
(Ord. 2001-01-01, 10-16-2001)
   C.   Additional Authority: The city planning commission shall have
additional authority and responsibility, as the city council shall from time to
time prescribe. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1A-6: PLANNING COMMISSION ACT AS ZONING COMMISSION:
The city planning commission shall also act as the zoning commission and shall
have the power to prepare and recommend to the city council zoning district
boundaries and appropriate regulations relating to the height, number of
stories, size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may
be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of
population, the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade,
industry, residences, and other purposes. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1A-7: ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Uniformity Of Regulations: The planning commission may recommend the
division of the city into districts of such number, size, and area as may be
deemed best suited to carry out the zoning purpose. All such regulations shall
be uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district but the
regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts.
   B.   Compliance With Comprehensive Plan; Other Considerations:
      1.   Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive
plan and designed to:
         a.   Lessen congestion in the streets;
         b.   Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
         c.   Promote health and the general welfare;
         d.   Provide adequate light and air;
         e.   Prevent overcrowding of land;
         f.   Avoid undue concentration of population;
         g.   Facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
      2.   Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability
for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1A-8: ZONING DISTRICT RECLASSIFICATION AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Application Procedure: Any owner, agent of, or attorney in fact for
said owner of real property located within the limits of the city may make
application to the planning commission for a reclassification of the zoning
district within which their property lies or for special exception use as
permitted on review and in accordance with provisions contained within the
zoning regulations of the zoning district within which their property lies.
Application shall be made in the following manner:
      1.   The application shall be heard within forty five (45) days at a
regular meeting of the planning commission from the payment of the fee as
established by the council and the filing of a completed application on the
form approved by the council, specifying the following:
         a.   The legal description of the property and its street address or
approximate location if the property has no street address;
         b.   The present zoning classification of the property;
         c.   The proposed zoning classification or special exception
requested;
         d.   The reasons for the request for reclassification or special
exception;
         e.   A list of property owners, mailing addresses and legal
descriptions within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the subject property;
and
         f.   A letter of authorization or power of attorney if the applicant
is not the owner of the subject property.
      2.   The city clerk shall set the application on agenda for the next
available meeting of the planning commission, taking into consideration the
requirements of notice as herein set out. (Ord. 2013-02, 5-30-2013)
   B.   Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   The city clerk shall cause notice to be sent to all owners of
property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the subject property at
least twenty (20) days before the hearing. This notice must include following:
         a.   The name of the applicant, a legal description of the applicant's
property, the street address or approximate location of the applicant's
property. (Ord. 05-02-2002, 5-7-2002)
         b.   The present zoning classification of the applicant's property and
the proposed change in classification or special exception requested. (Ord. 05-
02-2002, 5-7-2002; amd. Ord. 2013-02, 5-30-2013)
         c.   The date, time and place of the meeting of the planning
commission when the application shall be heard. (Ord. 05-02-2002, 5-7-2002)
         d.   The right of the landowner to protest against the proposed
reclassification or special exception and notice that all protests must be in
writing and filed with the city clerk at least three (3) days before the
hearing on the application. (Ord. 05-02-2002, 5-7-2002; amd. Ord. 2013-02, 5-
30-2013)
      2.   The city clerk shall also give notice to the public in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city of the hearing. Said notice shall
contain all the information as required in the notice to adjacent landowners
and shall include a map of the area affected which indicates street names,
numbers, or other significant landmarks. Said public notice shall be published
at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing on the application.
   C.   Public Hearing:
      1.   The planning commission shall, at a regularly scheduled meeting,
hear and consider the application and evidence of both the applicant and any
protesters against the application, and shall make a recommendation to the
council of whether the application should be approved with the reasons for
their recommendation. Provided, that if the owners of fifty percent (50%) or
more of the area of the lots within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the
exterior boundary of the subject property file protests against the
application, the application shall not be sent to the council with a favorable
recommendation unless recommendation is approved by at least three (3) members
of the commission.
      2.   The council shall hear and act on the recommendation of the planning
commission at their next regular meeting. The time of the next regular meeting
of the council shall be announced to the parties at the planning commission
meeting and no further notice to interested parties is required.
   D.   Council Action:
      1.   Both the applicant and the protesters of the application may appear
before the council at the time the council shall hear the application and shall
be afforded the opportunity to be heard in either support or protest to the
recommendation of the planning commission.
      2.   Before acting on the application, the council shall review the
report and recommendation of the planning commission and hear from the
applicant and any protesters present at the meeting.
      3.   The council may approve or deny the recommendation of the planning
commission, send the report back to the said commission with instructions for
further study and reconsideration, or refer the applicant to the board of
adjustment to seek a variance. Provided, that if the owners of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the area of the lots within a three hundred foot (300') radius
of the exterior boundary of the subject property have filed protests against
the application, and the planning commission recommendation was to approve the
application, the recommendation of the said commission shall not be approved
except upon the favorable vote of three (3) council members. (Ord. 05-02-2002,
5-7-2002)
ARTICLE B. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
10-1B-1: Appointment; Terms; Vacancies
10-1B-2: Meetings; Organization And Rules
10-1B-3: Allegation Of Error
10-1B-4: Authorize Variances
10-1B-5: Permit Certain Exceptions
10-1B-6: Extent Of Relief
10-1B-7: Appeals Procedure
10-1B-8: Notice Of Hearings
10-1B-9: Appeal To District Court
10-1B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Creation; Appointment: There is hereby created a board of adjustment
consisting of five (5) members, citizens of the city, appointed by the mayor
and confirmed by the city council, each to be appointed for a term of three (3)
years. Not less than two (2) members shall be appointed from the membership of
the planning commission.
   B.   Vacancies And Removals: Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Members may be removed for cause
by the council upon written charges and allowing an opportunity for hearing.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1B-2: MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
   A.   Chairman: The board of adjustment shall elect one of its members as
chairman to serve a term of two (2) years.
   B.   Adoption Of Rules: The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
   C.   Meetings And Deliberations; Records: Meetings of the board shall be
held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may
determine. The chairman, or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board
of adjustment shall be subject to the open meeting laws of the state 1 , and
all meetings, deliberations and voting of the board shall be open to the
public. The board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such facts; and shall keep records of all official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
   D.   Board Actions: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board is
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which the board was required to pass under any ordinance, or to effect any
variation as provided in this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 25 OS § 301 et seq.
10-1B-3: ALLEGATION OF ERROR:
The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where
it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the interpretation or
enforcement of this title or as provided in any other ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1B-4: AUTHORIZE VARIANCES:
   A.   Board Authority: The board of adjustment shall have the power to
authorize variances from the strict application of the provisions of this
title, as well as such other ordinances as the council shall so determine,
where the strict application of such provisions would result in an unnecessary
hardship, and may establish such requirements relative to such property as
would carry out the purpose and intent of the regulations.
   B.   Conditions For Granting Variance: The board may grant a variance only
upon finding that:
      1.   The strict application of the zoning regulations to the particular
piece of property would result in an unnecessary hardship by reason of:
         a.   Exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific
parcel of property at the time of the original adoption of the zoning
regulations;
         b.   Exceptional topographic conditions; or
         c.   Other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a
specific parcel of property.
      2.   That the conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property
involved.
      3.   That relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to
the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the zoning regulations or
the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1B-5: PERMIT CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS:
Upon appeal, the board is hereby empowered to permit the following exceptions:
   A.   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record;
   B.   To interpret the provisions of chapter 2, articles A through G, and
chapter 3, articles A through D, of this title where the street layout actually
on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the
several districts, which map is made a part of this title; and
   C.   To grant exceptions to the off street parking requirements set forth in
this title 1 , when it is determined that the size and shape of the lot to be
built on is such that off street parking provisions could not be complied with,
and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic congestion in the
adjacent streets. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 2, article D of this title.
10-1B-6: EXTENT OF RELIEF:
   A.   Authority Of Board: In exercising the powers mentioned in this article,
the board of adjustment, in conformance with the provisions of this title, may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made in keeping with the intent,
spirit and purpose of this title; and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   B.   Written Findings Of Fact: Every ruling made upon any appeal to the
board shall include a written findings of fact by the board of adjustment and
shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. (Ord. 09-01-2000,
10-2-2000)
10-1B-7: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
Appeals from the action of any administrative official acting under this title
shall be made in the following manner:
   A.   Time Of Taking Appeal; Notice And Fee: The appeal shall be taken within
thirty (30) days of the action appealed by filing with the official from whom
the appeal is taken, and the office of the board of adjustment, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds therefor, and paying such fee as shall be
established by the council.
   B.   Providing Records: The official from whom the appeal is taken shall
transmit to the board all papers constituting the record of the matter in
appeal.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his
opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
   D.   Board Action: The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to
the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. (Ord. 09-
01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1B-8: NOTICE OF HEARINGS:
   A.   Publication: Notice of public hearing before the board of adjustment
shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation and by
mailing written notice by the clerk of the board of adjustment to all owners of
property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundary of
the subject property. A copy of the published notice may be mailed in lieu of
written notice; however, the notice by publication and written notice shall be
published and mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
   B.   Contents Of Notice: The notice, whether by publication or by mail, of a
public hearing before the board of adjustment shall contain:
      1.   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
      2.   Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
appeal, variance or exception requested; and
      3.   Date, time and place of the hearing.
   C.   Minor Variances Or Exceptions: On hearings involving minor variances or
exceptions, notice shall be given by the clerk of the board of adjustment by
mailing written notice to all owners of property adjacent to the subject
property. The notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing and shall contain the facts listed in subsection B of this section. The
board of adjustment shall set forth in a statement of policy what constitutes
minor variances or exceptions, subject to approval or amendment by the city
council. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-1B-9: APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT:
   A.   Filing Of Appeal:
      1.   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of
the board of adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or
severally, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
city to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk and
with the board of adjustment, which notice shall specify the grounds of such
appeal.
      2.   Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the board of
adjustment shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk of the county the
original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the
case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the board of adjustment.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal to the district court from the board of
adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from
unless the chairman of the board of adjustment, from which the appeal is taken,
certifies to the court clerk, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay, in his opinion,
would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
district court upon application or notice to the administrative officer in
charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of the ordinance; and
upon notice to the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is
taken, and upon due cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2A-1: Short Title
10-2A-2: Purpose
10-2A-3: Nature And Application
10-2A-4: Regulation Of Use, Height, Area And Yards
10-2A-5: Definitions
10-2A-6: Zoning Districts; Map
10-2A-7: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
10-2A-8: Vacation Of Public Easements
10-2A-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter, including articles A through G, and chapter 3, articles A through
D, of this title, in pursuance of the authority granted by the state in 11
Oklahoma Statutes sections 43-101 through 43-109 and sections 44-101 through
44-110, is known as the ZONING ORDINANCE or ZONING REGULATIONS and may be cited
as such. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2A-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The zoning regulations contained herein are necessary:
      1.   To encourage the most appropriate uses of land;
      2.   To maintain and stabilize the value of property;
      3.   To reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the
public health;
      4.   To decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards;
      5.   To prevent undue concentration of population; and
      6.   To create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which
to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public
utilities, and other facilities.
   B.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of these zoning
regulations, they are held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. (Ord. 09-
01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2A-3: NATURE AND APPLICATION:
These zoning regulations classify and regulate the use of land, buildings, and
structures within the city limits. The regulations contained herein are
necessary to promote the health, safety, convenience, and welfare of the
inhabitants by dividing the city into zones and regulating therein the use of
the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories,
the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces,
density of population and location of buildings. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2A-4: REGULATION OF USE, HEIGHT, AREA AND YARDS:
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land is used and no building,
structure, or improvement is made, erected, constructed, moved, altered,
enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or
maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the
requirements established in the district in which such land, building,
structure, or improvement is located, and in accordance with the provisions of
the zoning regulations relating to any or all districts. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
10-2A-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these zoning regulations, words used in the present tense
shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural
and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural
construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory
and not directory.
For the purpose of these zoning regulations, certain terms and words are to be
used and interpreted as defined in this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building customarily incidental, appropriate
and subordinate to the main building or use and located on the same lot with
the main building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the
principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises.
ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE: Any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted, glass,
wooden, plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any
character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising
purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building
or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise
fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an
advertising structure other than a sign is determined as the area of the
largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other
signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor
merchandise or materials being offered for sale are construed as advertising
signs for the purpose of this definition.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses is secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
ALLEY: A public passage or way affording a secondary means of vehicular access
to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A multiple-family dwelling. (See definition of Dwelling,
Multiple-Family.)
AUTOMOBILE: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and
highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not limited to,
the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters, and motorcycles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used for the sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not butane or propane
fuels, or other automobile accessories, and which may or may not include
facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing
automobiles, but not including the painting thereof.
AUTOMOBILE WASH OR LAUNDRY: A structure designed primarily for washing
automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR SALVAGE YARD: An area outside of a building where motor
vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or "wrecked", or where motor
vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored.
BARBER AND BEAUTY SHOPS (Located In Areas Zoned As Residential Under Special
Exceptions): An area within the home of any barber, beautician, or stylist,
which is used by the inhabitant thereof for the cutting, styling, and/or
coloring of hair of third parties for compensation. The use of the area by the
barber, beautician, or stylist must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and must not change the character
thereof (i.e., increased traffic congestion, excessive parking requirements and
overloaded utilities) and must be conducted entirely within the main or
accessory buildings. Provided that there is no display of sign other than one
nonilluminated nameplate, not more than two (2) square feet in area attached to
the main or accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used or activity
is conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance
beyond the confines of the lot on which the services are rendered.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. For the purpose of height
measurement, a basement is counted as a story when more than one-half (1/2) of
its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when
subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor
employed on the premises.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: A private residence offering guest bedrooms as
overnight accommodations, plus breakfast, for compensation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided
for three (3) or more but not exceeding twelve (12) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each
portion of such structure so separated is deemed a separate structure.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building,
excluding all overhanging roofs.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and
lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling is deemed to
be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SITE: A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
building or structure.
CARPORT: A permanent roofed structure permanently open on at least two (2)
sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger vehicles.
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or
more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common parentage,
for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when
received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this
definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or
approved under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree of the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public
institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their
parents or legal guardians are attending services, meetings, classes, or are
engaged in church activities.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill
and afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not kept
overnight except under emergency conditions, including, but not limited to,
dental and doctors' offices.
CONVALESCENT, REST, NURSING HOME, OR EXTENDED CARE FACILITY: A health facility
where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care
for compensation.
COURT: An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bordered on two (2) or more sides
by such building or buildings.
COURT, INNER: A court other than an outer court. The length of an inner court
is the minimum horizontal dimension measured parallel to its longest side. The
width of an inner court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right
angles to its length.
COURT, OUTER: A court the full width of which opens onto a required yard, or
street or alley. The width of an outer court is the minimum horizontal
dimension measured in the same general direction as the yard, street or alley
upon which the court opens. The depth of an outer court is the minimum
horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its width.
DISTRICT, ZONING: Any section or sections of the city for which regulations
governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings
are uniform.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment where food, frozen dessert or beverage
is sold to the consumer and where motor vehicle parking space is provided and
where such food, frozen dessert or beverage is intended to be consumed in the
motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere on the premises outside of
the building.
DRY CLEANING OR LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE: Any attended or unattended place,
building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of
washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel,
cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance
which is operated primarily by the customer.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling having any portion of each of one or more walls
in common with adjoining dwellings.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling having open space on all sides.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer
courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one
family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE, OR ROW HOUSE: Three (3) or more dwelling units attached at
the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance and is
designed to be occupied, and may be owned, by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling designed to be occupied by two (2) families
living independently of each other.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted
children, or a group of not to exceed five (5) persons (excluding servants) not
all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. A "family" is
deemed to include domestic servants employed by the family.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors
of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings, and including,
but not limited to, the following spaces:
   A.   Basements;
   B.   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
   C.   Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of at
least seven feet (7');
   D.   Penthouses;
   E.   Attic space providing headroom of seven feet (7') or more;
   F.   Interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed covered porches and
enclosed steps; and
   G.   Accessory uses in enclosed covered space, but not including space used
for off street parking.
FLOOR AREA, NET: The total floor area within a building devoted or intended to
be devoted to a particular use, with structural headroom of seven feet (7') or
more, whether above or below the finished lot grade, excluding:
   A.   Elevators, stairwells, hallways, walls and partitions; and
   B.   Floor space permanently devoted to a parking space or parking spaces,
mechanical equipment closets, washrooms, or other items permanently preventing
the floor space from being occupied by persons while engaged in the use.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross
floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located, as:
 
Gross floor area   
Lot area         = Floor area ratio
 
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling unit for one family erected above a private
garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for
storage purposes only for automobiles or other materials by the occupants
thereof and their guests of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage, available to the
public, used for the care or servicing of automobiles where such vehicles are
parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building in which are provided facilities for the care,
servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: See definition of Floor Area, Gross.
HELP YOURSELF LAUNDRY: See definition of Dry Cleaning Or Laundry, Self-Service.
HOME ASSOCIATION: An incorporated nonprofit organization operating under
recorded land agreements through which:
   A.   Each lot or homeowner in a planned unit or other described land area is
automatically a member;
   B.   Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share
of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common
property; and
   C.   The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants
which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof (i.e., increased
traffic congestion, excessive parking requirements and overloaded utilities)
and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings;
provided, that no trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with
which there is no display of merchandise or sign other than one nonilluminated
nameplate, not more than two (2) square feet in area attached to the main or
accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used or activity is
conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond
the confines of the lot on which the occupation is conducted. The conducting of
a beauty or barber shop, tearoom or restaurant, rest home, clinic, doctor or
dentist office, childcare center, tourist home, real estate office, or cabinet,
metal or auto repair shop is not deemed a "home occupation".
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices which are an integral
part of the facilities.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6)
or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the
more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without
meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer court or camp,
sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed
under restraint.
KENNEL OR CATTERY: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling
dogs or cats, or a location with four (4) or more dogs or cats over six (6)
months of age.
LOT: Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or a
group of buildings, and accessory buildings and uses, including such open
spaces as required by these zoning regulations and other laws or ordinances,
and having its principal frontage on a street.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full
lengths on a street; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of
such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear
line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street,
excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a "lot" as defined herein.
MANUFACTURED BUILDING OR MANUFACTURED HOUSING: See definition of "modular home
or manufactured home" in section
10-2C-1 of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME: A portable or mobile living unit used or designed for human
occupancy on a permanent basis. See definition of "mobile home or double wide
mobile home" in section
10-2C-1 of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME, FREESTANDING: A mobile home located outside of a mobile home park
or subdivision.
MOBILE HOME PARK: See definition of "mobile home park" in section
10-2C-1 of this chapter.
NONCONFORMANCE: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. This may
include, but is not limited to, failure to conform to use, height, area,
coverage or off street parking requirements.
NONCONFORMING USE: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NURSERY, PLANT: The growing of trees, shrubs, bushes, plants or other similar
vegetation where no retail sales of any vegetation is conducted on the site.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient
in size to store one automobile together with a permanently surfaced driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or
egress of an automobile. For purposes of these zoning regulations, the size of
a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having
dimensions of not less than nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'), plus adequate
area for ingress and egress.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development planned in accordance with the
provisions of article E of this chapter.
REST HOME: See definition of Convalescent, Rest, Nursing Home, Or Extended Care
Facility.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
three (3) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12), persons; all in excess of
this number are defined as a "hotel" under the terms of these zoning
regulations.
SANATORIUM: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical
treatment or treatment and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents.
SETBACK: The distance between the lot line and the building line.
SIGN: See definition of Advertising Sign Or Structure.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
fifty feet (1" = 50'), which shows:
   A.   The topographic characteristics of the site at two foot (2') contour
intervals;
   B.   The location and dimensions of buildings, yards, courts, and other
features;
   C.   The use of each building and area;
   D.   The height of buildings;
   E.   Adjacent streets, alleys, utility drainage and other easements; and
   F.   The relationship of the development to adjacent areas which it may
affect.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A stable with a capacity for not more than two (2) horses or
mules.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for more
than two (2) horses or mules.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersections
of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living
quarters is counted as a full story.
STREET: Any public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: Any street which joins another street at an angle,
whether or not it crosses the other.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Townhouse, Or Row House.
TRAILER COURT: See definition of Mobile Home Park.
TRAILER, HAULING: A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is
designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats.
TRAILER HOME: See definition of Mobile Home.
TRAILER, TRAVEL OR CAMPING: A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary
human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not
constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in these zoning
regulations that an accessory building may be located in a portion of a yard
required for a main building. In measuring a "yard" for the purpose of
determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth
of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main
building is used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and
extending across a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the front property line and the main building or
any projections thereof, other than steps.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed
balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear yard is considered as
parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both
corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the
opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum
horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main building
or any projections other than steps. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007
Code; Ord. 2013-02, 5-30-2013)
10-2A-6: ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP:
   A.   Zoning Map: The city is hereby divided into zones as shown on the
zoning map, filed with the city clerk. The map as amended and all explanatory
material thereon is hereby made a part of these zoning regulations.
   B.   Zones Designated: Zones are designated as follows:
Residential:
 R-1 Rural single-family residential district
 R-2 Single-family residential district
 R-3 Rural mobile home residential district
 R-4 Mobile home residential district
 R-5 High density residential district
Commercial:
 C-1 Neighborhood commercial district
 C-2 Office commercial district
 C-3 Downtown commercial district
 C-4 General commercial district
 C-5 Highway commercial district
 C-6 Planned shopping center commercial district
Industrial:
 I-1 Light industrial district
 I-2 Heavy industrial district
Other:
 A-1 General agricultural district
 EC  Environmental conservation district
 F   Floodplain district
 
   C.   Specific Regulations: Specific district regulations are set forth in
chapter 3, articles A through D, of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2A-7: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts
as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right of way lines,
such centerlines, street lines, or highway right of way lines are construed to
be such boundaries.
   B.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines are construed to be the boundaries.
   C.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries are construed as being
parallel thereto and at such scaled distance therefrom as indicated on the
zoning map.
   D.   Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad line, such
boundary is deemed to be located on the easement line to which it is closest,
which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement unless
otherwise designated. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2A-8: VACATION OF PUBLIC EASEMENTS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the district
classification of the property to which the vacated portions of land accrue
shall become the classification of the vacated land. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
ARTICLE B. ADDITIONAL DISTRICT PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-2B-1: More Restricted District Regulations Apply
10-2B-2: Open Space
10-2B-3: Height
10-2B-4: Court Requirements For Multiple-Family Dwellings
10-2B-5: Storage And Parking Of Commercial Vehicles, RVs And Mobile Homes
10-2B-6: Childcare Centers
10-2B-7: Swimming Pools
10-2B-8: Animals
10-2B-9: Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases
10-2B-10: Architectural Design Of Accessory Buildings And Fences
10-2B-11: Portable Or Temporary Buildings
10-2B-12: Bed And Breakfast Facilities
10-2B-1: MORE RESTRICTED DISTRICT REGULATIONS APPLY:
Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit
residential uses of a more restricted district, such residential uses shall be
subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more
restricted district unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-2: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Intent Of Section: The requirements of this section are intended to
provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific
district regulations set forth in chapter 3, articles A through D, of this
title.
   B.   Counted As Open Space For Other Building Or Structure: No open space or
lot area required for a building or structure shall, during its life, be
occupied by, or counted as open space for, any other building or structure.
   C.   Projections Into Yards: Open eaves, cornices, window sills, and belt
courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet
(2'). Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to
exceed five feet (5').
   D.   Measuring Front Yard Depth: Where the dedicated street right of way is
less than fifty feet (50'), the depth of the front yard shall be measured at a
starting point twenty five feet (25') from the centerline of the street
easement.
   E.   Means Of Ingress And Egress:
      1.   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at
least one street for at least thirty five feet (35') and have a width of at
least fifty feet (50') at the building line.
      2.   A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and
egress for all dwelling units.
      3.   Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of
ingress and egress.
      4.   A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling if
all other provisions of these zoning regulations are complied with.
   F.   Commercial And Industrial Uses; Parking And Loading: Where minimum lot
sizes and open spaces are not established for commercial and industrial uses,
it is the intent of these zoning regulations that lots of sufficient size be
used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and
unloading space required for operation of the enterprise.
   G.   Sight Distance Area Defined: The following statements are definitions
of the "sight distance area":
      1.   Sight distance area at intersections of two (2) public streets. On
any corner lot, a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection
of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of twenty five feet (25')
along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to
form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street
intersection.
      2.   Sight distance area at an intersection of a public street and
private driveway leading to a parking lot of six (6) or more vehicles.
Triangles formed by measuring from the points of intersection of the front lot
line and the exterior edges of the pavement of the driveway approach from the
private property to the public thoroughfare, a distance of twenty five feet
(25') along the front lot line and the edges of pavement and connecting the
points so established to form a sight area on the lot adjacent to the driveway
intersection, and including the area of the driveway between the two (2)
triangles.
      3.   No parking wall, fence, sign, structure, or any plant growth other
than grasses shall be placed or maintained within the "sight distance area" as
herein defined from the ground elevation to a height of ten feet (10') above
the elevation of the adjacent public street or private driveway, whichever is
higher, excepting for traffic control signs and lighting standards and except
for private sign poles not exceeding one foot (1') in diameter.
      4.   Parking in the driveways of one-family and two-family dwellings is
excluded from the provisions of this regulation.
   H.   Private Garages: An attached or detached private garage which faces on
a street shall not be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the street
easement line.
   I.   Accessory Buildings: No accessory building shall be constructed upon a
lot to be used for a single-family dwelling until the construction of the main
building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used
unless the main building on the lot is also being used.
   J.   Architecture Of Building Added To Cluster Or Grouping: Whenever one or
more residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings are
proposed to be located in a cluster or grouping which has a different
arrangement, orientation or other site planning variation from that of other
buildings, structures, or uses in the area or on adjacent properties, the
architectural design, location, orientation, service, and parking areas of such
buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or
other properties in the area, as determined by the planning commission. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-3: HEIGHT:
The regulations herein set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the
specific district regulations appearing in chapter 3, articles A through D, of
this title:
   A.   Measuring Height: In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic
shall be counted as a story; provided, that a story in a sloping roof, the area
of which story at a height of four feet (4') above the floor does not exceed
two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the story immediately below it and which
does not contain an independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story.
   B.   Chimneys And Other Projections: Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires,
tanks, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy may extend
above the height limit.
   C.   Churches, Schools, Other Public Buildings: Churches, schools,
hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and semipublic buildings may exceed
the height limitation of the district if the minimum depth of rear yards and
the minimum width of the side yards required in the district are increased one
foot (1') for each two feet (2') by which the height of such public or
semipublic structure exceeds the prescribed height limit. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
10-2B-4: COURT REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
Whenever a multiple-family dwelling or group of multiple-family dwellings is
designed with an inner or outer court, the following requirements shall be
complied with:
   A.   Outer Court: The width of an outer court upon which windows open shall
be not less than ten feet (10'), or equal to the height of the opposing wall,
whichever is greater; and in no case shall an outer court be less than five
feet (5') in width or equal to seventy percent (70%) of the height of the
opposing wall, whichever is greater.
   B.   Inner Court: The width of an inner court of a multiple-family dwelling
shall be not less than two (2) times the height of the lowest wall forming the
court, but in no case shall it be less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Open Unobstructed Passageway: An open unobstructed passageway shall be
provided at the grade of each inner court. Such passageway shall be not less
than twelve feet (12') in width, shall have a clearance of not less than twelve
feet (12') in height, and shall provide a straight and continuous passage from
the inner court to a yard or open space having a direct connection with a
street. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-5: STORAGE AND PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, RVs AND MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles And Trailers: Commercial vehicles and trailers of
all types, including those used for hauling, shall not be parked or stored on
any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district,
except in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and
one-half (11/2) tons' rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall
be permitted; and
      2.   In no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives,
gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted.
   B.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles, which specifically
include, but are not limited to, motorized homes, camping trailers, pickup
campers, travel trailers, boats and boat trailers, shall not be parked or
stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential
district, except in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Recreational vehicles shall be stored in the rear yard of a
residential lot whenever reasonable access to the rear yard is available. If
absolutely no access to the rear yard is available, recreational vehicles may
be stored in the front yard of a residence; provided, that no portion of the
vehicle(s) extends over or into the street right of way.
      2.   Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in any street
right of way except for purpose of loading and unloading and then not for a
period to exceed twenty four (24) hours. Pickup campers that are in use daily
shall be exempted from this requirement.
      3.   No recreational vehicle shall be stored in the front or side yard of
a residence or a residential lot in a manner that would constitute a traffic
hazard or would, in any way, obstruct vision within the "sight triangle" of a
corner lot.
      4.   In no instance shall a recreational vehicle, either parked or
stored, be occupied either permanently or temporarily.
   C.   Mobile Homes: Mobile homes shall be parked or stored only in
conformance with city ordinances and the provisions of section
10-2C-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-6: CHILDCARE CENTERS:
   A.   Residential Districts, Use Permitted On Review: Childcare centers
authorized under uses permitted on review in residential districts shall meet
the following provisions:
      1.   Location In Single-Family Dwelling: The center shall be located in a
single-family dwelling which is the permanent residence of the operator and
shall be operated in a manner that will not change the character of the
residence.
      2.   Floor Area:
         a.   The center shall contain not less than nine hundred (900) square
feet of gross floor area where three (3) children, not members of the family,
are provided for.
         b.   The center shall provide an additional fifty (50) square feet of
floor area for each child more than three (3) provided for in the center.
         c.   The floor area of an attached garage shall not be included in
determining the interior floor space in the center unless compatible to the
existing dwelling.
         d.   Hallways and bathrooms shall not be included in figuring floor
area of the center.
      3.   County Health Requirements: The center shall meet county health
requirements as to safety, design, facilities and equipment of the features.
      4.   Lot Size; Outdoor Play Area; Fence: The center shall be located on a
lot having not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of area, and all
portions of the lot used for outdoor play space shall be enclosed by an opaque
ornamental fence not less than forty two inches (42") in height. The outdoor
play area shall have a minimum of seventy five (75) square feet per child
within the fenced boundaries.
      5.   Effect On Adjacent Property; Parking: The center shall be operated
in a manner that will not adversely affect property and uses in the area.
Parking for the leaving and picking up of children shall be regulated so as not
to interfere with normal traffic.
   B.   Commercial Districts, Permitted Use: Childcare centers are authorized
under permitted uses in commercial districts as follows:
      1.   Floor Area: The center shall provide a minimum of thirty five (35)
square feet per child of indoor space, exclusive of hallways, bathrooms,
kitchen and space occupied by furniture not for the children's use.
      2.   Outdoor Space; Fence: The center shall provide a minimum outdoor
space of seventy five (75) square feet per child which shall be enclosed by an
opaque ornamental fence not less than forty two inches (42") in height, or the
fencing shall be in accordance with the appropriate screening requirements of
the particular zoning district.
      3.   County Health Requirements: The center shall meet county health
requirements as to safety, design, facilities, equipment and licensing of the
features.
      4.   Parking: Parking for the leaving and picking up of children shall be
required so as not to interfere with normal traffic and be determined in
accordance with section
10-2D-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-7: SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Private Swimming Pools: "Private swimming pools" shall be defined as
pools maintained by an individual for the use of his family and friends, with
no other formal admission requirements. Private swimming pools shall be subject
to the following regulations:
      1.   Pool Construction; Fence: Pools may be constructed as an accessory
use, and yards in which pools are contained shall be completely enclosed by a
permanent wall or fence not less than four feet (4') in height.
      2.   Location: A swimming pool shall not be constructed in front of the
front or side building line and no portion of the pool, pool equipment such as
filters, diving boards, etc., shall be permitted on an easement.
      3.   Walkways, Decking, Facilities On Easements:
         a.   Pool walkways and decking may be permitted on easements; however,
these facilities shall not be placed in such a manner as to restrict access to
public utilities.
         b.   All facilities permitted over easements shall be subject to
removal if maintenance of public utilities is necessary; removal and
restoration of the decking, walkways or other permitted facilities on easements
shall be at the expense of the property owner.
      4.   Pool Setback: The inside wall of the pool and integral portions of
structure composing the pool wall shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5')
from the side or rear lot line and be required to meet all other provisions of
this section.
      5.   Placement Of Pool And Pool Equipment: Pool and pool equipment,
including, but not limited to, diving boards, filters, etc., shall be located
in such a manner as not to disturb adjoining property owners and be a minimum
of fifteen feet (15') from any portion of an existing residential building on
an adjacent lot.
      6.   Drainage And Oversplash: Pool drainage and oversplash from pool
usage shall not be permitted to be directed or otherwise run onto adjacent lots
and shall be handled in a manner consistent with all provisions of this title.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
   B.   Public Swimming Pools: "Public swimming pool" includes all entirely
artificially constructed wading pools, swimming pools, bathhouses used
collectively by a number of persons for wading, swimming, recreation, or
therapeutic bathing, together with all appurtenances pertaining to such bathing
places. Public swimming pools shall meet all requirements and regulations
contained in 63 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1-1013 through 1-1020, "Public
Bathing Places". (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
10-2B-8: ANIMALS 1 :
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with city ordinances.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 6 of this code.
10-2B-9: STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES:
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of
liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the regulations of the
city and the regulations of the liquefied petroleum gas administration of the
state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-10: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND FENCES:
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory
buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which the
building or fence is accessory. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-11: PORTABLE OR TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Portable or temporary buildings shall be permitted only in accordance with the
provisions of these zoning regulations and the relevant city ordinances. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2B-12: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES:
   A.   Residential Districts, Use Permitted On Review: Bed and breakfast
facilities authorized under uses permitted on review in residential districts
shall meet the following provisions:
      1.   There shall be on site paved concrete or asphalt parking available
at each bed and breakfast facility, which shall be accessible only from a paved
concrete or asphalt surface. The minimum parking requirements shall be not less
than one off street space per guestroom. Ingress and egress shall be installed
such that no traffic hazard is created.
      2.   One sign only shall be allowed which shall not be more than six (6)
square feet in area and which may be lighted by no more than two (2) 50-watt
light bulbs.
      3.   The bed and breakfast facility must maintain the residential
character of the neighborhood in which it is located, including, but not
limited to, the peace and quality of life thereof.
      4.   The bed and breakfast facility must meet all applicable codes and
licensing requirements and procedures and must have a minimum of two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet of habitable area and a minimum of one
bathroom for every two (2) guestrooms. (Ord. 2013-02, 5-30-2013)
ARTICLE C. MOBILE HOMES, RELOCATED HOMES, AND MODULAR OR MANUFACTURED HOMES 1
SECTION:
10-2C-1: Definitions
10-2C-2: Mobile Homes
10-2C-3: Relocated Homes
10-2C-4: Modular Or Manufactured Homes
10-2C-5: Mobile Home Placement
10-2C-6: Contents Of Application MH-1
10-2C-7: Relocated Home Placement
10-2C-8: Contents Of Application RH-1
10-2C-9: Exemptions
10-2C-10: Mobile Home Parks
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 6 of this title.
10-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and definitions shall be used for interpretation and
explanation of the requirements of this article:
ANCHORING EQUIPMENT: Straps, cables, turnbuckles, and chains, including
tensioning devices, which are used with ties to secure a mobile home to ground
anchoring.
ANCHORING SYSTEM: A combination of ties, anchoring equipment, and ground
anchors that will, when properly designed and installed, resist overturning and
lateral movement of the mobile home from wind forces and earthquakes.
CHASSIS OR FRAME: The structural component on which the body of the mobile home
and the wheels for transportation are mounted.
FOOTING OR FOUNDATION: That portion of the support system that transmits loads
directly to the soil.
MOBILE HOME OR DOUBLE WIDE MOBILE HOME: A manufactured single- family dwelling
not less than forty feet (40') in length nor less than ten feet (10') in width,
designed for transportation on streets or highways on its own wheels (a
permanent chassis) to any location ready to be occupied as living quarters. A
unit less than forty feet (40') in length or less than ten feet (10') in width
shall be classified as a camping trailer and regulated by the ordinances, rules
and regulations of the city pertaining to camping trailers and recreational
vehicles.
MOBILE HOME PARK: An officially approved unified development for two (2) or
more mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under single ownership.
MODULAR HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME: A newly constructed home which has been
moved from its manufacturing site by conventional house moving methods or on a
truck and has no permanent chassis. This home is then fully assembled and
permanently joined to a foundation on the city site to be occupied as living
quarters.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and
designed to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation
use, being of any weight, but with a length not exceeding forty feet (40') and
a width not exceeding ten feet (10').
RELOCATED HOME: A previously constructed home which has been moved from its
original building site by conventional house moving methods to another location
to be occupied as living quarters.
RUNNING GEAR: Any wheels, hubs, tires, springs, etc., designed for the purpose
of transporting the mobile home from one location to another.
SKIRTING: A type of wainscoting which encloses the lower part of the mobile
home, covering wheels and undercarriage, and which is constructed of fire and
weather resistant material, such as aluminum or cement asbestos board.
SUPPORT SYSTEM: A combination of footers, piers, caps and shims that will, when
properly installed, support the mobile home. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-2: MOBILE HOMES:
   A.   Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to mobile homes and
double wide homes, referred to collectively as "mobile homes":
      1.   Application For Permit/Variance: Before placement of a mobile home
or double wide mobile home within the city limits, the owner shall make
application for a permit/variance from the city as stated in section
10-2C-6 of this article.
      2.   Lot Size: For a mobile home, there shall be a lot not less than
fifty feet (50') in width; the length must be sufficient to provide the setback
distances as provided herein. A mobile home may not be placed on a lot occupied
by another dwelling.
      3.   Yards: The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25'), with a side yard of not less than five feet (5') on both sides of an
interior lot; or if located on a corner lot, there shall be a side yard setback
from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15'); and a rear
yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
      4.   Compliance With Building Code: A mobile home shall either bear a
seal which certifies that the unit complies with the building code or must be
inspected by the city and approved as to compliance.
      5.   Connection To Utilities: A mobile home shall be connected to the
sewer main with its own sewer line, and shall have its own water meter and
electric meter, all of which shall conform to the ordinances and regulations
pertaining to water, electric, and sewers in the city.
      6.   Foundation: A mobile home shall be placed on a foundation of solid
material and the foundation shall be built and placed so as to hold the mobile
home solid. The foundation should be of reinforced concrete set at least
eighteen inches (18") in the ground, and should be at least eight inches (8")
wide and ten feet (10') long. The foundation shall be placed at not more than
ten foot (10') intervals beneath the runners of the mobile home chassis.
      7.   Support And Anchorage: A mobile home shall be firmly supported on
the above required foundation and then anchored or secured to said required
foundation and any other footing as recommended by the manufacturer or required
by federal manufactured home construction and safety standards. As an alternate
to the manufacturer's recommended instructions, a support and anchorage system
designed by a registered engineer may be used.
      8.   Removal Of Running Gear: All running gear including wheels, hubs,
tires, springs, towing devices, etc., shall be physically removed from the
mobile home.
      9.   Skirting; Covering Openings:
         a.   A skirt of solid material must be provided from the floor of the
mobile home to the ground to screen any opening beneath the mobile home. The
skirting shall be noncombustible and unaffected by decay or oxidation. The
skirting material should complement the appearance of the mobile home. Wood
used as backup framing shall be pressure treated lumber. The area underneath
the mobile home floor shall be ventilated by opening in the skirting. The
opening shall have a net area of not less than one and one-half (1.5) square
feet for each twenty five (25) linear feet of skirting.
         b.   Openings shall be located as close to corners as practicable and
shall provide cross ventilation on at least two (2) approximately opposite
sides. The openings shall be covered with corrosion resistant wire mesh not
less than one-fourth inch (1/4") nor more than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension. The area under the floor shall be provided with an eighteen inch by
twenty four inch (18" x 24") minimum size access crawl hole. Pipe, ducts or
other nonstructural construction shall not interfere with the accessibility to
or within the underfloor areas.
      10.   Entrance Platforms: All mobile homes shall have as a minimum
requirement one entrance platform in front and one in the rear. The platform
shall have a minimum width and length of four feet (4'). Steps leading to the
platform shall have a maximum rise of eight inches (8") and a minimum run of
nine inches (9"). The platform shall be designed for a live load of one hundred
(100) pounds per linear foot. Construction shall be of cedar, redwood, plywood,
metal, concrete, or any suitable comparable material. All wood used shall be
pressure treated or otherwise approved for outdoor use. A substantial railing
capable of sustaining a load of twenty (20) pounds per linear foot applied
horizontally at right angles to top rail shall be provided on all open sides of
platform and steps. If plywood is used as the finished surface, it shall have a
nonslip treatment or be covered with an approved nonslip material.
      11.   Parking: Parking of motor vehicles shall conform to parking and
traffic ordinances, rules, and regulations as provided for other residences in
the city.
      12.   Commercial Use: Mobile homes shall not be used for commercial
purposes inside the corporate limits of the city.
      13.   Separate Application For Accessory Buildings: A separate
application must be made and approval obtained for the building of each
accessory or supporting building or structure, including a garage; or for
alteration, enlargement or change in any application previously approved. The
application shall be made in writing to the city clerk.
   B.   Compliance Certification: All mobile homes must be certified by the
city inspector to be in compliance with all regulations before utility services
are provided. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-3: RELOCATED HOMES:
   A.   Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to relocated homes:
      1.   Application For Permit/Variance: Before placement of a relocated
home within the city limits, the owner shall make application for a permit/
variance from the city as stated in section
10-2C-8 of this article.
      2.   Lot Size: A relocated home shall be placed on a lot not less than
fifty feet (50') in width; the lot must be of a sufficient length and width to
provide the setback distances as provided herein. A relocated home shall not be
placed on a lot occupied by another dwelling.
      3.   Yards: The minimum depth of a front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25'); the side yard of not less than five feet (5') on both sides of an
interior lot, or if located on a corner lot, there shall be a side yard setback
from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15'), and a rear
yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
      4.   Connection To Utilities: A relocated home shall be connected to the
sewer main with its own sewer line; and shall have its own water meter and
electric meter, all of which shall conform to the ordinances and regulations
pertaining to water, electric, and sewers in the city. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
      5.   Foundation: A relocated home shall be placed and permanently
attached to a permanent foundation. The foundation shall be of reinforced
concrete set at least eighteen inches (18") in the ground and shall be at least
twelve inches (12") wide. In all respects, the foundation and method of
attachment shall be the same as required for any home constructed under normal
methods and shall conform to the international building code requirements.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
      6.   Parking: Parking of motor vehicles shall conform to parking and
traffic ordinances, rules and regulations as provided for other residences in
the city.
      7.   Separate Application For Accessory Buildings: A separate application
must be made and approval obtained for the building of each accessory or
supporting building or structure, including a garage; or for alteration,
enlargement or change in any permit previously approved. The application shall
be made in writing to the city clerk.
   B.   Compliance Certification: All relocated homes must be certified by the
city inspector to be in compliance with all regulations before utility services
are provided. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-4: MODULAR OR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to modular homes or
manufactured homes/housing:
      1.   Application For Building Permit: Before placement of a new modular
or manufactured home within the city limits, the owner shall make application
for a building permit from the city as would any other owner attempting to
construct a home by conventional methods. The modular or manufactured home will
be required to meet all international building code standards and related
international standards as required for conventional construction. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Lot Size: A modular home or manufactured home shall not be placed on
a lot less than fifty feet (50') in width. A modular home or manufactured home
must contain at least nine hundred (900) square feet and, the lot must be of
sufficient size to provide the setback distances as established herein. A
modular home or manufactured home may not be placed on a lot occupied by
another dwelling.
      3.   Yards: The minimum depth of a front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25'); the side yard of not less than five feet (5') on both sides of an
interior lot, or if located on a corner lot, there shall be a side yard setback
from the intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15'); and a rear
yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
      4.   Connection To Utilities: A modular home or manufactured home shall
be connected to the sewer main with its own sewer line; and shall have its own
water meter and electric meter, all of which shall conform to the ordinances
and regulations pertaining to water, electric, and sewers in the city. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
      5.   Foundation: A modular home or manufactured home shall be placed and
permanently attached to a permanent foundation. The foundation shall be of
reinforced concrete set at least eighteen inches (18") in the ground and shall
be at least twelve inches (12") wide. In all respects, the foundation and
method of attachment shall be the same or equal as required for any home
constructed under normal methods and shall conform to the international
building code requirements. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
      6.   Parking: Parking of motor vehicles shall conform to parking and
traffic ordinances, rules and regulations as provided for other residences in
the city.
      7.   Separate Application For Accessory Buildings: A separate application
must be made and approval obtained for the building of each accessory or
supporting building or structure, including a garage; or for alteration,
enlargement or change in any permit previously approved. The application shall
be made in writing to the city clerk.
   B.   Compliance Certification: All modular or manufactured homes must be
certified by the city inspector to be in compliance with all regulations before
utility services are provided. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-5: MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT:
   A.   Form MH-1; Application; Fee: Before a mobile home may be placed within
the city limits, the owner shall submit to the city clerk a completed form MH-
1, application for placement of mobile home in R-1, R-2, or R-5 districts, and
shall pay a filing fee as set by the city council, plus cost of mailing
certified notices to property owners within a three hundred foot (300') radius
of the proposed site boundaries. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
   B.   Notification Letter, Form MH-2; Objections By Landowners: The city
clerk, or other designated official or employee, shall send by certified mail a
notification letter, form MH-2, to all landowners named in the application.
Return receipt will be requested. Objections from said landowners must be made
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notice. Failure of a landowner to object
shall be considered consent to the application. Provided, however, that
notification to the landowners as provided herein shall not be a requirement of
the permit procedure if the applicant is seeking a permit to replace a mobile
home currently located on property within the limits of the city and the
applicant will be removing the existing mobile home from the said premises.
(Ord. 11-01-2001, 1-24-2001)
   C.   Application And Objections Submitted To Council: After the expiration
of the response time, the city clerk shall transmit the application and all
objections received to the city council.
   D.   Council Action:
      1.   Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a completed application,
the city council shall meet to approve or disapprove the application.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the meeting in which the application was
considered, the city council shall notify the applicant by certified mail of
the approval or disapproval of the application. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION MH-1:
   A.   Contents: All applications for permit/variance shall include the
following:
      1.   The proposed location where the mobile home is to be placed (legal
description), lot number, block number, town site or addition name or number.
      2.   Proof of the applicant's ownership of the land on which the mobile
home is to be located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
      3.   A list with current mailing addresses (obtained from the Okfuskee
County assessor's office) of all the current property owners within a three
hundred foot (300') radius of the proposed site boundaries. Provided, that this
list shall not be a required document with the application for a mobile home
permit if notification of said landowners is not required by subsection 10-2C-
5B of this article. (Ord. 11-01-2001, 1-24-2001)
      4.   Size and type of the mobile home; and size of the lot on which the
mobile home is to be placed, along with a diagram showing measurements of the
lot, measurements of the mobile home, and the proposed location of the mobile
home upon the lot. The diagram must also show the distance between said home
and the front, side and rear boundaries of the lot.
      5.   Size and type of the proposed foundation upon which the mobile home
shall be placed.
      6.   Proposed method of sewage, water and electricity connections.
      7.   The type of proposed skirting to screen the opening between said
mobile home and the ground.
      8.   Pictures of the mobile home (front, back and side views) shall be
provided which clearly show the condition of the mobile home. The mobile home
shall be in good repair, neat in appearance, so as to add to the overall
appearance of the neighborhood.
      9.   Applicants shall obtain consent from at least fifty percent (50%) of
the owners of adjoining property prior to the meeting to consider the
application. Said consent, with proper documentation, shall be furnished to the
city clerk or designated representative at least seventy two (72) hours prior
to the meeting.
   B.   Permit Required: All persons making application for a permit/variance
or who otherwise wish to locate a mobile home within the city limits shall
obtain a permit for the same issued from the city clerk's office. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-7: RELOCATED HOME PLACEMENT:
   A.   Form RH-1; Application; Fee: Before a relocated home may be placed
within the city limits, the owner shall submit to the city clerk a completed
form RH-1, application for placement of relocated home in R-1, R-2, or R-
5 districts, and shall pay a filing fee as set by the city council, plus cost
of mailing certified notices to property owners within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the proposed site boundaries.
   B.   Notification Letter, Form RH-2; Objections By Landowners: The city
clerk, or other designated official or employee, shall send by certified mail a
notification letter, form RH-2, to all landowners named in the application.
Return receipt will be requested. Objections from said landowners must be made
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notice. Failure of a landowner to object
shall be considered consent to the application.
   C.   Application And Objections Submitted To Council: After the expiration
of the response time, the city clerk shall transmit the application and all
objections received to the city council.
   D.   Council Action:
      1.   Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a completed application,
the city council shall meet to approve or disapprove the application.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the meeting in which the application was
considered, the city council shall notify the applicant by certified mail of
the approval or disapproval of the application. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-8: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION RH-1:
   A.   Contents: All applications for permit/variance shall include the
following:
      1.   The proposed location where the relocated home is to be placed
(legal description), lot number, block number, town site or addition name or
number.
      2.   Proof of the applicant's ownership of the land on which the
relocated home is to be located.
      3.   A list with current mailing addresses (obtained from the Okfuskee
County assessor's office) of all the current property owners within a three
hundred foot (300') radius of the proposed site boundaries.
      4.   Size and type of the relocated home; and size of the lot on which
the relocated home is to be placed, along with a diagram showing measurements
of the lot, measurements of the relocated home, and the proposed location of
the relocated home upon the lot. The diagram must also show the distance
between said home and the front, side and rear boundaries of the lot.
      5.   Size and type of the proposed foundation upon which the relocated
home shall be placed.
      6.   Proposed method of sewage, water and electricity connections.
      7.   Pictures of the relocated home (front, back and side views) shall be
provided which clearly show the condition of the relocated home. The relocated
home shall be in good repair, neat in appearance, so as to add to the overall
appearance of the neighborhood.
      8.   Applicants shall obtain consent from at least fifty percent (50%) of
the owners of adjoining property prior to the meeting to consider the
application. Said consent, with proper documentation, shall be furnished to the
city clerk or designated representative at least seventy two (72) hours prior
to the meeting.
   B.   Permit Required: All persons making application for a permit/variance
or who otherwise wish to locate a mobile home within the city limits shall
obtain a permit for the same issued from the city clerk's office. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The conditions contained in this article shall not be construed to include a
mobile home used as caretakers' quarters at various job sites such as
construction projects, gravel pits and dumping operations, or any mobile home
offered for sale and located on a legal mobile home sales lot. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2C-10: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
Mobile home parks shall be constructed and operated in accordance with the
requirements of the ordinances of the city relating thereto, specifically
chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE D. OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-2D-1: General Intent And Application
10-2D-2: Required Open Space
10-2D-3: Location
10-2D-4: Joint Parking Facilities
10-2D-5: Ownership Or Control Of Lot
10-2D-6: Size Of Parking Space
10-2D-7: Amount Of Parking And Loading Spaces Required
10-2D-8: Parking Lot Construction And Maintenance
10-2D-1: GENERAL INTENT AND APPLICATION:
It is the intent of this article that adequate parking and loading facilities
be provided off the street for each use of land within the city. Requirements
are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. This article shall
apply to all uses in all districts. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2D-2: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Parking Part Of Open Space: Off street parking or loading space shall
be a part of the required open space associated with the permitted use and
shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
   B.   Additional To Yard Requirements: The area required for off street
parking shall be in addition to the yard areas herein required, except that the
front yard required in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district or I-1 light
industrial district may be used for uncovered parking area, and the front yard
of a residential district may be used for the uncovered parking area for six
(6) or less vehicles associated with a residential use when the area is
surfaced with a pavement adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust
with continued use, and may be used for uncovered area for more than six (6)
vehicles in accordance with the provisions of section
10-2D-8 of this article. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2D-3: LOCATION:
The off street parking lot shall be located within two hundred feet (200'),
exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have
direct access to a street or alley, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2D-4: JOINT PARKING FACILITIES:
Whenever two (2) or more uses are located together in a common building,
shopping center, or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements
may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility
cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of
spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than
the sum of the individual requirements. Spaces provided for permanent residents
of dwellings shall be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for
employees, customers, and service. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2D-5: OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF LOT:
The land upon which the off street parking lot is located shall be owned or
controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the
principal use is located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2D-6: SIZE OF PARKING SPACE:
The size of the parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular
area having dimensions of not less than nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'),
plus adequate area for ingress and egress. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2D-7: AMOUNT OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES REQUIRED:
   A.   Spaces Required: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be
provided, in all districts except the C-3 downtown commercial district in
accordance with the following schedule:
Boarding or rooming house or hotel      1 space for each 2 guests provided
                                        overnight accommodations
                                        1 space for each 3 seats, based on
                                        maximum seating capacity; provided,
                                        however, that churches may establish
                                        joint parking facilities not in excess
Church sanctuary                        of 50 percent of the required spaces,
                                        with public institutions and agencies
                                        that do not have a time conflict in
                                        parking demand; the joint parking
                                        facility shall be located not in excess
                                        of 400 feet from the church sanctuary
                                        1 space for each 150 square feet of
Commercial establishments not otherwise floor space in the building used for
classified                              retail trade, or used by the public,
                                        whichever is the greater
Community center, theater, auditorium   1 space for each 5 seats, based on
                                        maximum seating capacity
Convention hall, lodge, club, library,  1 space for each 100 square feet of
museum, place of amusement or           floor area used for assembly or
recreation                              recreation in the building
Dwelling                                11/2 spaces for each separate dwelling
                                        unit within the structure
                                        1 space for each 4 patient beds,
                                        exclusive of bassinets, plus 1 space
Hospitals                               for each staff or visiting doctor, plus
                                        1 space for each 3 employees including
                                        nurses, plus adequate area for the
                                        parking of emergency vehicles
                                        Adequate area to park all employees'
                                        and customers' vehicles at all times
Industrial establishments               and adequate space for loading,
                                        unloading, and storing all vehicles
                                        used incidental to or as a part of the
                                        primary operation of the establishment
Medical or dental clinics or offices    7 spaces per doctor, plus 2 spaces for
                                        each 3 employees
                                        1 space for each 300 square feet of
Office building                         gross floor area in the building,
                                        exclusive of the area used for storage,
                                        utilities, and building service area
                                        1 space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1
Sanatoriums, convalescent or nursing    space for each staff or visiting
homes                                   doctor, plus 1 space for each 4
                                        employees including nurses
 
   B.   Other Uses: For all uses not covered in subsection A of this section,
the planning commission shall make a determination of the parking demand to be
created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be
the off street parking requirement for the permitted use. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
10-2D-8: PARKING LOT CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Requirements: Off street parking lots for more than six (6) vehicles
shall comply with the following provisions:
      1.   Fence: All sides of a lot abutting a residential district shall be
enclosed with an opaque, ornamental fence or wall having a height of not less
than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6'). Such fence or wall shall be
maintained in good condition.
      2.   Setback; Sight Triangle:
         a.   No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line
established ten feet (10') back of the property line of the interior and corner
lots wherever the parking lot is located in a residential district or
immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit.
         b.   In all other cases, no setback shall be required; provided,
however, that on any corner lot formed by two (2) intersecting streets, no
parking shall be permitted, and no wall, fence, sign, structure or plant growth
having a height in excess of three feet (3') above the elevation of the crown
of the adjacent roadway surface shall be maintained in a triangle formed by
measuring a distance of thirty feet (30') along the front and side lot lines,
from their point of intersection, and connecting lot lines, from their point of
intersection, and connecting the points so established to form a triangle on
the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
      3.   Landscaping: All yards shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, and
evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition the year round.
      4.   Driveways: Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined
to and shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb
returns.
      5.   Pavement: All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes
shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner
that no dust will be produced by continued use.
      6.   Light Intensity: The intensity of light and arrangement of
reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential district use.
      7.   Signs:
         a.   No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs
used to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the
lot.
         b.   Only nonintermittent incandescent lighting of signs shall be
permitted.
   B.   Pavement: All parking spaces required under the provisions of this
article shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in a
manner that no dust will result from continued use. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
ARTICLE E. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-2E-1: Purpose And Intent
10-2E-2: Development Authorized, Conditions
10-2E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Intent And Goals: It is the intent of this article to encourage unified
design of housing, commercial, industrial, or institutional areas and
facilities, or combinations thereof, to provide for integrated developments
having harmony of design and variety of function. It is not intended to permit
a greater density or uses different from those set forth in the regulations of
the district in which the development is located, but this article is to
provide for a greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts,
and circulation than would otherwise be possible through the strict application
of district regulations, and to produce:
      1.   A maximum choice in the types of environment and living units
available to the public;
      2.   Open space and recreation areas;
      3.   A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural
topography, and geologic features, and prevents soil erosion;
      4.   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development;
      5.   An efficient use of lands resulting in smaller networks of utilities
and streets and thereby lowering housing costs;
      6.   An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding
development; and
      7.   A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other provisions of these zoning regulations.
   B.   Development As Unit:
      1.   This article is designed to provide for small and large scale
developments incorporating a single type or a variety of residential and
related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such a development may
consist of individual lots or it may have common building sites.
      2.   Common land must be an essential and major element of the plan which
is related to and affects the long term value of the homes and other
development.
      3.   A planned unit shall be a separate entity with a distinct character
in harmony with surrounding development. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2E-2: DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZED, CONDITIONS:
A planned unit development may be authorized; provided, that all of the
following provisions are complied with:
   A.   Permitted In Certain Districts: A planned unit development shall be
permitted in any district except an A-1 general agricultural district; R-
1 rural single-family district; R-2 single-family district; R-3 rural mobile
home residential district; or an R-4 mobile home residential district.
   B.   Design: The proposed planned unit development shall be designed to
provide for the unified development of the area and in accordance with the
spirit and purposes of the district in which the unit is located. The design
may provide for modification of yard, setback, and height requirements, but the
use, density, intensity of use, and coverage requirements for the district, and
the minimum dimensions established for the design of courts shall not be
reduced.
   C.   Minimum Size Of Site: The minimum size of the site upon which a planned
unit development shall be located shall be not less than three (3) acres for
commercial developments, not less than ten (10) acres for residential
developments, and not less than forty (40) acres for industrial, educational,
medical, and other types of institutional developments.
   D.   Off Street Parking: The off street parking requirements set forth in
article D of this chapter may be complied with by providing one or more
permanent, common, off street parking facilities for all uses within the
development; provided, that the facility contains the requisite number of
spaces for each use, and that the spaces provided for permanent residents shall
be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for employees,
customers, and service. The total spaces provided shall not be less than the
sum of the individual requirements and the spaces required for each use, and
shall be under the ownership or permanent control of the owners of the use for
which the spaces are required.
   E.   Site Development Plan: The developer shall submit a site development
plan of the proposed development in support of the application for a planned
unit development permit. This application shall be considered the same as a
rezoning request and the same procedures shall be followed concerning
application, planning commission review, and public hearings. Upon approval by
the city council, the site development plan shall become a part of the zoning
districts map. The plan may provide for staged development of the project and
shall so indicate on the plan.
   F.   Deviation Or Change In Plan: Any substantial deviation from the plan
submitted at the time of rezoning shall constitute a violation of the rezoning,
and substantial change in plans shall be resubmitted for review following the
same procedure required in the original adoption of the plan. The chief
enforcement officer shall interpret what constitutes a "substantial" deviation
or change in the plan.
   G.   Time Limit For Commencement: The construction of the planned unit
development shall be started within two (2) years of the effective date of
approval of the plan by the city council. Failure to begin the development
within the two (2) years shall automatically void the development plan and the
land shall revert to the same zoning classification which existed immediately
preceding the approval of the planned unit development.
   H.   Homes Association: A homes association shall be created if other
satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving, operating, and
maintaining common facilities, including streets, drives, service and parking
areas, and recreation areas. When required, the owner(s) shall establish a
homes association in accordance with the requirements and procedures outlined
by FHA in sections 7 and 8.2 of the land planning bulletin no. 6 entitled
"Planned Unit Development With A Homes Association", dated December, 1963.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE F. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
10-2F-1: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
10-2F-2: Alteration Or Enlargement Of Buildings And Structures
10-2F-3: Outdoor Advertising Signs And Structures
10-2F-4: Building Vacancy
10-2F-5: Change In Use
10-2F-6: Restoration Of Damaged Use
10-2F-7: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
10-2F-1: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption of these
zoning regulations may be continued and maintained except as otherwise provided
in this article. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2F-2: ALTERATION OR ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Adding To Or Enlarging: A nonconforming building or structure shall not
be added to or enlarged in any manner unless the building or structure,
including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that if
a building or structure is conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards
or height or off street parking space, the building or structure may be
enlarged or added to; provided, that the enlargement or addition complies with
the yard or height requirements, and the existing building and the addition
complies with the off street parking requirements of the district in which the
building or structure is located.
   B.   Moving Building Or Structure: No nonconforming building or structure
shall be moved in whole or in part to another location on the lot unless every
portion of the building or structure is made to conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
10-2F-3: OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND STRUCTURES:
Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure, or statuary,
which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time these zoning regulations
became effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof, shall not
be structurally altered, and all such nonconforming advertising signs,
billboards, commercial advertising structures and statuary and their supporting
members shall be completely removed from the premises not later than three (3)
years from the effective date hereof. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2F-4: BUILDING VACANCY:
A nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof, which is or hereafter
becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of one year shall
not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
10-2F-5: CHANGE IN USE:
   A.   Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Building:
      1.   A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure (i.e.,
commercial use of a dwelling, etc.) shall not be expanded or extended into any
other portion of such conforming building or structure nor changed except to a
conforming use.
      2.   If such a nonconforming use or a portion thereof is discontinued or
changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure, or
portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which such building or structure is located.
      3.   A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may
be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or
intended if occupied within a period of one year after the effective date
hereof.
   B.   Use Of Nonconforming Building: The use of a nonconforming building or
structure may be changed to a use of the same or a more restricted district
classification; but where the use of a nonconforming building or structure is
changed to a use of a more restricted district classification, it thereafter
shall not be changed to a use of a less restricted district classification.
   C.   Use As Wholesale Or Retail Liquor Store: A building or structure that
is nonconforming as to use at the time of adoption of these zoning regulations
or at any time thereafter, shall not be converted to or in any manner used as a
wholesale or retail liquor store unless such change in use conforms to the
provisions of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2F-6: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED USE:
When a building, the use of which does not conform to the provisions of these
zoning regulations is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public
enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its true value, it
shall not be restored except in conformity with the district regulations.
However, when a building is permitted to be restored under this section, the
requirements of these zoning regulations of the city requiring right of way
dedications, egress and ingress improvements, all other requirements pertaining
to improvements on public rights of way shall be complied with prior to the
restoration of the building. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2F-7: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent
buildings or structures is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), existing
at the time of adoption of these zoning regulations, may be continued for a
period of not more than three (3) years therefrom, provided:
   A.   The nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded; and
   B.   If the nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a
period of three (3) months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change
in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which the
land is located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE G. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2G-1: Enforcement; Permit Or Certificate Required
10-2G-2: Building Permits
10-2G-3: Certificates Of Occupancy
10-2G-4: Amendments
10-2G-5: Fee Schedule
10-2G-6: Classification Of New Additions
10-2G-7: Violations; Penalties
10-2G-1: ENFORCEMENT; PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
   A.   Enforcement Official Appointed: These zoning regulations shall be
enforced by a building inspector appointed by the city council.
   B.   Building Permit Or Certificate Of Occupancy Required: It shall be a
violation of these zoning regulations for any person to change or permit the
change in the use of land, buildings or structures or to erect, alter, move, or
improve any building or structure until a building permit or certificate of
occupancy has been obtained under the conditions of this article. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2G-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: Whenever any structure or building is to be improved
or erected, moved or structurally altered, a building permit shall be obtained
from the building inspector.
   B.   Required Information: The building inspector may require every
applicant for a building permit to furnish the following information:
      1.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing: a) the exact size, shape, and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon; b) the exact size and location on the
lot of all existing buildings and structures; c) the exact size and location on
the lot of the structure or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected,
or moved; and d) the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of
vehicles and ingress and egress drives for all off street parking and loading
facilities.
      2.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and
proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and
housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each
existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate.
      3.   Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed
to determine compliance with these zoning regulations.
      4.   A survey prepared by an engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma
of the boundaries of the lot on which the improvement is proposed to be
located. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2G-3: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure after
the effective date of these zoning regulations until a certificate of occupancy
is obtained from the building inspector certifying that all of the provisions
of these zoning regulations are complied with. Whenever a building permit is
issued for the erection of a new building or structure, an occupancy permit
shall also be required, prior to occupancy. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2G-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority; Hearing; Notice:
      1.   The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on
petition from a property owner, or on recommendation of the planning
commission, amend the regulations and districts herein established.
      2.   No change in regulations, restrictions or district boundaries shall
become effective until after a public hearing held in relation thereto, at
which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
      3.   At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the date, time and place of
such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of general
circulation in the city.
   B.   Planning Commission Report; Protests:
      1.   Every such proposed amendment shall be referred to the city planning
commission for report.
      2.   If a protest against the amendment is presented, duly signed, more
than three (3) days prior to the public hearing by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) or more of the area of lots included in such proposed change, or by the
owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within three
hundred feet (300') of any side of the territory included in such proposed
change, separated therefrom only by an alley or street, such amendment shall
not become effective, except by the favorable votes of three-fourths (3/4) of
all members of the city council.
   C.   Notice To Nearby Property Owners:
      1.   Notice of such proposed amendment shall be given by mailing written
notice by the city clerk or secretary of the planning commission to all owners
of property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundary
of the subject property. The notice shall contain the following:
         a.   Legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
         b.   Present zoning and classification of the property, and the
classification sought by the applicant; and
         c.   The date, time and place of the public hearing.
      2.   In addition, notice may be given by posting notice of such hearing
on the affected property at least ten (10) days before the date of hearing.
   D.   Refiling Of Petitions: Petitions to amend the zoning regulations heard
and decided by the city council will not again be set down for the hearing
within one year of the date of the decision by the city council. Petitions may
not be refiled with the planning commission within one year after the date of
such decision by the city council. Petitions for zoning of the same property in
a different zoning classification may, however, be refiled. (Ord. 09-01-2000,
10-2-2000)
10-2G-5: FEE SCHEDULE:
Fees for filing petitions to change the zoning of property and to amend the
district boundaries shall be as set by the city council per application per
parcel of land. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2G-6: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW ADDITIONS:
   A.   Assigning To A-1 District; Time Limit: All new additions and
annexations of land to the city shall be in an A-1 general agricultural
district, unless otherwise classified by the city council, for a period of time
not to exceed one year from the effective date of the ordinance annexing the
addition.
   B.   Planning Commission Study And Recommendations: Within this one year
period of time, the city council shall instruct the city planning commission to
study and make recommendations concerning the use of land within the annexation
to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the comprehensive city
plan, and upon receipt of such recommendations, the city council shall, after
public hearings as required by law, establish the district classification of
the annexation; provided, however, that this shall not be construed as
preventing the city council from holding public hearings prior to annexation
and establishing the district classification at the time of the annexation.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-2G-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed; Liability:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of these zoning regulations or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and shall be liable
for punishment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
      2.   The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof
where anything in violation of these zoning regulations shall exist, and any
architect, builder, contractor, individual, person, firm, or corporation
employed in connection therewith and who may assist in the commission of any
such violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as herein provided.
   B.   Remedial Action: In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of these zoning regulations,
the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or
land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the
premises. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3A-1: R-1 Rural Single-Family Residential District
10-3A-2: R-2 Single-Family Residential District
10-3A-3: R-3 Rural Mobile Home Residential District
10-3A-4: R-4 Mobile Home Residential District
10-3A-5: R-5 High Density Residential District
10-3A-1: R-1 RURAL SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is intended to provide a location
for the land situated on the fringe of the urban area that may be either
agricultural or urban in character. This area commonly has been subdivided by
ownership into various shaped tracts usually ranging from less than an acre to
twenty (20) acres in size. The use of land in these areas will represent a
variety of urban and rural uses including the single-family dwelling unit on a
small tract, residential uses with farm animals on acreage, and agricultural
endeavors of a limited scale. It is the purpose of this district to promote a
compatibility between uses and to encourage and provide an orderly transition
from agricultural to urban uses.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an R-1 rural single- family
residential district are used only for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, including a
private garage or accessory buildings which are a part of the main building,
including a private garage.
Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board
or sign is removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or sold.
Church.
Detached single-family home.
Garden or agricultural crops.
Home occupation.
Library.
Public park or playground.
Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms regularly used for
housing or sleeping.
Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to the
erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which is removed when
construction work is completed.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with provisions contained in this these zoning regulations:
Childcare center in accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-2B-6 of this title.
Golf club.
Greenhouse, provided the lot shall have a frontage on a major street of not
less than eighty feet (80') with a land area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet and the greenhouse is located within three hundred feet
(300') of a major street with a setback from the side lot lines of not less
than twenty five feet (25') and in accordance with front building line
requirements.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Nationally recognized lodge halls, fraternal organizations, veterans'
organizations; provided, however, any club organized primarily for the purpose
of dispensing or drinking alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted hereunder.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Sign or display, not exceeding two (2) in number advertising the residential,
commercial or industrial development of the land on which the sign or display
is situated. All signs or displays shall be removed immediately upon completion
of the development, but in no case shall they be permitted to remain longer
than three (3) years from the date of issuance of the special permit. The type,
location and lighting of the sign or display shall be such as to not be
detrimental to the use of adjacent properties, or to restrict sight distance on
public streets.
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way or property lines to comply with the following, except as provided in
section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   Front yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
            (2)   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
            (3)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
         b.   Side yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there
shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen
feet (15') and of not less than twenty feet (20') for dwellings of more than
one story, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that
unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set
back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of
the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the
front property line.
            (2)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not
less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than
twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building.
      2.   Lot Width: There shall be a width of one hundred feet (100') at the
front building line, and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not
less than sixty feet (60').
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall
be a lot area of not less than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square
feet.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective
date hereof, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted by this section.
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this subsection and the off street
parking areas required in chapter 2, article D of this title.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3A-2: R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: The principal use of land in this district is for
single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious, and educational
facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and
attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and
protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to
the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and
efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space
for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper
functional relationship of each element.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an R-2 single-family
residential district are used only for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, including a
private garage or accessory buildings which are a part of the main building,
including a private garage.
Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board
or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or sold.
Church.
Detached single-family dwelling.
Garden or agricultural crops but not for the raising of livestock.
Home occupation.
Library.
Public park or playground.
Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in public schools and having no rooms regularly used for
housing and sleeping.
Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to the
erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be removed
when construction work is completed. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-1A-8 of this title:
Barbershops and beauty shops in accordance with the definition contained in
section
10-2A-5 of this title.
Bed and breakfast facility in accordance with the provisions contained in
section
10-2B-12 of this title.
Childcare center in accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-2B-6 of this title.
Golf club.
Greenhouse, provided the lot shall have a frontage on a major street of not
less than eighty feet (80') with a land area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, and the greenhouse shall be located within three hundred
feet (300') of a major street with a setback from the side lot lines of not
less than twenty five feet (25'), and in accordance with front building line
requirements.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Nationally recognized lodge halls, fraternal organizations, veterans'
organizations; provided, however, any club organized primarily for the purpose
of dispensing or drinking alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted hereunder.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Sign or display, not exceeding two (2) in number, advertising the residential,
commercial or industrial development of the land on which the sign or display
is situated. All signs or displays shall be removed immediately upon completion
of the development, but in no case shall they be permitted to remain longer
than three (3) years from the date of issuance of the special permit. The type,
location and lighting of the sign or display shall be such as to not be
detrimental to the use of adjacent properties, or to restrict sight distance on
public streets. (Ord. 2013-02, 5-30-2013)
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way or property lines to comply with the following, except as herein provided
in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   Front yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
            (2)   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
            (3)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
         b.   Side yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there
shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than eight
feet (8') and of not less than ten feet (10') for dwellings of more than one
story, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that
unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set
back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of
the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the
front property line.
            (2)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be
the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
            (3)   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings, shall set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not
less than thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance
not less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than
twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building.
      2.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of
fifty feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a
street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall
be a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective
date hereof, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted by this section.
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking
areas required in chapter 2, article D of this title.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3A-3: R-3 RURAL MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is intended to provide an area with
a low population density and having restrictions similar to those for the R-
1 district. A variety of land use activities, including single-family dwellings
and mobile homes, on small acreages and agricultural operations of small scale
would be accommodated. It is the purpose of this district to afford a peaceful,
healthy, and safe living environment in a rural country setting located on the
urban fringe of the community.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an R-3 rural mobile home
residential district shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the R-1 rural single-family residential district.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the uses listed
in this subsection when located on the same lot.
Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-2C-6 of this title.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with the provisions contained in these zoning regulations:
Childcare center in accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-2B-6 of this title.
Golf club.
Greenhouse, provided the lot shall have a frontage on a major street of not
less than eighty feet (80') with a land area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet, and the greenhouse shall be located within three hundred
feet (300') of a major street with a setback from the side lot lines of not
less than twenty five feet (25') and in accordance with front building line
requirements.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Nationally recognized lodge halls, fraternal organizations, veterans'
organizations; provided, however, any club organized primarily for the purpose
of dispensing or drinking alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted hereunder.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Sign or display, not exceeding two (2) in number, advertising the residential,
commercial or industrial development of the land on which the sign or display
is situated. All signs or displays shall be removed immediately upon completion
of the development, but in no case shall they be permitted to remain longer
than three (3) years from the date of issuance of the special permit. The type,
location and lighting of the sign or display shall be such as to not be
detrimental to the use of adjacent properties, or to restrict sight distance on
public streets.
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way or property lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as
provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   Front yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
            (2)   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street than the
minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation
shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet (40').
            (3)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
         b.   Side yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there
shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen
feet (15') and of not less than twenty feet (20') for dwellings of more than
one story, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that
unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set
back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of
the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the
front property line.
            (2)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be
the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
            (3)   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings, shall set back from all interior lot lines a distance of not less
than thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance not
less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than
twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building.
      2.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of one
hundred feet (100') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut a
street for a distance of not less than sixty feet (60').
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall
be a lot area of not less than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square
feet.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective
date hereof, that lot may be used for any of the uses, except churches,
permitted in the R-2 single-family residential district.
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off street parking
areas required in chapter 2, article D of this title.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3A-4: R-4 MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: It is intended that this district provide for
higher population densities which are more urban in character and have
restrictions similar to those for the R-2 district. A range of activities
including single-family dwellings and mobile homes along with the required
educational and recreation use for the residential area would be accommodated.
The purpose of this district is to afford all persons an opportunity to enjoy
the benefits of a safe and healthy living environment.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an R-4 mobile home
residential district shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the R-2 single-family district.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the uses listed
in this subsection when located on the same lot.
Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-2C-6 of this title.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following use may be permitted on review in
accordance with the provisions contained in these zoning regulations:
Any special exception permitted on review in the R-2 single- family residential
district.
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way or property lines to comply with the following requirements, except as
provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   Front yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be twenty five feet
(25').
            (2)   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no buildings shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation
shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet (40').
            (3)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
         b.   Side yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   For detached single-family dwellings of one story located on
interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of
not less than five feet (5') and of not less than eight feet (8') for dwellings
of more than one story, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that
unattached one- story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set
back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of
the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the
front property line.
            (2)   For freestanding mobile homes located on interior lots, there
shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than ten
feet (10'), except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that
unattached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set
back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot when all parts of the
accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front
property line.
            (3)   For single-family dwellings, mobile homes and accessory
buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the
intersecting street of not less than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is
back to back with another corner lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other
case. The interior side yard shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory
buildings on an interior lot.
            (4)   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings, shall be set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not
less than thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance
not less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than
twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building.
      2.   Lot Width: Lot width regulations are as follows:
         a.   For single-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width
of fifty feet (50') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut on a
street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
         b.   For freestanding mobile homes, there shall be a minimum lot width
of seventy five feet (75') at the front building line, and such lot shall abut
on a street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each single-family dwelling and accessory building, there
shall be a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   For each freestanding mobile home and accessory buildings, there
shall be a lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         c.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use, except churches, permitted in the R-
2 single-family residential district.
         d.   For churches and main and accessory buildings other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this subsection and the off street
parking areas required in chapter 2, article D of this title.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3A-5: R-5 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is designed to provide for a higher
density of population than is afforded in any of the other residential
districts. The principal use of land is for a wide variety of dwelling types,
including single-family, attached dwellings (townhouses), low rise multiple-
family dwellings, garden apartments, and high rise apartments. Recreational,
religious, and educational uses normally located to service residential areas
also are permitted to provide the basic elements of convenient, balanced, and
attractive living areas.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an R-5 high density
residential district are used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in an R-2 single-family residential district.
Detached single-family dwelling and a garage apartment.
Mobile home park or subdivision.
Multiple-family dwelling, in accordance with the provisions contained in
section
10-2B-4 of this title.
Rooming house or boarding house.
Townhouse.
Two-family dwelling (duplex).
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when
located on the lot.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with the provisions contained in these zoning regulations:
Any special exception permitted on review in the R-2 single- family residential
district.
Convalescent, rest, or nursing home.
Doctor or dentist office or clinic.
Hospital.
Off street parking lot associated with a C commercial use as regulated under
the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this title.
Sanatorium.
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street rights of
way or property lines to comply with the following requirements, except as
provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   Front yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard is twenty five feet
(25').
            (2)   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than twenty five
feet (25'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this
regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than forty feet
(40').
            (3)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
         b.   Side yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   For detached dwellings and for unattached sides of attached
dwellings located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than five feet
(5') shall be provided on the unattached sides of the main dwelling for the
first story and an additional three feet (3') of side yard shall be provided
for each additional story or part thereof. For detached buildings of accessory
use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided,
however, that detached one-story buildings of accessory use shall not be
required to set back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line
when all parts of the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet
(60') from the front property line.
            (2)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be
the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
            (3)   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings, shall be set back from all interior side lot lines a distance of not
less than thirty five feet (35'), and from exterior side lot lines a distance
not less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be
a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the
depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in the
rear yard of another dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet
(10') to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be
located in the rear yard of a main building.
      2.   Lot Width: Lot width regulations are as follows:
         a.   For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and for a
single-family dwelling and a garage apartment located on the same lot, there
shall be a minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') at the front building line,
and the front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35').
         b.   For townhouse dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of
twenty two feet (22') at the front building line, and the front lot line shall
abut a street for a distance of not less than twenty two feet (22'); provided,
however, that whenever a side yard is required, the width of the lot at the
building line shall be increased by an amount equal to the width of the
required side yard.
         c.   For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width
of sixty feet (60') at the front building line and the width shall be increased
by ten feet (10') for each additional dwelling unit exceeding three (3) which
is located in the dwelling; however, the lot width at the front building line
shall not be required to exceed one hundred fifty feet (150'); and further
provided, that the front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not
less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For a single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall
be a lot area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   For a two-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be
a lot area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
         c.   For each townhouse dwelling unit and accessory buildings, there
shall be a lot area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet; provided, however, that the lot area for each townhouse dwelling unit
shall not be required to exceed one thousand nine hundred eighty (1,980) square
feet if the rear lot line abuts an open space, commonly owned by the owners of
the abutting property and of not less than fifty feet (50') in width and
extending across the total length of all of the rear yards of all dwelling
units in the attached dwelling.
         d.   Where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a
single-family dwelling, there shall be a lot area of not less than seven
thousand (7,000) square feet. When a garage apartment is located on the same
lot with a two-family or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall provide
not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet more than is required for the
two-family or multiple-family dwelling.
         e.   For multiple-family dwellings of less than five (5) stories in
height, there shall be provided a lot area of not less than eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet and an additional two thousand (2,000) square feet
shall be added for each unit, more than three (3), which is located in the
dwelling.
         f.   For multiple-family dwellings of five (5) stories or greater in
height, there shall be provided a lot area equal to not less than two (2) times
the gross floor area of the building, plus the coverage of the building.
         g.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use, except churches, permitted in the R-
2 single-family residential district.
         h.   For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard areas required by this subsection and the off street
parking area required in chapter 2, article D of this title.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area; provided, however, that a townhouse
which is located on a lot with a rear yard abutting a common open space, as
authorized in subsection 10-3B-1D of this chapter, may cover not more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
   E.   Height Regulations: There are no specific height regulations
established for uses permitted in this district, except as provided for in
section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3B-1: C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
10-3B-2: C-2 Office Commercial District
10-3B-3: C-3 Downtown Commercial District
10-3B-4: C-4 General Commercial District
10-3B-5: C-5 Highway Commercial District
10-3B-6: C-6 Planned Shopping Center Commercial District
10-3B-1: C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This commercial district is for the conduct of
retail trade and to provide personal services to meet the regular needs and for
the convenience of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these
shops and stores may be an integral part of the neighborhood closely associated
with residential, religious, recreational, and educational elements, more
restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, and off street parking are
made than are provided in other commercial districts.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in a C-1 neighborhood commercial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in an R-2 single-family residential district.
      2.   Any special exception use permitted on review in an R-2 single-
family residential district.
      3.   Retail stores and shops which supply the regular and customary needs
of the residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their
convenience, as follows:
Art school, gallery or museum.
Automatic bank center.
Bakery goods store.
Barbershop.
Beauty shop.
Candy store.
Childcare center.
Cleaning, pressing, laundry collection agency.
Dairy products or ice cream store.
Delicatessen.
Drugstore or fountain.
Dry goods store.
Grocery store.
Lodge hall.
Meat market.
Newspaper or magazine sales.
Package liquor store.
Pharmacy.
Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
      4.   Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the store and
premises or to products sold on the premises. Lighted signs of flashing or
intermittent type shall be prohibited; provided, however, that this shall not
prevent the use of animated signs located entirely within the building which
can be seen only from the street side of the building.
      5.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
      6.   Any building used for any of the above enumerated uses may not have
more than forty percent (40%) of its floor area devoted to purposes incidental
to the primary use. No material or goods offered for sale or stored in
connection with the uses enumerated in subsections B1 through B3 of this
section shall be displayed or stored outside of a building.
   C.   Area Regulations: The area requirements for dwellings and buildings
accessory thereto shall be the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high
density residential district. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   All buildings shall set back from the street right of way or
property line to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet
(25') in depth.
         b.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a residential district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall be not less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
         c.   Rear yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a residential district,
there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear,
there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination
thereof of not less than thirty feet (30').
      2.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential setback building line, except where the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will not be annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each structure, there shall be a lot area of not less than
five thousand (5,000) square feet.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective
date hereof, that lot may be used for any use permitted in the R-2 single-
family residential district.
      4.   Lot Coverage: The main commercial building shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area.
   D.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3B-2: C-2 OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This commercial district is intended to provide a
place for those types of institutional and commercial activities that require
separate buildings and building groups surrounded by landscaped yards and open
area. Land, space, and aesthetic requirements of these uses make desirable
either a central location or a suburban location near residential
neighborhoods.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in a C-2 office commercial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in an R-5 high density residential district.
      2.   Any of the following uses:
Apartment hotel.
Art gallery.
Assembly hall for nonprofit corporations.
Business college.
Hospital and sanatorium.
Library.
Museum.
Music conservatory.
Office building in which no activity is carried on catering to retail trade
with the general public, and no stock of goods is maintained for sale to
customers. These shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to,
doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, and engineers; provided, however, that
this shall in no way be construed as permitting undertaking establishments and
funeral homes.
Public and private schools and colleges, with students in residence and
dormitories associated therewith.
Trade school and school for vocational training.
      3.   Recreational uses associated with and maintained primarily for the
benefit and use of the occupants and families of the uses listed under
subsection B2 of this section.
      4.   Shops and stores associated with and incidental to the uses listed
under subsection B2 of this section and maintained only for serving the
occupants thereof.
      5.   Buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental and accessory
to the above uses.
      6.   Nameplate and sign relating only to the principal use.
   C.   Area Regulations: The area requirements for dwellings and buildings
accessory thereto shall be the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high
density residential district. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to
provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
         b.   Where a side yard is adjacent to a residential district, no
building shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to the side lot line. In
all other cases, no building shall be located closer than thirty five feet
(35') to the side lot line.
         c.   No building shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35')
to the rear lot line.
      2.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential setback building line, except when the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each structure, there shall be a lot area of not less than
five thousand (5,000) square feet.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use permitted in the R-2 single-family
residential district.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area, and in no case shall the total gross
floor area of the main building exceed the area of the lot.
   D.   Height Regulations: No building or structure shall exceed forty five
feet (45') in height, except as otherwise provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title, unless it is set back from all lot lines an additional
one foot (1') for each two feet (2') that the building height exceeds forty
five feet (45'). (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3B-3: C-3 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is intended to provide a
concentrated downtown core accommodating commercial and personal services of
all kinds, governmental, business and financial, to satisfy the needs of the
community and surrounding trade region. The uses in this district require a
central location, accessible from all routes entering the city, and they must
be grouped so that the transient and infrequent shopper can park and visit a
number of stores and businesses on foot.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in a C-3 downtown commercial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district, a C-
2 office commercial district, or an R-5 high density residential district.
      2.   Any special exception use permitted on review in an R-5 high density
residential district.
      3.   Any of the following uses:
Ambulance service office or garage.
Amusement enterprise.
Antique shops.
Appliance store.
Artist materials, supply studio.
Arts and craft shop.
Automobile parking lot.
Automobile supply store.
Baby store.
Bakery.
Bank or financial institution.
Book or stationery store.
Bus terminal.
Camera shop.
Carpenter and cabinet shop.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning and dyeing plant.
Clothing or apparel store.
Commercial school or hall.
Curio or gift shop.
Dance hall.
Dental laboratory.
Department store.
Dress shop.
Electric transmission station.
Florist shop, greenhouse, plant nursery.
Frozen food locker.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Furniture store.
Golf course, miniature or practice range.
Hardware store.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies and service.
Hospital for small animals.
Hotel.
Ice storage locker plant.
Interior decorating shop.
Jewelry or notions store.
Key shop.
Laboratory, testing and experimental.
Laundry.
Leather goods shop.
Lodge hall.
Medical facility.
Messenger or telegram service.
Music, radio or television store.
Musical instrument sales.
Nightclub.
Office business.
Office supply.
Optical manufacturing.
Optometrist sales and service.
Pawnshop.
Pet shop.
Photographer studio.
Printing plant.
Radio and television sales.
Recreation center.
Research laboratory.
Restaurant, sit down.
Sewing machines sales and service.
Shoe store and repair shop.
Sign printing shop.
Skating rink.
Sporting goods sales.
Storage warehouse.
Supermarket.
Tailor shop.
Tavern.
Theater, sit down.
Toy store.
Variety store.
Wholesale distributing center.
      4.   Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional, or business service which does not produce more noise, odor,
dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above.
      5.   Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental
to any of the above uses; provided, that there shall be no manufacturing,
processing or compounding of products other than such as are customarily
incidental and essential to retail establishments.
      6.   No article or material stored or offered for sale in connection with
uses permitted under subsections B1 through B5 of this section shall be stored
or displayed outside the confines of a building unless it is so screened by
permanent ornamental walls or fences that it cannot be seen from adjoining
streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level; provided,
however, that no screening in excess of seven feet (7') in height shall be
required.
   C.   Area Regulations: The area requirements for dwellings and buildings
accessory thereto shall be the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high
density residential district. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   There are no specific front yard requirements for uses other than
dwellings.
         b.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a residential district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
         c.   Rear yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a residential district,
there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear,
there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination
thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases, no
rear yard is required.
      2.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 2,
article D of this title.
      3.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential building setback line, except when the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
      4.   Lot Width: For structures other than dwellings, there shall be a lot
width of not less than twenty five feet (25') at the front building line.
      5.   Lot Area: For structures other than dwellings, there shall be a lot
area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Provided,
however, where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary lines
of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date hereof,
that lot may be used for any use permitted in the C-3 downtown commercial
district.
   D.   Height Regulations: There are no specific height regulations
established for uses permitted in this district, except as otherwise provided
for in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3B-4: C-4 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This commercial district is intended for the
conduct of personal and business services and the general retail business of
the community. Persons living in the community and in the surrounding trade
territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses
will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial
vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in a C-4 general commercial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in a C-1 neighborhood commercial district, a C-
2 office commercial district, a C-3 downtown commercial district, or an R-
5 high density residential district.
      2.   Any special exception use permitted on review in an R-5 high density
residential district.
      3.   Any of the following uses:
Ambulance service office or garage.
Amusement enterprise.
Antique shop.
Appliance store.
Artist materials, supply studio.
Arts and craft shop.
Automobile parking lot.
Automobile supply store.
Baby store.
Bakery.
Bank or financial institution.
Book or stationery store.
Bus terminal.
Camera shop.
Carpenter and cabinet shop.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning and dyeing plant.
Clothing or apparel store.
Commercial school or hall.
Curio or gift shop.
Dance hall.
Dental laboratory.
Department store.
Dress shop.
Electric transmission station.
Florist shop, greenhouse, plant nursery.
Frozen food locker.
Funeral parlor or mortuary.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Furniture store.
Golf course, miniature or practice range.
Hardware store.
Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies and service.
Hospital for small animals.
Hotel.
Ice storage locker plant.
Interior decorating shop.
Jewelry or notions store.
Kennel.
Key shop.
Laboratory, testing and experimental.
Laundry.
Leather goods shop.
Lodge hall.
Medical facility.
Messenger or telegram service.
Music, radio or television store.
Musical instrument sales.
Nightclub.
Office business.
Office supply.
Optical manufacturing.
Optometrist sales and service.
Pawnshop.
Pet shop.
Photographer studio.
Print or decorating store.
Printing plant.
Radio and television sales.
Recreation center.
Research laboratory.
Restaurant, sit down.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe store and repair shop.
Sign printing shop.
Skating rink.
Sporting goods sales.
Storage warehouse.
Supermarket.
Tailor shop.
Tavern.
Theater.
Toy store.
Variety store.
Wholesale distributing center.
      4.   Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal,
professional, or business service which does not produce more noise, odor,
dust, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated above.
      5.   Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental
to any of the above uses; provided, that there shall be no manufacturing,
processing or compounding of products other than such as are customarily
incidental and essential to retail establishments.
      6.   No article or material stored or offered for sale in connection with
uses permitted under subsections B1 through B5 of this section shall be stored
or displayed outside the confines of a building unless it is so screened by
permanent ornamental walls or fences that it cannot be seen from adjoining
streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level; provided,
however, that no screening in excess of seven feet (7') in height shall be
required.
   C.   Area Regulations: The area requirements for dwellings and buildings
accessory thereto shall be the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high
density residential district. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Setback: All buildings shall set back from the street right of way
or property line a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Yards:
         a.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a residential district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
         b.   Rear yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a residential district,
there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear,
there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination
thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases, no
rear yard is required.
      3.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 2,
article D of this title.
      4.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential building setback line, except when the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
      5.   Lot Width: For structures other than dwellings, there shall be a lot
width of not less than fifty feet (50') at the front building line.
      6.   Lot Area:
         a.   For structures other than dwellings, there shall be a lot area of
not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under another's ownership on the effective date
hereof, that lot may be used for any use permitted in a C-4 general commercial
district.
      7.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
fifty percent (50%) of the lot area.
   D.   Height Regulations: There are no specific height regulations
established for uses permitted in this district, except as otherwise provided
for in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3B-5: C-5 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This commercial district is intended to provide a
location for the limited amount of merchandise, equipment, and material being
offered for retail sale that, because of the type of material or transportation
requirements, are suitable for display and storage outside the confines of an
enclosed building, or which require easy and direct access by the traveling
public. There will be more assembly of equipment and incidental activity than
would prevail in the general commercial district. Persons of the community and
the surrounding trade territory will require direct access. However, the
concentration of shoppers will be much smaller, and visits less frequent than
in the general commercial district.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in a C-5 highway commercial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use permitted in a C-4 general commercial district.
      2.   Any of the following uses:
Automobile court or tourist court.
Automobile sales and service.
Automobile service station.
Boat sales.
Car wash.
Farm implements and machinery sales and service.
Feed and fuel store.
Machinery sales and service.
Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative wrought iron work
and play equipment sales.
Mobile home and camper sales.
Monument sales.
Motel.
Prefabricated house sales.
Public garage.
Restaurant, drive-in.
Theater, drive-in.
Trailers for hauling, rental and sales.
Truck sales and service.
      3.   The uses listed under subsection B2 of this section shall comply
with the following provisions:
         a.   All open storage and display of merchandise, material, and
equipment shall be so screened by ornamental fencing that it cannot be seen by
a person standing on ground level in a residential district when located to the
side or rear of the lot on which the open storage or display occurs; provided,
however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven feet (7') in
height. Merchandise and materials which are not completely assembled or which
are not immediately and actively being offered for sale shall, in addition to
complying with the above screening requirements, be so screened by ornamental
fences or by permanent buildings that it cannot be seen from a public street.
         b.   All yards unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as
trafficways shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good
condition the year round.
         c.   All of the lot used for the parking of vehicles, for the storage
and display of merchandise, and all driveways used for vehicle ingress and
egress shall be paved with a seal surface pavement and maintained in such a
manner that no dust will be produced by continued use.
         d.   All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as
an incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
         e.   Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed twenty
five feet (25') in width, exclusive of curb returns.
         f.   Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of
reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent
land uses or the use of adjacent streets, and shall not be of a flashing or
intermittent type.
   C.   Area Regulations: The area requirements for dwellings and buildings
accessory thereto shall be the same as the area requirements for the R-5 high
density residential district. The following requirements shall apply to all
other uses permitted in this district, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to
provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25').
         b.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10'). Whenever the rear lot
line of a corner lot abuts a residential district, the side yard adjacent to
the street shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') in width. In all other
cases, no side yard shall be required.
         c.   Rear yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   Whenever the rear lot line abuts a residential district,
there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear,
there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination
thereof of not less than thirty feet (30') in width. In all other cases, no
rear yard is required.
      2.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 2,
article D of this title.
      3.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall, not less than five feet (5')
high and not more than six feet (6') high, shall be constructed and maintained
in good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential setback building line, except where the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
   D.   Height Regulations: There are no specific height regulations
established for uses permitted in this district, except as otherwise provided
for in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3B-6: C-6 PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This commercial district is intended for a unified
grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for
the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the
community and surrounding trade region. It is intended that the planned
shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off street parking space
for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening
materials.
   B.   Uses Permitted:
      1.   Property and buildings in a C-6 planned shopping center commercial
district shall be used only for the uses enumerated below; provided, however,
that these uses shall be located in a unified shopping center which shall have
not less than five (5) shops and stores.
      2.   Any of the following uses may be permitted:
Antique shop.
Apparel store, family, children, men or women.
Appliance store.
Artist supplies.
Automobile parking lot.
Bakery goods store.
Bank.
Barbershop.
Beauty shop.
Book or stationery store.
Camera shop.
Candy store.
Catering establishment.
Cleaning and pressing collection station.
Curio shop.
Dairy products or ice cream store.
Delicatessen.
Drugstore or fountain.
Dry goods store.
Florist shop.
Furniture store.
Gift shop.
Grocery store.
Hardware store.
Help yourself laundry.
Jewelry store.
Meat market.
Medical facility.
Music store.
Newspaper or magazine sales.
Notions store.
Office supply store.
Optometrist sales and service.
Paint and decorating shop.
Pharmacy.
Photographer's studio.
Radio and television sales and service.
Restaurant.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe store or repair shop.
Specialty shop for women.
Sporting goods sales.
Tailor shop.
Toy store.
Variety store.
      3.   Office uses; provided, however that the total gross floor area of
all office uses, exclusive of those listed in subsection B2 of this section,
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the shopping
center.
      4.   Automobile service station which shall be planned as an integral
part of the center and constructed at the time of construction of the center.
      5.   Advertising signs relating to the shopping center, the stores and
shops therein and products sold therein. All advertising signs and structures
shall be designed as an integral part of the shopping center development and
shall be harmonious with the other design features of the center.
      6.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
uses.
   C.   Area Regulations:
      1.   Standards: It is intended that the grouping of the buildings and
parking areas be designed to protect, insofar as possible, adjacent residential
areas, and that ornamental screening from noise and light be provided where
necessary; provided, however, that in no case shall the design of the shopping
center provide less than the following standards:
         a.   Buildings shall set back from all street right of way lines not
less than twenty five feet (25').
         b.   On any side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there
shall be a yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   There shall be a rear yard, alley, service court, or combination
thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') in width, and all of the service
area of all buildings shall be completely screened from public view with
permanent ornamental screening materials.
         d.   Whenever any commercial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high, shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential building setback line, except when the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply. In addition, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that
there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential
buildings in a residential district.
      2.   Size Of Site: The parcel of land on which a planned shopping center
is located shall not be less than three (3) acres in area.
      3.   Site Coverage: Buildings shall not cover more than twenty percent
(20%) of the site on which the shopping center is located.
   D.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories, or thirty five feet (35') in height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title.
   E.   Common Parking Facilities:
      1.   Off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 2, article D of
this title may be complied with by providing a permanent common off street
parking facility for all of the uses within the shopping center; provided, that
the lot contains the requisite number of spaces for each use.
      2.   The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum
of the individual requirements; provided, however, that in no case shall the
amount of off street parking area, including driveways required for ingress and
egress and circulation, be less than two and one-half (21/2) times the gross
floor area of the shopping center.
   F.   Administration Procedures For Development: An application for rezoning
for a shopping center shall include the following, in addition to the
administrative requirements set forth in chapter 2, article G of this title:
      1.   Site Development Plans: The developer shall submit site development
plans of the proposed development which shall be in adequate detail to
determine compliance with the provisions of this section; and which shall show
the arrangement of the buildings, design, and circulation pattern of the off
street parking area, landscaped yards, ornamental screening, service courts,
and utility and drainage easements and facilities; and the relationship of the
shopping center development to adjacent areas which it may affect.
      2.   Evidence Of Ability Of Developer: Evidence that indicates to the
satisfaction of the planning commission the ability and intent of the developer
to carry out the development of the shopping center in accordance with
subsection F1 of this section.
      3.   Building Permit; Time Limit For Commencement Of Construction:
         a.   The developer shall obtain a building permit for the shopping
center in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth in chapter
2, article G of this title, and shall begin construction of the shopping center
within two (2) years after the effective date of rezoning for the shopping
center, and shall make a reasonable and continuous progress toward completion.
         b.   If the shopping center is not under construction within two (2)
years after the effective date of the shopping center rezoning, the planning
commission shall review the status of the development, and if it shall find
that the developer cannot proceed immediately with the development in
conformity with the requirements of this section, it shall recommend to the
city council the appropriate action and zoning classification to implement and
be consistent with the comprehensive plan.
      4.   Deviation From Plans: Any substantial deviation from the plat or
building plans submitted at the time of rezoning shall constitute a violation
of the building permit authorizing construction of a shopping center.
Substantial changes in plans shall be resubmitted to the planning commission to
ensure compliance with the requirements and purpose and intent of this section,
and no building permit shall be issued for any construction which is not in
substantial conformity with the approved plan. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE C. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3C-1: I-1 Light Industrial District
10-3C-2: I-2 Heavy Industrial District
10-3C-1: I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This industrial district is intended primarily for
production and assembly plants that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust, and
glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building, and
for warehousing, wholesale, and service uses. These industries may require
direct access to rail, air, or street transportation routes.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an I-1 light industrial
district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Any use, except dwellings, permitted in the C-5 highway commercial
district. No dwelling use, except sleeping facilities required by caretakers or
night watchmen employed on the premises, shall be permitted in an I-1 light
industrial district.
      2.   Any of the following uses:
Advertising signs and structures.
Bakery.
Book bindery.
Bottling works.
Building material sales yard and lumberyard, including the sale of rock,
gravel, and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not
including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant.
Candy manufacturing.
Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly
used by contractors.
Electrical equipment assembly.
Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture.
Engraving plant.
Food products processing and packing.
Freighting or trucking yard or terminal.
Furniture manufacturing.
Garment manufacturing.
Instrument and meter manufacturing.
Jewelry and watch manufacturing.
Laboratories, experimental.
Laundry and cleaning establishment.
Leather goods fabrication.
Oil field equipment storage yard.
Optical goods manufacturing.
Outdoor advertising signs.
Paper products manufacturing.
Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station.
Sale barn.
Sporting goods manufacturing.
      3.   The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed
building:
Assembly of electrical appliances, electrical instruments and devices, radios
and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils,
condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like.
Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body
and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or
recapping, and battery manufacturing.
Blacksmith shop and machine shop, excluding punch presses over twenty (20)
tons' rated capacity, drop hammers, and automatic screw machines.
Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or
odors.
Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising
structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts
and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
Manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise
from the following prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork,
feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics,
precious or semiprecious metals or stone, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn,
and paint not employing a boiling process.
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal
stamps.
Manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using
only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products
as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes,
pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products.
Wholesale storage or manufacture of alcoholic beverages.
      4.   Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily incidental
to any of the above uses.
      5.   The uses permitted under this subsection shall be conducted in such
a manner that no noxious odor, fumes, or dust will be emitted beyond the
property line of the lot on which the use is located.
      6.   No article or material permitted in this district shall be kept,
stored, or displayed outside the confines of a building unless it be so
screened by fences, walls, or planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining
public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground
level.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with provisions contained in this section:
Concrete batch or transit mix plant.
   D.   Area Regulations: All uses permitted in this district shall comply with
the following yard requirements, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards And Setbacks:
         a.   All buildings shall set back from the street right of way line to
provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
         b.   No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25')
to a side lot line, except that when the side of a lot abuts a residential
district, there shall be provided a side yard of not less than fifty feet
(50').
         c.   No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25')
to the rear lot line, except that when the rear of a lot abuts a residential
district, there shall be provided a rear yard of not less than fifty feet
(50').
      2.   Landscaping: All yard areas required under this section and other
yards and open spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped and
maintained in a neat condition.
      3.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any industrial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque, ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential setback building line, except where the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions of chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings and off street parking
and loading facilities shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the
lot area.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building or structure shall exceed forty five
feet (45') in height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3C-2: I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This industrial district is intended to provide
for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in the
districts established by these zoning regulations. The intensity of uses
permitted in this district makes it desirable that they be separated from
residential and commercial uses wherever possible.
   B.   Uses Permitted, Prohibited Or Restricted:
      1.   Property and buildings in an I-2 heavy industrial district may be
used for any use, except the following:
         a.   All residential uses except sleeping facilities required by night
watchmen and caretakers employed upon the premises.
         b.   All uses not complying with these zoning regulations, or any
other county, state, or federal regulation or law.
      2.   All of the following uses shall be permitted only after they have
been studied by the planning commission and have received the express approval
of the city council. The city council may require approval of the county health
department, the state fire marshal, and other state and county regulating
agencies, and may attach to the approval specific restrictions designed to
protect the public welfare.
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Explosives, manufacture or wholesale storage.
Gas manufacture.
Petroleum or its products, refining of.
Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane, or butane or other petroleum
products.
      3.   Property and buildings in an I-2 heavy industrial district, when
used for the following purposes, shall have the uses thereon conducted in such
a manner that all operation, display, or storage of material or equipment is so
screened by ornamental fences or walls that it cannot be seen from a public
street:
Automobile salvage or junk yard.
Building materials salvage yard.
Junk or salvage yard of any kind.
Scrap metal storage yard.
   C.   Area Regulations: All uses permitted in this district shall comply with
the following requirements, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   There are no specific front yard requirements established for
uses permitted in this district.
         b.   When the side of a lot abuts a residential district, there shall
be provided a side yard of not less than fifty feet (50'). In all other cases,
no side yard is required.
         c.   Rear yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   When the rear of a lot abuts a residential district, there
shall be provided a rear yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
            (2)   Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there shall
be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard or combination thereof of not
less than thirty feet (30') in width or of adequate area and width to provide
for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is greater. In all other cases, no
rear yard is required.
      2.   Off Street Parking: Buildings shall be provided with a yard area
adequate to meet the off street parking requirements set forth in chapter 2,
article D of this title.
      3.   Fence; Lighting:
         a.   Whenever any industrial district or parking lot or parking area
is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential
district, an opaque ornamental fence or wall not less than five feet (5') high
and not more than six feet (6') high shall be constructed and maintained in
good condition along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
abutting residential setback building line, except where the front yard is used
for off street parking, then the provisions in chapter 2, article D of this
title, pertaining to off street parking lots, shall apply.
         b.   In addition, the lighting, including any permitted illuminated
sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or
reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district.
   D.   Height Regulations: Where a lot adjoins a residential district, the
building shall not exceed forty five feet (45') in height, unless it is set
back one foot (1') from all front, side and rear building lines for each foot
of additional height above forty five feet (45'), except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE D. OTHER DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3D-1: A-1 General Agricultural District
10-3D-2: F Floodplain District
10-3D-3: EC Environmental Conservation District
10-3D-1: A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is intended to provide a location
for the land situated on the fringe of the urban area that is used for
agricultural purposes, but will be undergoing urbanization in the future. Most
of these areas will be in close proximity to residential and commercial uses.
Therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in this district should not be
detrimental to urban land uses. It is not intended that this district provide a
location for a lower standard of residential, commercial, or industrial
development than is authorized in other districts. The types of uses, area and
intensity of use of land which is authorized in this district is designed to
encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the
appropriate change in district classification is made.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in an A-1 general agricultural
district are used only for the following purposes:
      1.   Detached single-family dwelling.
      2.   Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained
in section
10-2C-6 of this title.
      3.   Church.
      4.   Public school or school offering general educational courses the
same as ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms regularly
used for housing or sleeping.
      5.   All agricultural land uses, buildings and activities.
      6.   The raising of farm animals in accordance with city ordinances.
      7.   All of the following uses:
Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, including barns,
sheds, and other farm buildings, private garages and accessory buildings which
are a part of the main building.
Advertising sign.
Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area
appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which board
or sign is removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or sold.
Country club.
Golf course or driving ranges.
Home occupation.
Library.
Municipal use.
Park or playground.
Plant nursery.
Public service or utility use.
Sign or display, not exceeding two (2) in number, advertising the residential,
commercial or industrial development of the land on which the sign or display
is situated. All signs or displays shall be removed immediately upon completion
of the development, but in no case shall they be permitted to remain longer
than three (3) years from the date of issuance of the special permit. The type,
location and lighting of the sign or display shall be such as to not be
detrimental to the use of adjacent properties, or to restrict sight distance on
public streets.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with the provisions contained in these zoning regulations:
Airport or landing field.
Cemetery (in accordance with state law).
Childcare center in accordance with the provisions of section
10-2B-6 of this title.
Drilling for oil or natural gas or the extraction of sand, gravel or minerals;
provided, that the operation is conducted in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinances of the city and the state laws and regulations relating thereto.
Kennel.
Lodge hall, veterans' organization, service organization.
Radio and television station and transmission tower.
Stable, public.
Temporary roadside stands for the sale of farm products grown on the premises;
provided, however, that up to fifteen percent (15%) of the display area for
produce may be used for the sale of products not grown on the premises. The
temporary structure is required to set back from the roadway only an adequate
distance to permit parking and ingress and egress, and shall not be constructed
in such a location as would create an undue traffic hazard subject to the
regulations and recommendations of the engineer.
Transportation, pipeline, and utility easements and rights of way.
Veterinary hospital.
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way or property lines to comply with the following requirements, except as
provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title.
      1.   Yards:
         a.   Front yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   The minimum depth of the front yard shall be fifty feet (50')
from the street right of way or one hundred feet (100') from the centerline of
the street right of way, whichever is greater.
            (2)   If twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings,
all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than one hundred
feet (100'), and no building varies more than five feet (5') from this average
setback line, then no buildings shall be erected closer to the street line than
the minimum setback so established by existing buildings; but this regulation
shall not require a front yard of greater depth than one hundred feet (100').
            (3)   When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements
shall be provided on both streets.
         b.   Side yard regulations are as follows:
            (1)   For dwellings of one story located on interior lots, there
shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen
feet (15') and of not less than twenty feet (20') for dwellings of more than
one story, except as provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title. For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, that
unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set
back more than three feet (3') from an interior side lot line when all parts of
the accessory building are located not less than sixty feet (60') from the
front property line.
            (2)   For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots,
there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less
than fifteen feet (15') in case such lot is back to back with another corner
lot, and twenty feet (20') in every other case. The interior side yard shall be
the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot.
            (3)   Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than
dwellings, and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all
exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than thirty five
feet (35').
         c.   There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than
twenty feet (20') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building.
      2.   Lot Width: For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of two
hundred seventy five feet (275').
      3.   Intensity Of Use:
         a.   For each dwelling, mobile home and buildings accessory thereto,
there shall be a lot area of not less than four (4) acres.
         b.   Where a lot has less area than herein required and all of the
boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership at the effective
date hereof, that lot may be used for one single- family dwelling unit, or
freestanding mobile home, or for the uses set forth in subsection 10-3A-1B of
this chapter but not for the raising of animals.
         c.   For churches and main and accessory buildings other than
dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate
to provide the yard area as required by this section and the off street parking
areas required in chapter 2, article D of this title.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
forty percent (40%) of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more
than twenty percent (20%) of the rear yard.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-3D-2: F FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is intended to comprise those areas
which are subject to periodic or occasional inundation and therefore are
unsuited for all residential uses and the usual commercial and industrial uses.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in the floodplain district shall
be used only for the following purpose:
      1.   The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock, and gardening.
      2.   The keeping of agricultural livestock in accordance with the
municipal regulations relating thereto.
      3.   Public recreation not involving buildings. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
10-3D-3: EC ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT:
   A.   General Description: This district is intended to provide for the
protection and preservation of environmentally sensitive lands incapable of
accommodating development of an urban character without experiencing any
adverse impacts as a result.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Property and buildings in the EC environmental
conservation district shall be used only for the following purposes:
      1.   The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock, and gardening.
      2.   The raising of farm animals in accordance with city ordinances.
      3.   Advertising signs.
   C.   Special Exceptions: The following uses may be permitted on review in
accordance with the provisions contained in these zoning regulations:
Cemetery.
Church.
Detached single-family dwelling.
Freestanding mobile home in accordance with the provisions contained in section
10-2C-6 of this title.
Golf course or driving range.
Park or playground.
Public stable.
   D.   Area Regulations: All buildings shall be set back from street right of
way and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements, except as
provided in section
10-2B-2 of this title:
      1.   Yards:
         a.   All buildings shall be set back from the street right of way line
to provide a front yard having not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
         b.   A side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') shall be provided
for all lots upon which a building is located.
         c.   A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided
for all lots upon which a building is located.
      2.   Lot Width: There shall be a minimum lot width for all buildings of
not less than one hundred feet (100').
      3.   Lot Area: For each main building and buildings accessory thereto,
there shall be a lot area of not less than ten (10) acres.
      4.   Lot Coverage: Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than
five percent (5%) of the lot area.
   E.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except as provided in section
10-2B-3 of this title. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-4A-1: Short Title
10-4A-2: Purpose And Intent
10-4A-3: Authority
10-4A-4: Application Of Regulations
10-4A-5: Definitions
10-4A-6: Plat Approval General Procedure
10-4A-1: SHORT TITLE:
The regulations of this chapter, including articles A through E, shall be known
as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF THE CITY. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4A-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban
development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential,
commercial and industrial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and
other public purposes will determine to a large degree the conditions of
health, safety, economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality
of these conditions is of public interest. These subdivision regulations and
standards for the subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make
provision for adequate light, air, open space, drainage, transportation, public
utilities and other needs, to ensure the development and maintenance of a
healthy, attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation
and protection of its human and natural resources.
   B.   These subdivision regulations are designed and intended to achieve the
following and should be administered so as to:
      1.   Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the
territorial jurisdiction;
      2.   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight;
      3.   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to
the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
      4.   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the
tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract, and that cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole
community be borne by the whole community;
      5.   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
      6.   Provide the most beautiful relationship between the uses of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular
regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the
pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and
building lines;
      7.   Prevent pollution of the air, streams and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wide use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order
to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value
of the land;
      8.   Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
      9.   Reconcile any differences of interest; and
      10.   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4A-3: AUTHORITY:
These subdivision regulations and minimum standards for land development are
adopted under the authority granted by 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 45-101
through 45-104. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4A-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Forms Of Land Subdivision: These subdivision regulations and
development standards shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision:
      1.   The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or
parcels, any part of which when subdivided shall contain less than ten (10)
acres in area;
      2.   The division of land previously subdivided or platted into tracts,
lots, sites or parcels of less than ten (10) acres in area;
      3.   The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private
easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including
those for use by public and private utility companies; or
      4.   The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract
of land regardless of the area involved.
   B.   Certificate Of Preliminary Plat Approval: No subdivider proposing to
make, or having made, a subdivision within the territorial jurisdiction shall
proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including
grading, before obtaining a certificate of preliminary plat approval, and shall
not convey title to any lot or lots before obtaining from the planning
commission a certificate of final plat approval and acceptance of the plat.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4A-5: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these subdivision rules and regulations, words in the present tense
include the future; words in the singular include the plural and words in the
plural include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure";
the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
For the purpose of these subdivision regulations, certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:
ALLEY: A minor right of way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights of way, public
walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, or a combination
thereof.
BUILDING LINE OR SETBACK LINE: A line or lines designating the area outside of
which buildings may not be erected.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons
for the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
GENERAL PLAN: The comprehensive development plan for the city which has been
officially adopted to provide long range development policies for the area
subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among
other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and
community facilities.
LOT: A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the
transfer of ownership or for development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or
more streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which runs through a block from street to street
and which has two (2) nonintersecting sides abutting on two (2) or more
streets.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE: A double frontage lot which is designed to be developed
with the rear yard abutting a major street and with the primary means of
ingress and egress provided on a minor street.
LOT, SPLIT: Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two (2)
or more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, and which does not constitute a "subdivision" as herein defined.
PLAT, FINAL: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets
and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character
and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
ROADWAY: That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic; and
where curbs are in place, that portion of the street between curbs.
STREET: Any public or private right of way which affords the primary means of
access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A minor street which collects traffic from other minor
streets and serves as the most direct route to a major street or a community
facility.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic and
having one end closed and terminated by a turnaround.
STREET, FRONTAGE OR SERVICE: A minor street auxiliary to and located on the
side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas
and for control of access.
STREET, MAJOR: An arterial street which is designated on the major street plan
or expressway plan.
STREET, MINOR: Any street not classified as a major street on the major street
plan or expressway plan.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting
as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION: The division or redivision of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right of way
or easement.
TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION: All land lying within the corporate limits of the
city. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4A-6: PLAT APPROVAL GENERAL PROCEDURE:
For all cases of subdividing within the scope of these subdivision regulations,
a plat of the land in question shall be drawn and submitted to the planning
commission and city council for their approval or disapproval, as provided in
article B of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE B. PLAT PREPARATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
10-4B-1: Preliminary Plat
10-4B-2: Final Plat
10-4B-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Submission Of Preliminary Plat For Approval:
      1.   The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for submission to
the planning commission. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat shall be
submitted to the office of the city clerk not less than fifteen (15) days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
      2.   Each plat submitted for preliminary approval shall be placed on the
agenda of the planning commission only after payment of fees, as specified in
section
10-4E-2 of this chapter, has been made and all the other appropriate
requirements of these subdivision regulations have been fulfilled. However, a
plat not meeting all of the requirements may be submitted, provided the
subdivider presents with the plat a written request for specific exceptions and
enumerates in detail the reasons therefor.
   B.   Preapplication Plans And Data: Not less than fourteen (14) days prior
to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall present to the planning commission the following information:
      1.   A general description of the existing conditions of the site and the
suitability of the site for the proposed development. This information may
include data on existing land characteristics, existing covenants and
agreements, the availability of utilities and community facilities, the
proposed use of each portion of the subdivision, proposed lot sizes and
building sizes, proposed business areas, playground, park and school sites and
other pertinent data as may be needed to supplement the sketches required by
this section.
      2.   A general location map should be included and should show the
proposed subdivision and its relationship to existing utilities, schools,
parks, traffic arteries and other features that will affect and influence the
subdivision, such as hospitals, churches, airports, railroads and shopping and
employment centers.
      3.   A sketch plan drawn to approximate scale should be included and
should show topography, using a contour interval of not greater than five feet
(5'), the proposed street layout, lots and other planning features. The street
and lot plan may be in the form of a freehand pencil sketch.
   C.   Certification Of Design: The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a
statement signed by the registered engineer preparing the plat that he has, to
the best of his ability, designed the subdivision in accordance with the
ordinances and regulations governing the subdivision of land, except where an
exception is requested in writing and the reasons for which are clearly stated.
   D.   Contents: The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
      1.   The scale, north point and date.
      2.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      3.   The names and addresses of the owners of record, the subdivider and
the registered engineer preparing the plat.
      4.   A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section
lines, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area of
which the proposed subdivision is a part.
      5.   The names, with locations of intersecting boundary lines of
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of city limits, if falling within or
immediately adjoining the tract.
      6.   The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two feet
(2') referenced to a United States geological survey or coast and geodetic
survey bench mark or monument.
      7.   The locations of existing buildings, water, watercourses and the
locations of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision; provided, however, that the actual
measured distances shall not be required.
      8.   The length of the boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest
foot, and the proposed locations and widths of streets, alleys, easements and
setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions.
      9.   The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface and subsurface
structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to the
proposed subdivision, and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the
following structures and utilities:
         a.   Water mains;
         b.   Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals;
         c.   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; and
         d.   Street improvements.
      10.   Location of the tract by legal description, giving acreage.
      11.   Names and addresses of owners of unsubdivided property abutting the
proposed subdivision.
      12.   Proposed layout, including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot
numbers, block numbers, street and alley lines with proposed street names,
right of way and easement widths, sites reserved for parks, playgrounds,
schools, etc., sites for nonresidential, nonpublic uses and building lines with
dimensions.
      13.   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the proposed
subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements relating
thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed plat. On
all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated,
and for all watercourses entering the tract, the drainage area above the point
of entry into the subdivision shall be given in acres.
      14.   The classification of every street within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the
proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term
(expressway, primary thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, collector or minor)
directly on each street.
      15.   Existing and proposed covenants and restrictions which affect the
area.
   E.   Planning Commission Action: The planning commission shall approve,
approve conditionally or disapprove the plat within sixty (60) days of the date
of its submission by the applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or
approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing,
a copy of which shall be signed by the planning commission chairman, and shall
be attached to one copy of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider. Unless
stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the subdivider, if no action is
taken by the planning commission at the end of sixty (60) days after
submission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. The reasons for
disapproval or conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of
the subdivision regulations with which the plat does not conform. On
conditionally approving a plat, the planning commission may require submission
of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the standards, or
after the applicant and planning commission agree upon any revision which shall
be filed with the planning commission on a revised copy, the preliminary plat
shall be forwarded to the city council for its review.
   F.   City Council Action: The city council shall approve, approve
conditionally or disapprove the plat within sixty (60) days of the date it was
forwarded to the city council for review. If the preliminary plat is
disapproved or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be attached to one copy of the plat
and transmitted to the subdivider. Unless stipulation for additional time is
agreed to by the subdivider, if no action is taken by the city council at the
end of sixty (60) days after being forwarded to the city council, the plat
shall be deemed to have been approved. The reasons for disapproval or
conditional approval shall refer specifically to those parts of the subdivision
regulations with which the plat does not conform. On conditionally approving a
plat, the city council may require submission of a revised preliminary plat. If
the plat conforms to all of the standards, or after the applicant and city
council agree upon any revision which shall be filed with the city council on a
revised copy, the subdivider may proceed with the laying out of streets and
roads, the preparation of utility plans and the preparation of a final plat.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4B-2: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Submission Of Final Plat For Approval:
      1.   A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on tracing cloth, and three (3)
dark line prints thereof shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk not
less than twelve (12) days before the planning commission meeting at which it
is to be considered for final approval. At the same time, there shall be
submitted two (2) sets of the proposed plans and specifications for all
improvements and the proposed restrictions in final form; provided, however,
the final plat may be approved subject to later submission of final improvement
plans and specifications.
      2.   Each plat submitted for final approval shall be placed on the agenda
of the planning commission only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements
of these subdivision regulations. However, a plat not meeting all of the
requirements may be submitted, provided the subdivider presents with the plat a
written request for specific exceptions and enumerates in detail the reasons
therefor.
   B.   Time Of Submission: The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted to the planning commission and the city council for final approval
within one year of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not
submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be
considered as having been disapproved unless the planning commission agrees to
an extension of time. The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county
recorder within two (2) years after approval by the city council and planning
commission; and if not filed within such time, such approval shall be
considered as having been voided.
   C.   Drafting: The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') from an accurate survey and on sheets whose
dimensions are twenty one inches by thirty three and one-half inches (21" x
331/2") between borderlines. On the first sheet of every plat, there shall be a
key map showing the location of the subdivision referenced to government survey
section lines and major streets. If more than two (2) sheets are required for
the plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheet for each area. A
border of one-half inch (1/2") surrounding the sheet shall be left blank at the
top, bottom and right hand side and a margin of two inches (2") at the left
side for binding purposes.
   D.   Contents: The final plat shall show:
      1.   The location and description of all section corners and permanent
survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision
shall be referenced.
      2.   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals
thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified.
      3.   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands,
with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names.
      4.   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles.
      5.   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length or direction of
an alley is not readily discernible from data given for lot and block lines,
the length and bearing shall be given.
      6.   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed streets and
alleys, and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements which shall be
properly located.
      7.   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles, except that where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted.
      8.   The outline of any property which is offered for dedication to
public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings with the area marked
"public".
      9.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be
excluded from platting marked "reserved" or "not a part".
      10.   The location of all building lines, setback lines and easements for
public services or utilities with dimensions showing their location.
      11.   The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection and
central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns.
      12.   The proper acknowledgments of owners and the consent by the
mortgagee to plat restrictions.
      13.   The scale, north point and date.
      14.   Location of tract by legal description, giving acreage.
      15.   The following which shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing:
         a.   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed;
         b.   Engineer's certificate of survey, signed and his seal;
         c.   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to
the public;
         d.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the county recorder of deeds which directly
affect the land being subdivided;
         e.   Certificate of planning commission approval;
         f.   Certificate of city council acceptance of ways, easements and
public land dedications;
         g.   Treasurer's certificate; and
         h.   Certificate of the Oklahoma department of environmental quality
or its successor.
      16.   A title which shall include:
         a.   Name of subdivision;
         b.   Name of city, county and state; and
         c.   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, range and township.
   E.   Planning Commission Action:
      1.   The planning commission shall act upon the final plat within forty
five (45) days after it has been submitted for final approval. This approval
and the date thereof shall be shown on the plat over the signature of the
planning commission chairman or secretary. Unless stipulation for additional
time is agreed to by the subdivider, and if no action is taken by the planning
commission at the end of forty five (45) days after submission, the plat shall
be deemed to have been approved. A certificate by the city clerk as to date of
submission of the plat for final approval, and failure of the planning
commission to act thereon within such time shall be sufficient in lieu of
written endorsement of approval.
      2.   If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted with the tracing and
prints to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically
to those parts of the subdivision ordinance with which the plat does not
comply.
   F.   City Council Action: Before recording the final plat, it shall be
submitted to the city council for approval and for acceptance of public ways
and service and utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This
approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the mayor and
attested to by the city clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat or
plan by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication
shown thereon.
   G.   Prints Furnished By Applicant: After final approval of the plat and the
affixing of all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider
shall provide the planning commission with two (2) dark line prints thereof,
and one contact reproducible cloth tracing, the tracing to be filed with the
city engineer. The applicant, accompanied by a representative of the city,
shall file the original tracing with the county clerk; and the applicant shall
pay all required filing fees.
   H.   Approval And Recording Of Plats Required: No plat or other land
subdivision instrument shall be filed in the office of the county clerk until
it shall have been approved by the planning commission and by the city council
as required. All final plats shall be filed within two (2) years of the date of
approval by the planning commission, and no lots shall be sold from any plat
until recorded. Failure to record the plat within two (2) years of the date of
planning commission or city council approval, whichever is the later, shall
void all approvals thereto. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE C. DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4C-1: Streets
10-4C-2: Alleys
10-4C-3: Easements
10-4C-4: Blocks
10-4C-5: Lots
10-4C-6: Building Lines
10-4C-1: STREETS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   Major Streets: Major streets shall be planned to conform with the major
street and expressway plan.
   B.   Service Streets; Protection Of Residential Properties: Whenever a
subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the
planning commission may require service streets, reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line,
deep lots or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection
of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
   C.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
   D.   Railroad Rights Of Way: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
railroad right of way or limited access highway right of way, the planning
commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of
such right of way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land. Such distances also shall be determined with due regard for
the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation structures.
   E.   Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is placed in the city under conditions
approved by the planning commission.
   F.   Future Street System For Unsubdivided Portion Of Plat: Where the plat
to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for
development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed future street
system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the
subdivider.
   G.   Large Lots Or Parcels: When a tract is subdivided into larger than
normal building lots or parcels, as defined by section
10-4C-5 of this article, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit
the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate
resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility easements and connections
for such resubdivision.
   H.   Street Jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') should be avoided.
   I.   Right Of Way Widths:
      1.   Street right of way widths shall be in accordance with the
transportation plan, and, where not otherwise designated, it shall be the
responsibility of the developer to dedicate rights of way to provide a width of
not less than the following:
 
Major streets:
 Primary arterial    120 feet
 Secondary arterial  100 feet
Minor streets:
 Collector           60 feet
 Local               50 feet
 
      2.   Whenever the major or minor street is located wholly within the
proposed subdivision, the total width of the right of way shall be dedicated;
and whenever the major or minor street is located adjacent to the outer edge of
the subdivision, one-half (1/2) of the right of way shall be dedicated, if it
is determined by the planning commission that it is equitable and feasible from
an engineering design standpoint for the other half of the right of way to be
dedicated from adjacent property.
   J.   Design Criteria; Surface; Construction: In general, the design criteria
as set forth in table
10-4C-1 of this section shall be followed in the layout and design of major and
minor streets. All collector streets shall have an approved surface not less
than thirty two feet (32') in width, measured from face to face of curbs and
all other minor streets shall have an approved surface of not less than twenty
six feet (26') in width, measured from face to face of curbs. All construction
shall be in accordance with the street construction specifications of the city.
   K.   Intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles
as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than sixty degrees
(60°). Detailed designs of intersections may be required.
   L.   Cul-De-Sacs: A cul-de-sac should not exceed five hundred feet (500') in
length, measured from the entrance to the center of the turnaround, and, if
more than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length, shall be provided with a
turnaround having a radius of not less than fifty feet (50') at the property
line and not less than forty feet (40') at the curbline.
   M.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these subdivision regulations; and provided, that the planning
commission finds it will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other
half of the street easement when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever
a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the
street shall be platted within the tract which is being subdivided.
   N.   Arrangement And Names Of Streets:
      1.   The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in
the subdividing of adjacent properties. The planning commission may require the
dedication of street rights of way to facilitate the development of adjoining
properties.
      2.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the
approval of the planning commission.
   TABLE
10-4C-1
   DESIGN STANDARD FOR OKEMAH CITY STREETS
Design Element Freeway Primary Arterial Secondary Arterial Collector Local
Design Element    Freeway      Primary Arterial Secondary   Collector Local
                                                Arterial
Design speed:     70 mph       50 mph           45 mph      30 mph    25 mph
Outlying areas    60 mph       40 mph           40 mph      30 mph    25 mph
Urbanized areas
Maximum
curvature:        4°          –              –         –       –
Outlying areas    4°          –              –         –       –
Urbanized areas
Maximum grade:    4%           7%               7%          10%       15%
Outlying areas    6%           7%               7%          10%       15%
Urbanized areas
Minimum grade     –          0.5%             0.5%        0.5%      0.5%
Stopping sight    600'/475'    350'             200'        200'      200'
distance
Number of traffic 4 min.       4 min.           4           2         2
lanes
Traffic lane      12'          12'              12'         12'       –
effective width
Number of parking Not allowed  Not allowed      Not allowed 1 side    1 side
lanes
Total minimum
street width      –          50' min.         50' min.    32'       26'
(face to face of
curbs)
Minimum paving    Structurally
thickness:        designed     81/2"            81/2"       3"        3"
Asphalt section   Structurally 6"               6"          6"        5"+
Concrete section  designed
Width of
shoulder/parking  10'          10'              10'         8'        8'
lane
Right of way      300'         120' min.        100' min.   60' min.  50' min.
width
Access control    Full         Planned          Planned     –       –
Structure design  HS-20        HS-20            HS-20       HS-15     HS-15
load
Vertical          16.5'        15.5'            15.5'       15.5'     15.5'
clearance
Surface type      High         High             High        High      High
 
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4C-2: ALLEYS:
   A.   Commercial And Industrial Districts:
      1.   Required; Exception: Alleys shall be provided in commercial and
industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive this
requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service
access, such as off street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and
adequate for the uses proposed.
      2.   Width: Alleys serving commercial and industrial areas shall not be
less than thirty feet (30') in width.
   B.   Residential Blocks:
      1.   Not Required; Exception: Alleys shall not be provided in residential
blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the
planning commission of the need for alleys.
      2.   Width: When alleys are permitted in residential blocks, they shall
not be less than twenty feet (20') in width.
   C.   Intersections: Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall
be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.
   D.   Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but
if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the
dead end, as determined by the planning commission. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000)
10-4C-3: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Width: Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than ten feet
(10') wide shall be provided along each rear lot line, and along side lot lines
where necessary for use by public and private utilities. The planning
commission may require aerial easements and easements of greater width for the
extension of main storm and sanitary sewers and other utilities where it is
deemed necessary.
   B.   Rights Of Way For Drainage, Parks, Utilities: Where a subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel or stream, there shall be provided
a right of way for drainage and public parks and public utility purposes
adequate to contain all of the runoff from a 100-year maximum flood. The right
of way shall include all of the land within the subdivision that has an
elevation below the 100-year maximum flood elevation which shall be calculated
in accordance with, and shall be adequate to provide for, the drainage
requirements of the ordinances and regulations relating thereto. This shall not
be interpreted as prohibiting the reclamation of lands subject to flooding by
filling or by other appropriate means. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4C-4: BLOCKS:
   A.   Basis For Determining Length, Width And Shape: The lengths, widths and
shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard for the following:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      2.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      3.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Length: Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than one
thousand eight hundred feet (1,800') measured along the centerline of the
block. When a block exceeds six hundred feet (600') in length, the planning
commission may require a dedicated easement not less than fifteen feet (15') in
width and a paved crosswalk not less than four feet (4') in width to provide
pedestrian access across the block.
   C.   Width: Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient
width to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended
for business and industrial use should be of a width suitable for the intended
use, with due allowance for off street parking and loading facilities. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4C-5: LOTS:
   A.   Width: Residential lots other than lots for townhouses shall not be
less than fifty feet (50') in width at the front building line and shall abut a
street a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'), except that a corner
lot shall be not less than sixty feet (60') in width at the front building
line.
   B.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines should be approximately at right angle
or radial to street lines.
   C.   Depth: The depth of residential lots other than lots for townhouses
shall not be less than one hundred ten feet (110').
   D.   Area: The area of residential lots other than lots for townhouses shall
not be less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
   E.   Residential Subdivisions With Septic Tanks: In residential subdivisions
where septic tanks or individual sewage disposal devices are to be installed,
the area of the lot shall not be less than:
      1.   Thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet when percolation rate is
one inch (1") in thirty (30) minutes or less; or
      2.   Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet when
percolation rate is one inch (1") in thirty one (31) to sixty (60) minutes; or
      3.   Twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet when
percolation rate is one inch (1") in thirty (30) minutes or less and they have
an adequate approved public water system. Regardless of the minimum lot size,
all lots shall be shaped such that it will accommodate a properly designed
sewage system with adequate protection of the water supply, including adjacent
lots and the public health of the area.
         a.   A subdivider shall conduct a percolation test on each proposed
lot in a subdivision and indicate the location and result of each test on the
preliminary plat; the dimensions and area of each lot may be established at the
levels necessary to conform to the specified requirements.
         b.   In no instance, however, shall the size of a lot, where a septic
tank or other type of individual sewage disposal device is to be installed, be
less than twenty two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet.
   F.   Lots Not Served By Public Water System: Every residential lot not
served by an approved public water system shall be no smaller than twenty two
thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet.
   G.   Double Frontage And Reverse Frontage; Planting Screen Easement:
      1.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where they are needed to provide for the separation of residential development
from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
      2.   A planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10') shall be
provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or other
use where screening is required. There shall be no right of access across a
planting screen easement.
      3.   At the discretion of the planning commission, the developer may
substitute for an easement and a planting screen a permanent ornamental fence
of a height and architectural design which will appropriately screen and be
harmonious with residential or other neighborhood elements. (Ord. 09-01-2000,
10-2-2000)
10-4C-6: BUILDING LINES:
   A.   Residential Subdivisions: Building lines shall be provided for all
residential subdivisions as follows:
      1.   A front yard building line shall be located not less than twenty
five feet (25') back of the street right of way line.
      2.   A side yard building line on the side of a corner lot abutting the
street shall be located not less than fifteen feet (15') back of the street
right of way when such lot is back to back with another corner lot and not less
than twenty feet (20') back of the street right of way line in every other
case.
      3.   A side yard building line on an interior lot shall be located not
less than ten feet (10') back of the side yard property line.
      4.   A side yard building line shall be provided not less than ten feet
(10') back of a crosswalk right of way line on the side of a lot abutting a
midblock crosswalk.
      5.   Restrictions requiring buildings to be located within the building
lines shown on the plat shall be set forth on the plat or on a separate
recorded instrument.
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Lots: Building lines for commercial and
industrial lots shall be at least forty feet (40') from each street property
line or as otherwise required by the planning commission. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
ARTICLE D. IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-4D-1: Compliance With Minimum Standards; Continuity
10-4D-2: Maintenance And Supervision
10-4D-3: Plans Required
10-4D-4: Surety Bond
10-4D-5: Permanent Markers
10-4D-6: Street Improvements
10-4D-7: Sidewalks
10-4D-8: Water Lines And Fire Hydrants
10-4D-9: Installation And Sterilization Of Mains
10-4D-10: Sewage Disposal Systems
10-4D-11: Storm Sewers And Drainage Channels
10-4D-12: Location Of Utility Lines
10-4D-13: Street Lighting
10-4D-1: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM STANDARDS; CONTINUITY:
   A.   Minimum Standards: All improvements shall be designed and installed so
as to comply with the minimum standards established by the ordinances and
regulations relating thereto.
   B.   Continuity Of Improvements: All improvements shall be designed and
installed so as to provide for a logical system of utilities, drainage and
streets and to create continuity of improvements for the development of
adjacent properties. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-2: MAINTENANCE AND SUPERVISION:
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of
the area, or that are of common use or benefit, which are not or cannot be
satisfactorily maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made
which is acceptable to the city council for the proper and continuous
operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities. (Ord. 09-01-2000,
10-2-2000)
10-4D-3: PLANS REQUIRED:
Plans for the improvements required by this article shall be prepared by the
city engineering department or by a qualified engineer, registered in the
state. Two (2) sets of prints of the proposed plans and specifications for all
improvements shall be filed with the city clerk. One set of as built plans and
specifications, certified and signed by an engineer registered in the state,
shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the acceptance by the city council
of any improvement installed by the subdivider. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-4: SURETY BOND:
   A.   Filing Of Bond: In lieu of completion of the improvements herein
required, the city council may require the subdivider to file a surety bond
with the city clerk to ensure the actual construction of such improvements
according to the plans and specifications approved by the planning commission
within a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date of approval
of the final plat. Such bond shall be in the amount of one hundred percent
(100%) of the estimated cost of the improvement as determined by the planning
commission and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the city council.
   B.   Requirement For Building Construction: No building construction shall
be permitted on any lot that does not comply with the provisions of these
subdivision regulations and other applicable elements of the general plan, and
no municipal utility service shall be furnished to such lot.
   C.   Drainage And Utility Services: In any case where the council does not
require a bond for the improvements required herein, no building shall be
permitted on any lot or in any area in a subdivision where the proposed
construction will produce runoff or require utility services that affect other
areas or lots located within or outside the subdivision unless a bond, in the
amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost, is posted for the
portion of the drainage or utility improvements that will protect the affected
area. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-5: PERMANENT MARKERS:
Each block and subdivision corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not
less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and twenty four inches (24") long,
at least one inch (1") below finished grade. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial, industrial or other purposes shall lay out, grade and otherwise
improve all streets that are designated on the approved plat or that directly
serve the subdivision in accordance with the specifications of the city and in
accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   New Street Intersecting State Or Federal Highway: The design of an
improvement of an intersection of any new street with an existing state or
federal highway shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Oklahoma
state highway department, but in no case shall the standard be less than the
applicable city specifications.
   B.   Portion Of Cost Paid By Subdivider: Whenever a subdivision contains a
major street that requires a street facility that is more costly than is
required to serve the future occupants of the subdivision, the subdivider shall
be required to pay only the portion of the cost of the major street that would
equal the cost of an improvement required to serve only the subdivision, as
determined by the city council.
   C.   Driveways: All driveways which connect with public streets shall be
constructed in accordance with "Standard Design Of Driveway Entrances For
Oklahoma Highways", revised September 1956, and subsequent amendments thereto,
as prepared by the Oklahoma state highway department. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000; amd. 2007 Code)
10-4D-7: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Plan Required; Construction:
      1.   A plan for a system of sidewalks shall be prepared that will provide
every lot within a residential or commercial subdivision, or portion thereof,
with a direct sidewalk connection with all of the community facilities and
commercial enterprises located within or adjacent to the subdivision, and in a
manner that will provide convenient pedestrian circulation throughout the
neighborhood or area in which the subdivision is located.
      2.   The planning commission may require the construction of sidewalks to
connect with existing or future proposed sidewalks in areas adjacent to the
subdivision where such sidewalks are needed for pedestrian circulation.
   B.   Width; Requirement Near Schools: Sidewalks shall have a width of four
feet (4') and shall be installed on both sides of all streets for a distance of
at least two thousand feet (2,000') on those streets which would provide direct
access to a school site.
   C.   Collector Streets; Exception For Industrial Subdivisions:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of collector streets
and major thoroughfares.
      2.   The planning commission may exempt industrial subdivisions from
sidewalk requirements.
   D.   Residential Areas: Sidewalks in residential areas shall abut property
lines. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-8: WATER LINES AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Installation Of Lines And Hydrants:
      1.   The subdivider shall install water lines and fire hydrants when an
existing city water line is located within a reasonable distance as determined
by the planning commission.
      2.   Installation shall be in accordance with the specifications
governing water line construction, as provided for herein.
      3.   Work included under these specifications shall include the
furnishing and installation of all pipes, valves, fittings, specials, fire
hydrants and other incidental work and materials in connection with conveying
water from the source of supply to the water mains and to each fire hydrant,
including furnishing and installation of all the water mains and appurtenances
in accordance with the plans and these specifications. All work shall be
performed in accordance with these subdivision regulations and with
recommendations and regulations of the state health department.
   B.   Excavations And Trenches:
      1.   Trenching Generally:
         a.   The location of the water mains, hydrants, valves, etc., shall be
shown on the city maps or plans. Trenches shall be of sufficient width to
provide ample room for workmen and making joints. In no case shall the trench
inside of sheeting and bracing lines be less than twelve inches (12") greater
than the external diameter of the pipe bell. Trenches shall be cut to depths
which shall provide a minimum cover of thirty inches (30"). The cover shall be
measured from the top of the barrel of the pipe to the finished surface of the
ground or street. The grade of the invert of all water lines shall, in general,
be parallel to the street grade, except that the engineer may require a greater
depth, not to exceed two feet (2'), at the point where there is a sharp break
in the street grade, or where necessary to provide clearance for existing or
proposed pipelines of drainage structures. Bottoms of the trenches shall be
accurately graded to provide uniform bearing and support for the pipe.
         b.   Ledge rock, boulders and large stones shall be removed to provide
a clearance of at least six inches (6") on each side of all pipes and
appurtenances. Adequate clearance for properly jointing pipe laid in rock
trenches shall be provided at bell holes.
      2.   Protection Of Excavation: The contractor shall adequately protect
all excavations from caving in by providing suitable sheeting, shoring and
bracing.
      3.   Backfilling Trenches:
         a.   After water mains have been tested and approved, the trenches
shall be backfilled.
         b.   Where water mains are laid in rock, shale or clay, four (4) to
six inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench between bell holes to
provide a uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe. When the
water main is in place and the joint has been completed, the trench shall be
backfilled with sand to the top of the pipe. Where mains are constructed in the
parking area or parallel to a road where there would normally be no traffic,
the remainder of the trench may be filled with a Morman board or other such
device, allowing six inches (6") for top dressing, after which the entire
trench shall be settled with water. After settlement, the top dressing shall be
applied, but in no case shall the top dressing be applied where pools of water
are standing. Where the trench is excavated in front of developed property, the
top dressing must be, in general, of as good soil as the original ground, and
in the event there is a lawn, trees or decorative shrubbery, the growth shall
be protected and restored to its original condition.
         c.   Where the water main crosses roadways or rights of way, etc.:
            (1)   Where the water main crosses any unpaved roadway, gravel or
oil surfaced road, driveway of any kind, or railroad tracks, four (4) to six
inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the pipe
invert. After the pipe is laid to grade, sand shall be used for backfill to the
top of the pipe, the sand to be flooded with water to prevent settlement. Then
the backfill from the top of the sand to the top of the trench shall be
compacted in six inch (6") layers to a density of at least equal to that of the
top six (6) to twelve inches (12") of the surrounding earth, using water if
required to get proper compaction.
            (2)   In case the excavation fails to furnish suitable material for
the bottom of the trench or backfill, the contractor shall supply such material
as will be suitable and satisfactory to the engineer, moving same from another
locality or part of work as necessary.
            (3)   Where the water mains are constructed under proposed paving
or paving which has been cut in or across roads and highways, driveways,
sidewalks, under fences, foundations or other such structures, four (4) to six
inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the pipe
invert, and after the pipe is laid to grade, the entire trench shall be
backfilled with sand from the bottom to the top of the trench, and then
thoroughly settled with water by flooding or jetting, being certain that the
sand around and under the pipe is sufficiently wetted to attain maximum
compaction.
   C.   Cutting And Replacing Paving:
      1.   Where concrete, asphalt concrete or asphalt concrete base paving has
been cut, the contractor shall dispose of the broken materials, and after the
sand backfill has been completed, shall apply a temporary patch of asphalt
surface course (hot mixed cold laid). The contractor shall maintain these
patches for a period of sixty (60) days or to the time the permanent repair has
been made. A permit fee and repair fee shall be paid to the city before any
paving cut is made, and evidence of payment of these fees shall be shown to the
city inspector for the job on which the cut or cuts occur. Street cuts will not
be allowed for the purpose of laying water lines where boring is feasible, as
determined by the city council.
      2.   Where water mains are to be installed across an existing paved
street by boring, a sleeve jacket of next larger size in diameter of PVC pipe
will be installed in the bore hole to protect the main line.
   D.   Pipe And Fittings: All pipe and fittings used for the construction of
the water mains and distribution system shall conform to the following
requirements:
      1.   All water lines will be of a quality equal to or better than that
for PVCSDR 21 pipe as determined by the American Water Works Association
(AWWA).
      2.   All pipes shall be straight, accurately circular in section, with
all inner and outer surfaces concentric. Except where shorter lengths are
required for connections with valves, fittings or changes in design
requirements where such connections must be made at specific locations, all
pipe shall be furnished in laying lengths of not less than twenty feet (20')
plus or minus two inches (±2"), and the length or lengths to be furnished shall
be stipulated in the proposal.
      3.   All pipes shall be delivered in all respects sound and conformable
to these specifications. Inspection by the city or its representative shall not
relieve the contractor of any of his obligations in this respect, and any
defective pipe which may be passed by the city or its representative, at the
works or elsewhere, shall be at all times liable to rejection when discovered
until the final completion and adjustment of the contract. Care shall be taken
in handling the pipe not to injure the coating or lining, and pipe damaged
during transportation or at any time after it has received the coating or
lining shall not be used.
   E.   Hydrant Specifications:
      1.   All fire hydrants shall have a six inch (6") mechanical connection
and shall have two (2) 21/2-inch and one 41/2-inch streamer connection designed
for one hundred fifty (150) pounds' working pressure or three hundred (300)
pounds' hydrostatic pressure, and shall conform to the latest specifications of
the American Water Works Association for a traffic model hydrant with breakable
coupling at ground level, with a five and one-fourth inch (51/4") valve
opening. All working parts shall be bronze. All hose threads shall conform to
the standard threads of the city. Design, materials and workmanship shall be
similar and equal to the latest stock pattern ordinarily produced by the
manufacturer.
      2.   All fire hydrants will have a maximum separation not to exceed five
hundred feet (500'), and will be located in order to provide the greatest and
most effective firefighting capacity for the area.
   F.   Setting Hydrants And Valves: Hydrants and valves installed in trenches
shall be placed where shown on the drawings unless otherwise directed by the
engineer. Hydrants, valves and valve boxes shall all be plumb, with valve boxes
placed directly over the valves. After being correctly positioned, earth fill
shall be carefully tamped around the valve box for a distance of four feet (4')
on all sides of the box. Hydrants shall be set at such elevations that the
connection pipe and distributing mains shall have the same depth of cover. Each
hydrant shall be placed upon a slab of stone or concrete not less than four
inches (4") thick and fifteen inches (15") square. The back side of the
hydrant, opposite the pipe connections, shall be firmly wedged between the
hydrant and the vertical face of the trench to prevent the hydrant from flowing
off the line. Around the base of each hydrant shall be placed not less than
seven (7) cubic feet of three-fourths inch (3/4") crushed rock to ensure the
complete drainage of the hydrant when closed. All backfill around hydrants
shall be thoroughly compacted to the surface of the ground. Before installing
any hydrant or valve, care shall be taken to see that all foreign material is
removed from the interior of the barrel. Stuffing boxes shall be tightened and
the hydrant or valve opened or closed to see that all parts are in working
condition.
   G.   Bracing Pipe Bends: All fittings at bends in the pipe shall be firmly
braced by means of a concrete brace block. Additional blocks may be ordered by
the engineer.
   H.   Tests: After the pipe has been laid and jointed, and before any joints
are covered, the pipeline shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of one
hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch for a period of two (2) hours. If
there is any perceptible leakage during the test, the necessary repairs shall
be made and the test repeated. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-9: INSTALLATION AND STERILIZATION OF MAINS:
   A.   Size Of Lines: Distribution lines shall not be less than six inch (6")
nominal diameter.
   B.   Use Of New Materials: All pipe and accessories, unless otherwise
specifically stipulated in the proposal, shall be new materials which have at
no time previously been used for any purpose whatsoever.
   C.   Cleaning Interior Of Pipes: The interior of all pipe shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all foreign matter before being lowered into the trench
and shall be kept clean during laying operations by means of plugs or other
approved methods. No trench water shall be allowed to enter the pipe or
fittings. At all times when work is not in progress, all open ends of pipes and
fittings shall be securely closed to the satisfaction of the engineer.
   D.   Inspection Of Pipes For Defects: Before lowering, and while suspended,
the pipe shall be inspected for defects. Any defective, damaged or unsound pipe
shall be rejected.
   E.   Pipeline Deflections From Straight Line Or Grade: Pipelines or runs
intended to be straight shall be so laid. Deflections from a straight line or
grade, made necessary by vertical curves or horizontal curves of offsets, shall
not exceed six (6) D inches per linear foot of pipe (where D represents the
nominal internal diameter of the pipe expressed in inches) between the
centerlines, extended, of any two (2) connecting pipes. If the specified or
required alignment requires deflections in excess of those stipulated above,
the contractor shall either provide, at his own expense, special bends as
approved by the engineer, or pipes in shorter length in such length and number
that the angular deflection at any joint, as represented by the specified
maximum deflections, is not exceeded.
   F.   Jute Packing Of Joints: After placing a length of pipe in the trench,
the jute packing material for the joint shall be held around the bottom of the
spigot so that it will enter as the pipe is pushed into position. The spigot
shall be centered in the bell, the pipe pushed into position and brought into
true and specified alignment. Except where necessary in making connections with
other lines and as authorized by the city engineer, pipe shall be laid with the
bells facing in the direction of laying, and for lines on an appreciable slope,
bells shall, at the discretion of the city engineer, face upgrade. Not less
than two (2) lengths of pipe shall be in a position, with jute packing
installed and earth fill tamped alongside the pipe, ahead of each joint before
it is poured, except where necessary for closures. Under no circumstances will
pipe be laid in water, and no pipe shall be laid when trench conditions or the
weather is unsuitable for such work, except by permission of the city engineer.
   G.   Causes For Suspension Of Work: The work, or any portion of the work,
under construction shall be suspended immediately on written order of the city
engineer or the city council for any good cause or causes, among others of
which special reference is made to the following:
      1.   Failure of the contractor to provide sufficient and proper equipment
and properly executing the work;
      2.   Deliberate failure on the part of the contractor to observe any
requirements of these specifications or to comply with any orders given by the
city engineer as provided for in these specifications; or
      3.   Failure of the contractor promptly to make good any defects in
materials or workmanship or any defects of any other nature, the correction of
which has been directed in writing by the city engineer.
   H.   Sterilization Of Mains: Upon completion of the water lines, arrangement
shall be made for their sterilization in a manner satisfactory to the city. At
a minimum, the contractor shall provide the material and do the work necessary
to sterilize all the pipes, valves, hydrants and other surfaces with which
water provided by the system will come in contact, in the following manner:
A solution containing not less than fifty (50) parts per million of chlorine
shall be prepared by the addition of either liquid chlorine or dry calcium
hypochlorite to water introduced into all parts of the system. This solution
shall remain in the parts for at least five (5) hours, and the sterilization
shall be done before any part of the system is put in operation. The contractor
shall have laboratory tests made and shall resterilize lines as necessary
before they are placed in service. Payment for this item shall be included in
the price bid for the construction of the items to be sterilized. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-10: SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Sanitary Sewer Or Septic Tank Installation:
      1.   The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers whenever a sanitary
sewer is reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission.
Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the specifications
governing sanitary sewer construction, as specified in this section.
      2.   Whenever a sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible, septic tanks
or other unit disposal systems may be used in accordance with the following
provisions:
         a.   A lot on which a unit disposal system is located shall not be
less than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet in area;
         b.   No portion of any unit disposal system shall be located closer
than twenty feet (20') to the lot line of the lot on which the system is
located; and
         c.   All unit disposal systems shall comply with the recommendations
and requirements of the state and county health departments.
      3.   When subdivisions contain ten (10) acres or more, the planning
commission may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers and a disposal
system that is adequate to serve all of the lots within the subdivision and as
set forth in the Oklahoma department of health's engineering bulletin number
600 entitled "Septic Tank And Sub Surface Tile Systems" and subsequent
amendments thereto.
      4.   The work under this subsection includes the furnishing of all
material, equipment, tools, labor and supervision necessary to the construction
of sanitary sewers complete, together with all necessary trenching, excavating,
sheeting and bracing, pumping, bailing, pipe laying and backfilling, and the
furnishing of all the materials and appurtenances necessary to the proper
functioning of the complete sewer system.
   B.   Pipe Specifications: All sewer lines shall have a nominal diameter of
eight inches (8") or greater and shall meet or surpass the specifications for
schedule 40 plastic PVC pipe.
   C.   Trench Excavation:
      1.   Excavations of every description and of whatever substance
encountered shall be made to the depth shown on the drawings.
      2.   All excavated material not required for backfilling or not suitable
for use as backfilling material shall be disposed of within the site areas as
directed by the engineer.
      3.   In general, excavation shall be made in open cut to the line and
grade shown on the drawings. Sides of trenches shall be kept as nearly vertical
as possible and shall be sheeted and braced as required.
      4.   The trench width shall be such as to provide ample working space at
the sides of the pipe but in no case shall it exceed the diameter of the barrel
of the pipe plus sixteen inches (16"). The trench width shall be measured at
the top of the pipe. Where cuts exceed ten feet (10'), the trench width shall
be limited to the outside diameter of the pipe plus six inches (6") at the top
of the pipe.
      5.   Wherever wet, unstable soil is encountered, the engineer may, if he
deems it necessary, order the trench bottom to be excavated below grade and the
material so excavated to be replaced with sand, gravel or other suitable
material, well tamped in place. Where, through error or neglect, the contractor
shall carry the excavation below trench grade, he shall backfill to trench
grade with sand, gravel or other suitable material well tamped in place, and
the cost of such backfill shall be borne by the contractor.
      6.   Bell holes shall be cut in the bottom of the trench of sufficient
size to allow for proper jointing of the pipe, but in no case shall they leave
more than one-third (1/3) of the pipe unsupported.
      7.   Excavated material which is to be used in backfilling shall be
neatly piled along the trench in such a manner as to provide a minimum of
inconvenience to other contractors and the traveling public. In no case shall
waterways be obstructed without other provisions being made for the removal of
water.
      8.   When utilities such as water mains, sewers, pipelines, gas mains and
electric conduits are encountered in the excavation, the contractor shall
notify the owner of such utility and shall take such steps as the owner and the
engineer deem necessary to protect such utility from damage. Should damage
occur, the contractor shall repair same at his own expense and shall pay the
owner for any loss suffered on account of such damage.
   D.   Pipe Laying:
      1.   In general, the bottom of the trench shall be so shaped as to
support the pipe throughout its lower quarter. If the trench is in rock or
other hard material, it shall be excavated at least four inches (4") below pipe
grade, and the material so excavated shall be replaced with well tamped sand,
gravel or other suitable material.
      2.   If the foundation is of such material, or if conditions are such
that the pipe cannot be properly supported, or if the load is such that the
engineer deems extra support necessary, he may order in writing that a concrete
cradle or concrete encasement be provided. Extra compensation will be paid for
concrete cradling.
      3.   All pipes shall be inspected for defects before they are lowered
into the trench and shall be carefully cleaned of any dirt or grease, either in
the barrel or on the jointing surfaces. Pipe shall be laid with the bells
upgrade, and pipe laying shall progress upgrade.
      4.   Care shall be taken to lay each pipe to exact line and grade, and to
have the spigot end of each pipe concentric with the bell of the pipe into
which it is laid. Any defective pipe, or any pipe which has its joints
disturbed after laying, shall be taken up and replaced. All branches or other
openings along the line of the pipe shall be securely closed against dirt or
other debris, and at the suspension of work at any time, a suitable stopper
shall be placed at the end of the pipe to prevent the entrance of earth or
debris into the pipe. All Y branches shall be encased in concrete.
      5.   The work or any portion of the work under construction shall be
suspended immediately on written order of the city engineer or the city council
for any good cause or causes, among others of which special reference is made
to the following:
         a.   Failure of the contractor to provide sufficient and proper
equipment for properly executing the work;
         b.   Deliberate failure on the part of the contractor to observe any
requirements of these specifications or to comply with any orders given by the
city engineer, as provided for in these specifications; and
         c.   Failure of the contractor promptly to make good any defects in
materials or workmanship or any defect of any other nature, the correction of
which has been directed in writing by the city engineer.
      6.   All developers who are constructing sewer mains with sewer service
wyes must tie a one inch (1") wide plastic tape to the wye and bring the tape
to the surface of the ground before backfilling the sewer main.
   E.   Backfilling: In general, backfilling shall be done with the material
excavated from the trench. However, should the excavated material contain large
pieces of rock or other material which, in the opinion of the engineer, might
injure the sewer, he may reject it as backfill material or restrict its use to
the upper part of the fill. Selected topsoil, free of weeds, brush, roots and
other deleterious matter shall be used as backfill for embedment of sewer pipe
from the bottom of the trench to a depth of six inches (6") above the top of
the bell. Special care shall be used in placing and thoroughly compacting this
selected topsoil to provide good bearing for the pipe. Backfilling shall be
carried on in the following manner:
      1.   Where sewer lines are laid in rock, shale or clay, four (4) to six
inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench between bell holes to provide
a uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe. When the pipe is in
place and the joint has been completed, the trench shall be backfilled with
sand to the top of the pipe. Where mains are constructed in the parking or
parallel to a road where there should normally be no traffic, the remainder of
the trench may be filled with a Morman board or other such device, allowing six
inches (6") for top dressing, after which the entire trench shall be settled
with water. After settlement, the top dressing shall be applied, but in no case
shall the top dressing be applied where pools of water are standing. Where the
trench is excavated in front of developed property, the top dressing must be,
in general, of as good soil as the original ground, and in the event there is a
lawn, trees or decorative shrubbery, the growth shall be protected and restored
to its original condition.
      2.   Where the sewer main crosses any unpaved roadway, gravel or oil
surfaced roads, driveways of any kind or railroad tracks, four (4) to six
inches (6") of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the pipe
invert. After the pipe is laid to grade, sand shall be used for backfill to the
top of the pipe, sand to be flooded with water to prevent settlement. Then the
backfill from the top of the sand to the top of the trench shall be compacted
in six inch (6") layers to a density at least equal to that of the top six (6)
to twelve inches (12") of the surrounding earth, using water if required, to
get proper compaction. In case the excavation fails to furnish suitable
material for the bottom of the trench or backfill, the contractor shall supply
such material as will be suitable and satisfactory to the engineer, moving same
from another locality or part of work if necessary. Where compaction is
required or ordered, it shall be compacted to a density equal to that of the
adjacent soil. Where sewer mains are constructed under driveways, sidewalks,
under fences, foundations or other such structures, four (4) to six inches (6")
of sand shall be placed in the trench below the grade of the pipe invert, and
after the pipe is laid to grade, the entire trench shall be backfilled with
sand from the bottom to the top of the trench, and then thoroughly settled with
water by flooding or jetting, being certain that the sand around and under the
pipe is sufficiently wetted to attain maximum compaction.
   F.   Manholes: Manholes shall be constructed where shown on the city maps or
plans. They shall be built of vitrified brick or other suitable material as
approved by the city council and shall be in accordance with the dimensions
shown on the detailed drawings:
      1.   Vitrified brick for the manholes shall be grade A, common, sound and
hardturned, and shall meet the requirements of the ASTM standard specifications
C-62-30 with subsequent revisions.
      2.   Mortar for brickwork shall be composed of one part cement and two
(2) parts sand, to which not more than ten (10) pounds of hydrated lime per
sack of cement may be added.
      3.   Brick manhole walls shall be eight inches (8") thick if not over
eighteen feet (18') deep, and shall be thirteen inches (13") thick for depths
of over eighteen feet (18'). The eight inch (8") walls shall be laid with all
headers, and the thirteen inch (13") walls shall be laid with headers and
stretchers alternately on the inside and the outside of the wall. All joint
spacers must be completely filled with mortar and the outside of the manhole
plastered with one-half inch (1/2") of mortar.
      4.   The invert of the manhole shall be built of split sewer pipe on
straight lines. The curves and the bench above the centerline of the pipe may
be formed in concrete or built up brick and plastered with one-half inch (1/2")
of cement mortar.
      5.   Manhole frames and covers as shown on the detailed drawings shall be
provided for each manhole. The frame shall be thoroughly grouted to the top of
the brick or at such an elevation that the manhole cover will be flush with the
finished grade. The castings shall conform to the standard specifications of
the ASTM for gray iron castings, serial designation A48-18, with subsequent
revisions, and shall be free from pouring faults, cracks, sponginess, blowholes
and other defects that would impair their value for the service intended.
Covers shall sit in their frames without rocking or rattling, and the engineer
shall reject any frames and covers which, in his opinion, will be noisy under
traffic.
      6.   Manholes will be located at distances not to exceed four hundred
feet (400'), and where a bend in the sewer line of more than sixty degrees
(60°) from the normal occurs, a manhole will be constructed.
      7.   Manhole steps shall be of cast iron of high grade and shall provide
a step at least four inches (4") by eight inches (8") from the face of the
manhole, steps to have a sixteen inch (16") spacing. Smaller steps may be used
if a staggered spacing is used. They shall be resistant to rust and corrosion
and free from burrs, pins, sharp edges and excessive roughness. The engineer
shall reject any steps which, in his opinion, would cut or scratch the hands of
the person using them. After being set, they shall be given one coat of an
approved protective asphalt paint.
      8.   Any time a line enters into a manhole over two feet (2') above the
flow line of the manhole, the manhole shall be made into a drop manhole.
   G.   Connections To Existing Sewers And Appurtenances: All connections
between new and existing sewers or appurtenances shall be made in accordance
with the detailed drawings or as directed by the engineer, and the cost of such
connections shall be included in the price bid for sewers complete. The
contractor shall use every precaution to keep earth and other foreign matter
out of the existing sewer or appurtenances and shall, if so ordered by the
engineer, clean the sewer or appurtenances in the immediate vicinity of the
connection. If for any reason it becomes necessary for the contractor to
obstruct the existing sewer, he shall, at his own expense, provide a method
suitable to the engineer of diverting the sewage. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-11: STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE CHANNELS:
   A.   Major Drainage Channels: All major drainage channels lying within or
immediately adjacent to the subdivision shall meet the following conditions:
      1.   All land having an elevation below the 100-year maximum flood
elevation and not protected by levees or dikes shall be dedicated to the city
for the purpose of providing drainage and for public park and utility easement
use.
      2.   The existing channel lying within or immediately adjacent to the
subdivision shall be cleaned to provide for the free flow of water, and the
channel shall be straightened, widened and improved to the extent required to
prevent overflow beyond the limits of the dedicated drainage area.
      3.   Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building sites
and streets to an elevation where all lots, building areas and streets will not
be subject to overflow, and in a manner that will provide for the rapid runoff
of all rainfall.
      4.   Whenever channel improvement is carried out, sodding, back sloping,
cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control
erosion for all the anticipated conditions of flow for the segment of channel
involved.
      5.   A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless
it is placed in an enclosed storm sewer.
      6.   Culverts, bridges and other drainage structures shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications of the city at all locations where
drainage channels intersect with continuous streets or alleys.
   B.   Drainage Improvement Requirements: Bridges and culverts have the
following requirements:
      1.   All flow of water across continuous streets or alleys shall be
through culverts or bridges;
      2.   Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year
frequency rain based on the drainage area involved; and
      3.   Design of bridges and culverts shall conform to construction
specifications of the city.
   C.   Channels And Storm Sewers Outside Subdivision Boundaries:
      1.   The city reserves the right to require improvements, provision of
drainage easements and provision of agreements beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision to facilitate flow of water through the subdivision, to avoid
probability of lawsuits based on damage from changed runoff in the subdivision,
and also to provide continuous improvement of the overall storm sewer system.
      2.   Requirements outside the subdivision may be:
         a.   Location: In channels or storm sewers flowing to or from the
subdivision, or in channels or storm sewers located in adjacent areas that are
affected by flow of water to the subdivision.
         b.   Improvements:
            (1)   Enlargement or replacement of undersized drainage structures
to provide free flow;
            (2)   Removal of obstructions;
            (3)   Straightening of channel;
            (4)   Widening or deepening of channel;
            (5)   Construction of erosion control structures;
            (6)   Backsloping, sodding or riprapping of bank; and
            (7)   Construction of closed or open paved storm sewers for purpose
of closing gap or continuation of overall storm sewer system. (Ord. 09-01-2000,
10-2-2000)
10-4D-12: LOCATION OF UTILITY LINES:
All utilities to be installed in a subdivision shall be located underground in
the grass plot outside of curb lines but within street rights of way or in
easements dedicated therefor. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4D-13: STREET LIGHTING:
Installation of street lighting in all new subdivisions may be required by the
planning commission and, if required, they shall conform to specifications
adopted by the city council. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
ARTICLE E. ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT
SECTION:
10-4E-1: Administration
10-4E-2: Filing Fees
10-4E-3: Exemptions From Regulations
10-4E-4: Variations
10-4E-5: Adoption And Amendment Of Regulations
10-4E-6: Building Permit Issuance
10-4E-7: Violations; Penalties
10-4E-1: ADMINISTRATION:
The subdivision rules and regulations shall be administered by the planning
commission along with the city council. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4E-2: FILING FEES:
   A.   Preliminary Plat Fee: To defray partially the costs of notification and
administration procedures, there shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of
submission of the preliminary plat a fee in the amount set by city council.
   B.   Final Plat Fee: Where only a portion of an approved preliminary plat is
submitted for final approval, a final plat of the remaining area may be
submitted at any time within five (5) years of the preliminary approval without
payment of an additional filing fee by the subdivider, if the final plat for
the additional area conforms substantially with the approved preliminary plat.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4E-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGULATIONS:
   A.   Single Ownership, Three Or Fewer Lots: Whenever there is a tract or
previously subdivided parcel under single ownership which is to be resubdivided
into three (3) or fewer lots, the proposed subdivision may be exempt from the
procedural provisions of these subdivision regulations, and a preliminary and
final plat may not be required, but this shall not constitute an exemption from
any of the design requirements herein contained.
   B.   Lot Splits: Exemptions which shall be designated as "lot splits" shall
be permitted under the following procedures:
      1.   An accurate survey, prepared by a land surveyor registered in the
state of Oklahoma, shall be submitted of the proposed tract, and the
resubdivision thereof shall be submitted to the city engineer, or his
designated representative.
      2.   The city engineering and planning staff shall review the proposed
lot split to ensure compliance with all design and improvement requirements of
these subdivision regulations and shall prepare a written report thereon, which
shall be forwarded to the planning commission in not more than fifteen (15)
days after receipt of the application for a lot split, for consideration at the
next regular meeting of the planning commission. If the application is approved
by the planning commission, it shall be certified by the signature of the
chairman of the planning commission and attested by the secretary. If the
application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing, with
reference made to the express provision of the regulations to which the
proposed lot split does not conform, and shall be transmitted to the applicant.
Whenever a deviation is required from the improvement requirements contained
herein or a street or other element is to be dedicated, the action of the
planning commission shall be forwarded to the city council for its approval and
acceptance of dedications. For all other types of lot splits, the action of the
planning commission shall be final. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4E-4: VARIATIONS:
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in these subdivision regulations
would result in substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may
vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but
not of procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his
property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public
welfare and interests of the city are protected and the general intent and
spirit of these subdivision regulations preserved. Such modification may be
granted upon written request of the subdivider stating the reason for each
modification and may be waived by three-fourths (3/4) vote of the regular
membership of the planning commission, subject to the acceptance of the plat
and the dedications thereon by the city council. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4E-5: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS:
The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend, vacate or revoke, and
make public rules and regulations for the administration of these subdivision
regulations to the end that the public is informed and that approval of plats
is expedited. These subdivision regulations may be enlarged, vacated, or
amended by the city council after public hearing, due notice of which shall be
given as required by law. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4E-6: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement
or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land when the new
structure does not comply with all of the provisions of these subdivision
regulations. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-4E-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations; Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter 4, including articles A through E, or
shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall
be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Remedial Action: In addition to the other remedies provided herein, the
city may institute any proper action or proceedings to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 5
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
10-5-1: Findings Of Fact; Application Of Chapter
10-5-2: Statement Of Purpose
10-5-3: Interpretation
10-5-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
10-5-5: Definitions
10-5-6: Floodplain Administrator
10-5-7: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
10-5-8: Development Permit
10-5-9: Compliance Required
10-5-10: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-5-11: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
10-5-12: Variance Procedures
10-5-13: General Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
10-5-14: Specific Standards For Flood Hazard Reduction
10-5-15: Subdivision Proposals
10-5-16: Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
10-5-1: FINDINGS OF FACT; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
   A.   Findings:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
   B.   Application Of Chapter: This chapter shall apply to all areas of
special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
10-5-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-3: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; or
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-5: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application. The following terms as used
herein will mean:
APPEAL: A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A. A nonbasement building:
      1.   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH,
B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piles), or shear walls parallel to the floor of
the water; and
      2.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
   B.   In the case of zones A1-30, A1, A, A99, AO AH, B, C, X, D, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated
building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5)
of the national flood insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date hereof.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map of a community on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HABITABLE FLOOR: Any floor usable for the following purposes, which includes:
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A
floor used for storage purposes only is not a "habitable floor".
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national flood insurance
program regulations.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which the
base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME OR DOUBLE WIDE MOBILE HOME: A manufactured single- family dwelling
not less than forty feet (40') in length nor less than ten feet (10') in width,
designed for transportation on streets or highways on its own wheels (a
permanent chassis) to a location, ready to be occupied as living quarters.
MODULAR HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME: A newly constructed home which has been
moved from its manufacturing site by conventional methods or on a truck and has
no permanent chassis. This home is then fully assembled and permanently joined
to a foundation on the city site to be occupied as living quarters.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement,
or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or
walkways; nor does it include excavation of basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
      1.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
   B.   For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of national flood insurance program regulations
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, herein specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-6: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Designation: The city floodplain administrator is appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building
site will be reasonably safe from flooding;
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required;
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the Oklahoma water resources board prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency;
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with section
10-5-7 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
sections
10-5-13,
10-5-14 and
10-5-15 of this chapter; and
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. (Ord. 09-
01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-7: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency on its flood insurance study for the city, with accompanying
flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM), and
any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-8: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Required: A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Procedures:
      1.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions,
and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed
structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
         a.   Elevations in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures;
         b.   Elevations in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
         c.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 10-5-14B of this chapter;
         d.   Description of the extent of which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         e.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection 10-5-6B1 of this chapter.
      2.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         c.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         d.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         e.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         f.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         g.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         h.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         i.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for proposed use; and
         j.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-9: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-10: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-11: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-12: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Judgment On Requests For Variances: The planning and zoning commission
of the city shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Error In Requirements: The appeal board shall hear and render judgment
on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   C.   Appeal Of Decision In Court: Any person or persons aggrieved by the
decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of
competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Record Of Actions: The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record
of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal
emergency management agency upon request.
   E.   Historic Places: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Lot Size Consideration: Variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in
subsection 10-5-8B2 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Attaching Conditions To Granting Of Variances: Upon consideration of
the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purpose and objectives of this chapter as set out in section
10-5-2 of this chapter.
   H.   Increase In Flood Levels: Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
   I.   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief;
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the costs of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   J.   Variances For Functionally Dependent Use: Variances may be issued by a
community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use;
provided, that:
      1.   The criteria outline in subsections A through I of this section are
met; and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-13: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   Anchoring: All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   B.   Minimize Flood Damage: All new construction or substantial improvements
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   C.   Construction Materials: All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
   D.   Utilities, Service Facilities: All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
   E.   Infiltration Of Floodwaters: All new and replacement water supply
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
   F.   Sewage Systems: New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharge from the systems into floodwater.
   G.   Wastewater Disposal: On site wastewater disposal systems shall be
located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-14: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
10-5-7, subsection 10-5-6B8 or 10-5-15C of this chapter, the following
provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in
subsection 10-5-8B1 of this chapter is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to the flooding, shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
      1.   Number, Size Of Openings: A minimum of two (2) openings having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
      2.   Height Of Openings: The bottom of all openings shall be no higher
than one foot (1') above grade.
      3.   Covers Or Devices: Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
      4.   Mobile Homes:
         a.   All mobile homes to be placed within zone A shall be installed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this
requirement, mobile homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
         b.   All mobile homes shall be in compliance with subsection C1 of
this section.
         c.   All mobile homes to be placed or substantially improved within
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the mobile home is at or above the
base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system in accordance with the provision of this subsection C4. (Ord.
09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-15: SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   Requirements: All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with subsection 10-5-1A, and
sections
10-5-2 and
10-5-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Development Permit Requirements: All proposals for the development of
subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet
development permit requirements of section
10-5-8 of this chapter and the provisions of sections
10-5-13 and
10-5-14 of this chapter.
   C.   Base Flood Elevation Data: Base flood elevation data shall be generated
for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection 10-5-6B8 or section
10-5-7 of this chapter.
   D.   Drainage: All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
   E.   Utilities: All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-5-16: AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
10-5-7 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   Lowest Floor Elevation: All new construction and substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
   B.   Nonresidential Structures: All new construction and substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the following:
      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   C.   Certification By Engineer Or Architect: A registered professional
engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection 10-
5-8B of this chapter are satisfied.
   D.   Drainage: Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 6
MOBILE HOMES; MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 1
SECTION:
10-6-1: Definitions
10-6-2: Application Of Regulations To Existing And New Parks
10-6-3: License Requirements And Conditions; Temporary Permit
10-6-4: Supervision, Caretaker
10-6-5: Inspection Of Mobile Home And Travel Trailer Parks
10-6-6: Notice Of Violations; Hearings And Orders
10-6-7: Freestanding Mobile Homes, Location
10-6-8: Nonresidential Mobile Trailers
10-6-9: General Requirements For Parks
10-6-10: Travel Trailer Park Service Buildings
10-6-11: Sewage Disposal
10-6-12: Water Supply
10-6-13: Refuse Disposal
10-6-14: Insect And Rodent Control
10-6-15: Electricity; Exterior Lighting
10-6-16: Fuel Piping To Mobile Homes
10-6-17: Litter Control; Fire And Safety Rules
10-6-18: Alterations And Additions
10-6-19: Registration Of Owners And Occupants
10-6-20: Wrecked Or Damaged Homes, Trailers
10-6-21: Mobile Home Subdivisions
10-6-22: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 2, article C of this title for mobile homes in
  residential districts.
10-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and a
bath or shower. For purposes of regulation under this chapter, a "dependent
mobile home" shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless
otherwise specified.
FREESTANDING MOBILE HOME: Any mobile home not located in a mobile home park
licensed by the city or in an approved mobile home subdivision.
HEALTH OFFICER: The legally designated health authority of the city or his
authorized representative.
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath or
shower. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this chapter, the term
"mobile home" shall mean an independent mobile home.
INSPECTION OFFICER: The building inspector of the city or his authorized agent.
LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park or
travel trailer park under the provisions of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME: Shall have the meaning set out for the term, "mobile home or
double wide mobile home" in section
10-2C-1 of this title.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Shall be as defined in section
10-2C-1 of this title.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the
accommodation of one mobile home, and not located on a mobile home sales lot.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively and where mobile home lots
are sold for occupancy.
NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILER: Any vehicle having the basic characteristics of
either a mobile home or travel trailer, but which is used for purposes other
than residential and is not being offered for sale as indicated by a clearly
displayed sign on or near the trailer.
PARK: A mobile home or travel trailer park.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a temporary permit is issued to maintain or
operate a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter.
PERSON: A natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM OR PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM: Any such system built and owned by,
or dedicated to and accepted by, the city; all other systems are private.
RURAL: Any area shown on the city area general plan for suburban or rural
development and which is zoned agriculturally.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men or
women, and may also include buildings containing laundry facilities and other
facilities.
SUBDIVISION: A "mobile home subdivision", unless otherwise indicated.
TRAILER PARK OR TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or
more travel trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located,
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
TRAVEL TRAILER OR TRAILER: All vehicles and portable structures built on a
chassis, designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel,
recreational, and vacation use not included in the definition of "independent
mobile home". For purposes of regulation under this chapter, a "dependent
mobile home" shall be considered to be the same as a "travel trailer", unless
otherwise specified.
TRAVEL TRAILER SPACE: A plot of ground within a travel trailer park designed
for accommodation of one travel trailer. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007
Code)
10-6-2: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING AND NEW PARKS:
   A.   Conformance By New Parks: All new mobile home parks and travel trailer
parks planned and for development after the effective date hereof shall conform
to the regulations and standards established in this chapter.
   B.   Existing Parks Excepted:
      1.   Those mobile home and travel trailer parks already developed before
the initial effective date hereof shall not be governed by the regulations and
standards established in sections
10-6-9,
10-6-10 and
10-6-12 of this chapter, unless specifically stated therein.
      2.   No existing mobile home or travel trailer park shall be permitted to
expand or have placed a greater number of mobile homes or travel trailers
within its existing boundaries unless these additional units conform to all of
the regulations and standards of this chapter. An existing mobile home or
travel trailer park shall not be expanded beyond its existing boundaries unless
the new area developed conforms to all the regulations and standards of this
chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS; TEMPORARY PERMIT:
   A.   License Or Temporary Permit Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any
mobile home park or travel trailer park within the city limits unless he holds
a valid license issued annually by the city.
      2.   Any mobile home park or travel trailer park in existence on the
effective date hereof may be continued under a temporary permit for such period
of time and under such conditions as are hereinafter described.
   B.   Application For License; Issuance; Succeeding Ownership:
      1.   Application shall be made to the city clerk, who shall issue a
license upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent provisions of this
and other ordinances and regulations of the city.
      2.   Every individual or other entity holding such a license shall notify
the city clerk in writing within thirty (30) days after having sold,
transferred, given away or otherwise disposed its interest in or control of
such mobile home park or travel trailer park as to the identity of the person
succeeding to ownership.
   C.   Contents Of Application: Application for original licenses shall be in
writing signed by the applicant and accompanied by an affidavit of the
applicant as to the truth of the application, and shall contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal
description of the park;
      3.   A complete plan of the park showing compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder; and
      4.   Such further information as may be requested by the inspection
officer and/or health officer.
   D.   License Renewal Application: Applications for renewals of licenses
shall be made in writing by the holder of the license and shall contain the
following:
      1.   Any change in the information submitted since the time the original
license was issued or the latest renewal granted; and
      2.   Other information requested by the inspection officer or health
officer.
   E.   Plan Required: A complete plan, as required by subsection C3 of this
section for the purpose of obtaining a license to be issued, shall show:
      1.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
      2.   The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces or travel
trailer spaces;
      3.   The location and width of roadways, walkways, buffer strips and
recreational areas;
      4.   The location of service buildings and other proposed structures;
      5.   The location and size of utility and treatment facilities; and
      6.   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the park.
   F.   License Suspension For Noncompliance; Hearing:
      1.   Notice Of Violations; Reinspection:
         a.   Whenever the health officer or inspection officer finds
conditions existing in violation of this chapter, or of any regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, such officer shall give notice in writing to the person to
whom the license was issued that, unless such conditions or practices be
corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, the
license will be suspended.
         b.   At the end of such period, not to exceed ninety (90) days, the
inspection officer or health officer shall reinspect such park, and if such
conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license
and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license
was issued.
         c.   Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease
operation of such park, except as provided in subsection 10-6-6D of this
chapter.
      2.   Request For Hearing: Any person whose license has been denied,
suspended, or who has received notice from the inspection officer or health
officer that his license will be suspended unless certain conditions or
practices at the park are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the city council; provided, that when no petition for such
hearing shall have been filed within ten (10) days following the day on which
notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been
automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten (10) day period.
   G.   Temporary Permit:
      1.   Issuance: A temporary permit, upon written request therefor, shall
be issued by the city clerk upon written approval of the inspection officer and
health officer for every mobile home park or travel park in existence upon the
effective date hereof, permitting the park to be maintained and operated during
the period ending one year after the effective date hereof, without being
subject to the provisions of this chapter, except such of the provisions as are
made expressly applicable to permittees.
      2.   Extension Of Term Of Temporary Permit: The term of the temporary
permit may be extended, upon written request, for not to exceed one additional
period of up to one hundred eighty (180) days if:
         a.   The permittees shall have filed application for a license in
conformity with this chapter within one year after the effective date hereof;
         b.   The park plans and specifications accompanying the application
for license comply with all the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances and statutes; and
         c.   The permittee has diligently endeavored to make the existing park
conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with the application
but has failed to do so due to circumstances beyond his control.
   H.   License And Temporary Permit Fees; Posting:
      1.   The city clerk shall charge and collect for each mobile home park or
travel trailer park an initial license or temporary permit fee as set by the
city council. The initial license or temporary permit shall expire one year
from the date of issue, unless renewed upon such conditions as the city council
may by ordinance direct. No charge shall be made for renewals of licenses.
      2.   The license certificate or temporary permit shall be conspicuously
posted in the office of, or on the premises of, the mobile home park or the
travel trailer park at all times. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-4: SUPERVISION, CARETAKER:
The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall
be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park, its facilities and
equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or
caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or permittee, for the
violation of any provision of this chapter to which the licensee or permittee
is subject. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-5: INSPECTION OF MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
   A.   Condition Of Park: The inspection or health officers are hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of
mobile home and travel trailer parks located within the city in order to
perform their duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of mobile
home parks and of the general public.
   B.   Outside Premises: The inspection officer and the health officer shall
have the power to inspect the outside premises of private or public property
for the purposes of inspecting and investigating conditions in relation to the
enforcement of this chapter or of regulations promulgated thereunder.
   C.   Register, Record Of Occupants: The inspection and the health officer
shall have the power to inspect any register containing a record of all mobile
homes and occupants using the park.
   D.   Occupant To Allow Access To Premises: It is the duty of every occupant
of a park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part
of the mobile home park or travel trailer park or their premises at reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with this chapter or with any lawful regulations adopted
hereunder, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-6: NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice: Whenever the inspection officer or health officer
determines violations of this chapter or pertinent laws or ordinances exist, he
shall notify the owner or his agent of the alleged violation. The notice shall:
      1.   Be in writing;
      2.   Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
      3.   Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect
compliance with provisions of this chapter and other pertinent regulations;
      4.   Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for the
performance of any act it requires; and
      5.   Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require. The
notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon the owner or agent when
a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address.
   B.   Right To Hearing:
      1.   Any person affected by any notice issued under this chapter or
resulting regulation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the city council. Such person shall file with the inspection officer or
health officer a written request for such hearing and setting forth briefly the
grounds for such request within ten (10) days after the notice was served.
      2.   When no request for such hearing shall have been filed within ten
(10) days following the day on which notice was served, a violation shall be
deemed to have been automatically in existence at the expiration of the ten
(10) day period.
      3.   The filing of the request shall not stay the notice in cases of
orders issued under this section. The mayor and city council shall hold the
hearing at the earliest possible time.
   C.   Council Findings And Order; Appeal:
      1.   After the hearing, the inspection officer or health officer shall
compile the findings of the city council as to compliance with this chapter and
pursuant regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying
or withdrawing the prior notice which shall be served as provided in this
section.
      2.   Appeals from decisions of the mayor and city council shall be to the
district court.
   D.   Emergency Situation; Immediate Action:
      1.   Whenever the inspection officer or health officer finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health,
the inspection officer or health officer may, without notice or hearing, issue
an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such
action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately.
      2.   Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but upon petition to the city council, shall be afforded a hearing
at the next regular meeting even if the action has been completed. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-7: FREESTANDING MOBILE HOMES, LOCATION:
   A.   Parking Or Storage Restrictions:
      1.   No freestanding mobile home or travel trailer shall be permitted in
the city limits except as defined in chapter 2, article C of this title, or
unless it is being actively offered for sale, or in the case of a freestanding
travel trailer, unless it is parked for storage.
      2.   Those freestanding mobile homes which are nonconforming under the
provisions of this chapter may so continue.
      3.   No mobile home or travel trailer may be stored or parked in front
yards or on side yards abutting a street on corner lots, or on streets.
      4.   No water, plumbing or permanent electrical connections are permitted
on travel trailers.
   B.   Additional Restrictions:
      1.   Except for mobile homes or travel trailers within regular commercial
mobile or travel trailer sales lots, each such freestanding mobile home or
travel trailer offered for sale must be clearly marked as such, and shall not
be occupied for either living or sleeping purposes.
      2.   Freestanding mobile homes or travel trailers located within regular
commercial mobile home or travel trailer sales lots need be neither
individually marked for sale or removed within one hundred twenty (120) days if
not sold.
      3.   A property owner shall not store, nor permit to be stored, more than
one mobile home or travel trailer on a residential lot.
      4.   The property owner shall not actively offer for sale more than one
mobile home in any twelve (12) month period.
      5.   The mobile home shall not be stored in any required front or side
yard or public utility easement, nor shall such mobile home or travel trailer
project beyond the front of any building.
   C.   Conditions For Allowing:
      1.   Freestanding mobile homes are permitted in the city, but only as
permitted in chapter 2, article C of this title.
      2.   Permits for freestanding mobile homes shall be issued by the
inspection officer. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
      3.   Such freestanding mobile homes must comply with all city regulations
and the mobile home standards in the international residential code. (Ord. 09-
01-2000, 10-2-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
10-6-8: NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILERS:
   A.   License Required: No nonresidential mobile trailer shall be permitted
in the city unless a license for its operation is issued by the inspection
officer or health officer. Such license shall specify the permitted use of the
nonresidential mobile trailer, the location of such operation and the
termination date of the license. No license shall be issued for a use that
would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law or regulation.
   B.   Annual Fee: An annual fee as set by the city council shall be charged
for each nonresidential mobile trailer license, which shall expire on June 30
of each year, and be renewable on July 1 each succeeding year thereafter.
   C.   Operation By Construction Contractors: Operation of nonresidential
trailers by contractors on construction projects for which building permits
have been issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units is
permitted during the term of such construction project without issuance of a
permit.
   D.   Permanent Location Prohibited: This section is not to be construed as
permitting or authorizing the permanent location of any nonresidential mobile
trailer in the city. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKS:
   A.   Types Of Parks:
      1.   Parks shall be of three (3) types:
         a.   Mobile home parks;
         b.   Travel trailer parks; and
         c.   Mixed mobile home and travel trailer parks.
      2.   No dependent travel trailer shall be located in a mobile home park
and used for occupancy. In a mixed park, separate areas shall be reserved for
mobile homes and for travel trailers. No mobile home shall be permitted in the
travel trailer sector, and no travel trailer shall be permitted in the mobile
home sector.
   B.   Site Drainage: All mobile home parks shall be located on a well drained
site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools
of water. Drainage shall not endanger any water supply.
   C.   Minimum Area: The minimum area of any park shall be two and one-half
(21/2) acres. However, parks in existence on the initial effective date hereof
may continue to operate with less than two and one-half (21/2) acres.
   D.   Intensity Of Development:
      1.   Intensity of development shall be limited to no more than ten (10)
mobile homes per gross acre for a mobile home park and no more than fifteen
(15) travel trailers per gross acre for a travel trailer park.
      2.   Area used for sewerage treatment facilities shall not be included in
density computations.
      3.   Mobile home spaces shall be at least thirty feet (30') wide where
pads are closest to driveways. Travel trailer spaces shall be at least twenty
five feet (25') wide where travel trailers are located closest to the driveway.
   E.   Parking Spaces: Every mobile home space and travel trailer space shall
be clearly defined. Mobile homes and travel trailers shall be so parked in such
spaces that at the nearest point they shall be ten feet (10') from any other
mobile home or travel trailer.
   F.   Location Near Street: It is unlawful to locate a mobile home or travel
trailer less than twenty five feet (25') from any public street or highway
right of way or so that any part of such mobile home or travel trailer will
obstruct any roadway or walkway of such park.
   G.   Occupancy Of Spaces Restricted: It is unlawful to permit a mobile home
to occupy a travel trailer space, a travel trailer to occupy a mobile home
space, and for any mobile home or travel trailer to be located in a park unless
in a designated mobile home space or travel trailer space.
   H.   Driveway Requirements: All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a sealed
surface driveway of not less than twenty feet (20') in width if on street
parking is prohibited, and twenty six feet (26') in width if on street parking
is permitted on one side of the street only. Driveways must have unobstructed
access to a public street or highway.
   I.   Traffic; Safety Hazards: In mobile home parks or travel trailer parks
existing at the effective date hereof, parking on or adjacent to the street
within the park is permissible so long as it does not obstruct free movement of
traffic. Whether or not a safety hazard exists is a question to be determined
by the mayor and city council. If the city council determines that a safety
hazard does in fact exist, the mobile home park or travel trailer park
concerned will be required to comply with subsection J of this section.
   J.   Vehicular Parking: In new mobile home parks, at least two (2) clearly
defined parking spaces will be provided for each mobile home space either on or
adjacent to the mobile home space. In new travel trailer parks, at least one
parking space shall be provided for each space either on or adjacent to the
space.
   K.   Clothes Drying Lines Or Facilities:
      1.   Outside drying spaces or other clothes drying facilities shall be
provided in every mobile home park or travel trailer park.
      2.   Mobile home parks shall have at least one hundred (100) linear feet
of clothes drying line or one mechanical clothes drying unit in good condition;
mechanical units shall be located in a service building.
      3.   Travel trailer parks and mixed parks shall have at least twenty five
(25) linear feet of outdoor clothes drying line for each travel trailer space
or one mechanical clothes drying unit for the first ten (10) travel trailer
spaces or any fraction thereof and an additional unit for each ten (10)
additional trailer spaces or fraction thereof.
   L.   Surface Of Driveways And Walkways: All driveways and walkways within a
park shall be at least asphalt-oil-rock sealed surface.
   M.   Major Means Of Ingress And Egress:
      1.   In the city limits area, new mobile home parks should abut and have
their major means of ingress and egress on at least a secondary thoroughfare.
      2.   Travel trailer parks and mixed parks in the city limits area should
abut and have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a primary
thoroughfare.
   N.   Screening: All mobile home parks shall provide a suitable screening
where abutting existing single-family residential areas. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-
2-2000)
10-6-10: TRAVEL TRAILER PARK SERVICE BUILDINGS:
   A.   Service Building Required:
      1.   Each travel trailer park shall be provided with at least one service
building adequately equipped with flush type toilet fixtures and other sanitary
facilities as required in this chapter.
      2.   No service building shall contain less than one toilet for females,
one toilet for males, one lavatory and shower or bathtub for each sex and one
laundry tray.
      3.   All sanitary facilities required by section
10-6-9 of this chapter shall be located in service buildings.
   B.   Service Facility Requirements: Each park accommodating travel trailers
shall provide the following:
      1.   Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than two (2)
flush toilets and one urinal for the first six (6) travel trailers or fraction
thereof; and for travel trailers in excess of six (6), not less than one
additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every ten (10) additional
travel trailers or fractional number thereof.
      2.   Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than two (2)
flush toilets for the first six (6) travel trailer spaces or any less number
thereof; and for travel trailer spaces in excess of six (6), not less than one
additional flush toilet for every ten (10) additional travel trailer spaces or
fractional number thereof in excess of six (6).
      3.   Each sex shall be provided with not less than two (2) lavatories and
two (2) showers or bathtubs with individual dressing accommodations for the
first six (6) travel trailer spaces or any less number thereof; and for travel
trailer spaces in excess of six (6), not less than one additional lavatory and
one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for
every ten (10) additional travel trailer spaces or fractional number thereof.
      4.   Each toilet for females and each shower or bathtub with individual
dressing accommodations for females shall be in a private compartment or stall.
      5.   The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females
shall either be separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same
building, by a soundproof wall.
      6.   There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not less
than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans and other
containers of human excreta or a slop sink with at least a three inch (3") trap
and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleansing such bed pans or
containers.
   C.   Distance From Travel Trailer Spaces: Travel trailer spaces shall not be
more than two hundred feet (200') from a service building.
   D.   Building Requirements: Service buildings shall:
      1.   Be located twenty five feet (25') or more from any travel trailer
space;
      2.   Be of permanent construction, and be adequately lighted;
      3.   Be of moisture resistant material to permit frequent washing and
cleansing;
      4.   Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of
seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) during cold weather, and to supply adequate
hot water during time of peak demands; and
      5.   Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened.
   E.   Laundry Facilities: Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio
of one laundry unit to every thirty (30) travel trailer spaces, and shall be in
a separate soundproof room of a service building or in a separate building. A
laundry shall consist of not less than one clothes washing machine and one
clothes drying machine.
   F.   Maintenance; Sanitation: All service buildings and the grounds of the
park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any
condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or
constitute a menace. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-11: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Public Or Private Sewer System: Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush
toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other
buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer and disposal
plant, septic tank system or private sewer and lagoon system of such
construction and in such manner as approved by the Oklahoma state health
department and in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city.
   B.   Sewer Connections: Each mobile home space shall be provided with at
least a four inch (4") sewer connection at least two inches (2") above the
surface of the ground. The sewer connection should be protected by a concrete
collar at least four inches (4") thick and have a minimum outside diameter of
twenty four inches (24"). The sewer connection shall be fitted with a standard
ferrule and close nipple and provided with a screw cap. Connection between the
mobile home drain and the sewer must be watertight and self-draining. Mobile
homes with fixtures from which back siphonage may occur shall not be connected
to the park's water system until the defect has been corrected. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
   C.   Mandatory Connection To Public Sewer When Available: In the event that
a public sewer system is or becomes available within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of a mobile home park or travel trailer park, connection must be made to
the public system within one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-
2000; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Private Sewage System Design:
      1.   The design of private sewage treatment facilities shall be based on
the maximum capacity of the park.
      2.   Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged
into any watershed.
      3.   The disposal facilities shall be located where they will not create
a nuisance or health hazard to the mobile home park or to the owner or
occupants of any adjacent property.
      4.   The Oklahoma state health department must approve the type of
treatment proposed and the design of any disposal facilities and sewer systems
prior to construction.
   E.   Required Reception By Occupants: Every mobile home occupying a mobile
home park space shall tie into the park sewerage system and shall dump any
accumulated waste into the system. Every dependent trailer shall dump all
accumulated waste into a receptacle provided in the travel trailer park upon
entering and upon leaving the park. Such receptacles must be approved by the
Oklahoma state health department. Any other dump of accumulated waste within
the city is prohibited.
   F.   Monthly Sewerage Charge:
      1.   The monthly sewerage charge shall be based on the maximum mobile
home or travel trailer capacity of the park.
      2.   The park operator shall, by the tenth of each month, notify the city
clerk or the city utility office of the maximum number of mobile home spaces in
use at any one time during the previous month. The city clerk shall then adjust
the sewerage fee to the actual use of the park. Should the park operator fail
to notify the city clerk of the prior month's actual usage of trailer or mobile
home spaces, the sewerage fee shall be levied on the maximum capacity of the
park.
   G.   Maintenance Of Connections; Leakage Prohibited:
      1.   Sewer connections shall be watertight. Park licensees shall maintain
trailer and mobile home connections to sewer and water systems in good
condition and ensure that there is no sewerage or water leakage on the park
premises.
      2.   Park licensees shall be liable for and be assessed the cost of
repair of any sewer or water leakage on the park premises. (Ord. 09-01-2000,
10-2-2000)
10-6-12: WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Potable Supply Required:
      1.   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each park, capable of furnishing a minimum of two hundred fifty
(250) gallons per day per mobile home space.
      2.   Where a public supply of water of such quality is available within
three hundred feet (300') or becomes available within three hundred feet
(300'), connection shall be made thereto within one hundred eighty (180) days,
and its supply shall be used exclusively.
      3.   Where private water supplies must be developed, the health officer
must approve the location, construction, and development of both the water well
and pipe system and connections.
   B.   Water Connections And Piping:
      1.   The water system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes
to all buildings and mobile home spaces. Each mobile home shall be provided
with a cold water tap at least four inches (4") above the ground. An adequate
supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for
all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities.
      2.   All water piping shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with state and local law; the water piping system shall not be connected with
nonpotable or questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the
hazards of backflow or back siphonage. All water connections shall be
weathertight.
      3.   All water piping within the park shall be designed to deliver twenty
(20) psi at each water tap.
   C.   Drinking Fountains: Where fountains are provided for public use, they
shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health officer.
   D.   Construction Of Individual Water Connections: Individual water service
connections that are provided for direct use by mobile homes or travel trailers
shall be of such construction so that they will not be damaged by the parking
of such mobile homes or travel trailers. The park system shall be adequate to
provide twenty (20) pounds per square inch of pressure at all mobile home or
travel trailer connections.
   E.   Water Supply For Travel Trailer Reservoirs: Provisions shall be made
within one hundred fifty feet (150') of such travel trailer space to supply
water for travel trailer reservoirs.
   F.   Pumps And Well Casings; Drains:
      1.   No well casing, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be
located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room
or space aboveground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such
rooms, whether above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the
surface.
      2.   All floors shall be watertight and sloped from the pump pedestal to
the drain, and floors shall extend at least two feet (2') from the well in all
directions. The pedestal shall not be less than twelve inches (12") above the
floor. This shall not be construed as prohibiting submersible pumps.
   G.   Water Storage Reservoirs: All water storage reservoirs shall be
watertight and constructed of impervious material; all overflow and vents of
such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited.
Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the
entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir shall not
connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may back up. (Ord. 09-01-
2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-13: REFUSE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Management Free Of Health Hazards: The storage, collection and disposal
of refuse in the park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air
pollution.
   B.   Refuse Containers: All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight,
rodentproof containers, which shall be located within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of any mobile home space or travel trailer space. Containers shall be so
provided in sufficient numbers and capacity to properly store all refuse.
   C.   Racks For Refuse Containers: Racks or holders shall be provided for all
refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as to
prevent containers from being tipped to minimize spillage and container
deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Lids for containers shall
be permanently connected to racks or holders with chains or other flexible
materials.
   D.   Refuse Collection And Disposal:
      1.   All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly and as otherwise
required by the health officer. Where municipal garbage collection is not
available, the mobile home park operator shall either employ a private agency
or provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in
covered vehicles or covered containers.
      2.   Where municipal or other private disposal service is not available,
the mobile home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by burial or
transporting to an approved disposal site as directed by the health officer.
Refuse shall be buried only at locations and by methods approved by the
inspection officer and in accordance with the ordinances of the city.
      3.   When municipal refuse disposal service is available, it must be
used. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-14: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
   A.   Control Measures Required: Insect and rodent control measures to
safeguard public health as required by the inspection officer or health officer
shall be applied in the mobile home park or travel trailer park.
   B.   Larvicidal Solutions: Effective larvicidal solutions may be required by
the inspection officer or health officer for fly or mosquito breeding areas
which cannot be controlled by other, more permanent measures.
   C.   Insect Or Noxious Weed Control: The inspection officer or health
officer may require the park operator to take suitable measures to control
other insects and obnoxious weeds.
   D.   Debris: Accumulations of debris, which may provide harborage for
rodents, shall not be permitted in the mobile home park.
   E.   Rats Or Other Rodents: When rats or other objectionable rodents are
known to be in the park, the park operator shall take definite action, as
directed by the inspection officer or health officer, to exterminate them.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-15: ELECTRICITY; EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
   A.   Electrical Outlets: An electrical outlet supplying at least sixty (60)
amperes shall be provided for each mobile home space. The installation shall
comply with all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances.
Such electrical outlets and extension lines shall be grounded and
weatherproofed. Plug receptacles shall also be grounded and weatherproofed. No
power supply line shall be permitted to lie on the ground, and no main power
line shall be suspended less than eighteen feet (18') above the ground, unless
otherwise approved by the inspection officer. All trailer houses shall be
grounded to the approval of the inspection officer.
   B.   Streetlights: Streets and driveways within mobile home and travel
trailer parks shall be lighted with streetlights meeting the current standards
of the Illuminating Engineering Society, or one-half (1/2) candlepower,
whichever is higher. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-16: FUEL PIPING TO MOBILE HOMES:
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall
be of acceptable material as determined by the inspection officer and shall be
permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or
cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside
or beneath the mobile home or less than five feet (5') from any mobile home
exit. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-17: LITTER CONTROL; FIRE AND SAFETY RULES:
   A.   Litter, Rubbish And Flammable Materials: Park areas shall be kept free
of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.
   B.   Fire And Safety Rules: All parks shall conspicuously post fire and
safety rules and regulations as follows:
1.   Name: Name of park.
2.   Rules: Fire safety rules and regulations.
3.   Emergency Facilities.
a. The telephone number of the fire department is                    .
b. The telephone number of the police department is                .
c. The telephone number of mobile home park office is             .
d. The nearest public telephone is                                         .
4.   Services: The connecting and disconnecting of water, fuel and electrical
services will be made only by park personnel and other authorized persons as
determined by park management. Should these services be interrupted, telephone
or notify the park office or other; for water           , for fuel           ,
for electrical            .
5.   Firefighting Equipment: It is recommended that each homeowner have UL
approved portable hand fire extinguishers mounted in easily accessible
locations.
6.   Procedure In Case Of Fire: In case of fire in your trailer, tenants should
do these things in the following order:
a. Get the occupants out of the trailer; and
b. Call the fire department and call the park management.
The important thing to do is to get the professional firefighters at the fire.
In case of fire in the area, tenants should call the fire department, use
portable extinguishers on the fire, and call the park management.
7.   Fire Conditions: Tenants can aid mobile home park management in keeping
the area free from such conditions by notifying trailer park management when
they recognize unsafe conditions. Constant vigilance is necessary to maintain
the premises free from fire at all times. Fire safety is everyone's job.
8.   Rubbish: Tenants shall keep the area under and around their units free
from an accumulation of rubbish, paper, leaves and brush.
9.   Empty Fuel Containers: Tenants shall not place empty fuel containers under
their units. These containers shall be left in place.
10.   Home Inspections: Through the facilities of your local fire department,
your home can be inspected by members of this department at designated times.
If you would like to have a voluntary inspection of your unit, please notify
the park office.
11.   Traffic Regulations: Operators of vehicular equipment shall observe the
posted traffic signs or signals. Keep fire lanes open.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-18: ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS:
   A.   Plumbing, Electrical: All plumbing and electrical alterations or
repairs in the park shall be made in accordance with the applicable regulations
of the city.
   B.   Skirting Of Mobile Homes: Skirting of mobile homes is permissible but
areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a
harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard.
   C.   Construction; Permit Required:
      1.   A permit issued by the inspection officer shall be required before
any construction on a mobile home space or any structural addition or
alteration to the exterior of a mobile home takes place.
      2.   No construction or addition or alteration to the exterior of a
mobile home located in a mobile home park shall be permitted unless of the same
type of construction or materials as the mobile home affected.
      3.   All such construction, additions or alterations shall be in
compliance with applicable local and state laws.
      4.   No permit shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies,
awning or antennas. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-19: REGISTRATION OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
   A.   Contents Of Register: Each licensee or permittee shall keep a register
containing a record of all mobile home and travel trailer owners and occupants
located within the park. The register shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the owner or occupant of each mobile home
and motor vehicle by which it is towed;
      2.   The make, model, year and license of each mobile home and motor
vehicle;
      3.   The state, territory or country issuing such license;
      4.   The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home;
      5.   Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent mobile
home;
      6.   Each mobile home or travel trailer shall be identified while in a
park space by some clear, legible and orderly external method of identification
or numbering system.
   B.   Inspection; Retention Of Record: The park shall keep the register
available for inspection at all times by authorized city personnel whose duties
necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The
register record of each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period
of one year following the date of departure of the registrant from the park.
(Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-20: WRECKED OR DAMAGED HOMES, TRAILERS:
Wrecked, damaged or dilapidated mobile homes and travel trailers shall not be
kept or stored in a mobile home park or travel trailer park. The health officer
shall determine if a mobile home or travel trailer is damaged or dilapidated to
a point that makes the mobile home or travel trailer unfit for human occupancy
on either a temporary or permanent basis. Whenever such a determination is
made, the mobile home or travel trailer shall be vacated and removed from the
premises. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-21: MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Size Of Subdivision: The minimum size of mobile home subdivision shall
be ten (10) acres.
   B.   Residences Restricted To Mobile Homes: No residences except mobile
homes shall be permitted in a mobile home subdivision.
   C.   Lot Width And Area:
      1.   Minimum effective lot width in a mobile home subdivision shall be
forty feet (40') measured at the front building line and minimum lot area shall
be three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet; provided, that at least a
five foot (5') side yard shall be provided on each lot beyond any mobile home
and additions thereto; and further provided, that in areas not serviced by a
public sewer, the minimum additional lot area shall be determined by the health
officer on the basis of safe and sanitary sewer service.
      2.   The effective lot width of a mobile home shall be determined, for
interior lots, by measuring at right angles across the lot from one diagonal
side line to the other, and for corner lots, the measurements shall be made at
right angles from the diagonal having the greatest divergence from
perpendicular to the street, through the midpoint of the rear line of the
required front yard, to the opposite lot line or an extension thereof.
   D.   Side Lines Of Lots: Side lines of lots in mobile home subdivisions need
not be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street
lines.
   E.   Adjacent To Public Street: Regardless of the effective lot width,
mobile home subdivision lots must abut a public street for at least twenty five
feet (25').
   F.   Screening: All mobile home subdivisions shall provide suitable
screening where abutting single-family residential areas.
   G.   Compliance With Subdivision And Zoning Regulations: Mobile home
subdivisions shall comply with the subdivision and zoning ordinances of the
city except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
10-6-22: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 09-01-2000, 10-2-2000)
CHAPTER 7
CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS AND EASEMENTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Definitions
10-7-2: Authority To Close
10-7-3: Procedure For Closing
10-7-4: Right To Reopen; Effect Of Closing
10-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
CLOSE: A legislative act of the city council discontinuing the public use of a
public way or easement without affecting title to real property.
EASEMENT: Rights in real property as set forth in 60 Oklahoma Statutes section
49.
PUBLIC WAY: A street, avenue, boulevard, alley, lane or thoroughfare opened for
public use. (Ord. 2001-01-01, 10-16-2001)
10-7-2: AUTHORITY TO CLOSE:
The city council shall have the power by ordinance to close to the public the
use of any public way or easement within the city whenever the city council
deems such closing necessary. However, before final action shall be taken by
the city council on the closing of any public way or easement, such question
shall be submitted to the city planning commission for investigation and
report. (Ord. 2001-01-01, 10-16-2001)
10-7-3: PROCEDURE FOR CLOSING:
   A.   Application By Property Owner; Fee: Any property owner owning property
abutting a public way or easement may make application to the city clerk to
close said public way or easement. Said application shall be made to the city
clerk and shall be accompanied by an application fee as set by the council by
resolution.
   B.   Contents Of Application: The application shall set forth the following:
      1.   Name and address of the party making application;
      2.   The proper legal description of the public way or easement which is
sought to be closed;
      3.   The reason for which closing is sought;
      4.   The names and addresses of all property owners, if any, abutting the
public way or easement;
      5.   The names and mailing addresses of all public service corporations,
transmission companies or franchise holders having rights in said public way or
easement.
   C.   Hearing Before Planning Commission; Notice:
      1.   Upon the filing of a completed application, the city clerk shall set
the application for hearing before the planning commission. (Ord. 2001-01-01,
10-16-2001)
      2.   The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing by certified mail to
all the persons, firms or corporations listed on the application at least
thirty (30) days prior to the date of the planning commission meeting at which
said application shall be heard. The city clerk shall give notice to the public
by publishing a notice of said application one time in a legal newspaper
published in, or of general circulation in, the city at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. (Ord. 2001-01-01, 10-16-2001; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   City Attorney Review: During the time between the submission of the
completed application and the meeting of the planning commission, the city
clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the city attorney who shall
review the application for completeness and verify the inclusion of all
affected parties in the application for purposes of notice. If the city
attorney shall find that the application is not properly completed or that any
interested owner entitled to notice as described above has not been listed in
the application, the application shall be sent back to the city clerk who shall
then take consideration of the application off the agenda for the planning
commission meeting and return the application to the party making the
application with a letter of denial of the application stating the reasons
given by the city attorney for denial and informing the said party that the
application fee has been forfeited and that reapplication must be submitted
with an additional application fee.
   E.   Planning Commission Investigation And Recommendation; Council Action:
      1.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing upon the
application after due and proper notice has been given as required above. After
the hearing, the planning commission shall have thirty (30) days to
investigate, report, and make a recommendation to the city council regarding
the closing of the public way or easement. The report and recommendation shall
be placed on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
council.
      2.   The city council must act upon the application and recommendation
within thirty (30) days after it first appeared on their agenda. The city
council may either approve, deny, or send the application back to the planning
commission for further investigation. The city council shall not be bound by
the recommendation of the planning commission. The decision of the city council
shall be final, and if the application is denied, the applicant may not reapply
for the closure of a public way or easement for a period of two (2) years
unless a permanent and material change in fact or circumstance occurs.
      3.   If the application is resubmitted to the planning commission for
further investigation, the planning commission shall have a reasonable time
after the resubmission to complete their investigation and report. The
application shall then be sent back to the city council for final action.
   F.   Council Direction For Filing Application: The city council may, upon
its own motion, direct the filing of an application to close a public way or
easement, in such case no application fee shall be required. The city attorney
shall prepare the application, and, after it is completed, the city clerk shall
submit said application to the planning commission for investigation, report,
and recommendation to the city council. (Ord. 2001-01-01, 10-16-2001)
10-7-4: RIGHT TO REOPEN; EFFECT OF CLOSING:
   A.   In the event any public way or easement is closed by the city council
by ordinance, the city shall retain the absolute right to reopen the public way
or easement without expense to the city by motion of the city council or upon
the completed and paid application of the property owners owning more than one-
half (1/2) in area of the property abutting on the public way or easement
previously closed. The procedure for opening a public way or easement shall be
the same as that for closing a public way or easement.
   B.   The closing of a public way or easement shall not affect the right to
maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove utility, public service
corporation, or transmission company facilities of service thereon, unless
released in writing executed by the owners thereof. (Ord. 2001-01-01, 10-16-
2001)
