CITY OF PRYOR CREEK, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-9, passed - -2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Section
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I. NAME, BOUNDARIES, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, POWERS
   
1.   Name–boundaries
   
2.   Rights–liabilities; powers
ARTICLE II. ELECTIONS
   
3.   Time of election–officials elected
   
4.   Boundaries of wards
   
5.   Qualifications of elective officers
   
6.   Filing–manner of elections
   
7.   Procedure in conducting elections
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
   
8.   Legislative powers
   
9.   Vacancies
   
10.   Removal by Council
   
11.   Holding other offices
   
12.   No direct interest in city expenditures
   
13.   Presiding officer–President of the Council and Clerk
   
14.   President of the Council
   
15.   Regular meetings
   
16.   Special meetings
   
17.   Quorum
   
18.   Rules of procedure
   
19.   Final passage of ordinances
   
20.   Publication of ordinance adopted
   
21.   Amendment, repeal
   
22.   Record of ordinances
   
23.   Proof of ordinance
   
24.   Administrative ordinances
   
25.   Fire Pension Fund
   
26.   Police Pension Fund
   
27.   Power to regulate intoxicating beverages
ARTICLE IV. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
   
28.   Elected officers
   
29.   Continuance in office
   
30.   Changes in compensation
   
31.   Compensation of nonelective officers and employees
   
32.   Selection of officers and employees of the City of Pryor Creek
   
33.   Removal of officers
   
34.   Oath Of Office
   
35.   Bonds
   
36.   The Mayor
   
37.   Duties of the City Clerk
   
38.   Duties of the Treasurer
   
39.   Duties of the Chief of Police
ARTICLE V. MUNICIPAL UTILITY BOARD
   
40.   Board created
   
41.   Appointment, terms
   
42.   Removal of members of Utility Board
   
43.   Filling of vacancies
   
44.   Compensation
   
45.   Duties
   
46.   Operation for benefit of city, no free service
   
47.   Utility rates
   
48.   Application of revenues
   
49.   Surplus revenues
   
50.   Major improvements and extensions
   
51.   Elections to authorize incurring of indebtedness
   
52.   Annual estimate of needs, appropriation
ARTICLE VI. OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND BOARDS
   
53.   Departments established
   
54.   Police Department
   
55.   Department of Public Health
   
56.   Power of Health Officer to make arrest
   
57.   Physicians report to Department
   
58.   Quarantine
   
59.   Library, Park and Cemetery Boards, powers
ARTICLE VII. THE INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
   
60.   Direct legislation
   
61.   Twenty five percentum petition
   
62.   Several ordinances at one election
   
63.   Limit to special election
   
64.   Repeal of electoral ordinance
   
65
.   Mode of protesting against ordinances
   
66.   Reference by the Council
   
67.   Ordinance receiving the highest number of votes to prevail
   
68.   Regular procedure
   
69.   The enacting clause
   
70.   Initiative ordinances repealed by electoral vote
ARTICLE VIII. FRANCHISES
   
71.   Franchises granted upon vote
   
72.   Franchise petitions
   
73.   Franchise specify streets
   
74.   Power to regulate rates and fares
   
75.   Ordinance in plain terms
   
76.   Franchise provide for safety, etc.
   
77.   Exclusive franchise
   
78.   No franchise leased except
   
79.   Renewal
   
80.   Terms not longer than twenty five years compensation
   
81.   City may purchase– procedure
   
82.   Matters in Charter not to impair right of Council to insert other matters
in franchises
ARTICLE IX. PUBLIC MONEYS AND FINANCE
   
83.   Sinking funds
   
84.   Fiscal year
   
85.   Audits
   
86.   Appropriations
   
87.   State laws applicable
ARTICLE X. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   
88.   Signature and seal
   
89.   Present ordinances continue in force
   
90.   Continuing bonds, etc.
   
91.   Official book, records, etc.
   
92.   Constitution and laws of the State Of Oklahoma
   
93.   Amendment
   
94.   Effect of unconstitutionality of any section
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Pryor Creek, under the authority of the
Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, do ordain and establish this
Charter for the City of Pryor Creek.
ARTICLE I. NAME, BOUNDARIES, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, POWERS
Section 1. Name–boundaries.
The Municipal corporation now existing and known as “The City of Pryor Creek”,
shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate under the same
boundaries with power and authority to change its boundaries in the manner
authorized by law.
Section 2. Rights–liabilities; powers.
   A.   By the name of “The City of Pryor Creek”, the City shall have perpetual
succession and shall own, possess or hold all real and personal property
heretofore owned, possessed or held by the said City of Pryor Creek, and shall
assume, manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith.
   B.   Shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all
benefits, and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of
said City of Pryor Creek, by that name may sue and defend, plead and be
impleaded, in all courts and places, and in all matters and proceedings; may
have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure; may purchase,
receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property.
   C.   May receive bequests, devises, gifts and donations of all kinds of
property, in fee simple or in trust, for public, charitable or other purposes;
and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such
bequests, devises, gifts and donations with power to manage, sell, lease or
otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the bequests,
devises, gifts or donations.
   D.   Shall have the power within or without its territorial limits to
construct, condemn and purchase, acquire, lease, add to, maintain, conduct and
operate water works, light plants, power plants, gas distribution system,
electric distribution system, sewage disposal system, and other public
utilities or works or ways, in whole or in part, and everything required
therefor, for the use of said City and the inhabitants thereof, and any such
system, plants or works or ways, or any contracts in relation or connection
therewith, that may exist and which said City may desire to purchase, in whole
or in part, may be purchased or acquired by said City which may enforce such
purchase by proceedings at law as in taking land for public use by right of
eminent domain, within the limits prescribed by the Constitution and laws of
the State of Oklahoma, and shall have the power to issue bonds with the assent
of the qualified electors within this City at any election legally called, in
an amount necessary to carry out any of said powers or purposes.
   E.   The legislative, executive and judicial powers of the City shall extend
to all matters of local and Municipal government, it being the intent hereof
that the specification of particular powers by any other provision of this
Charter shall never be construed as impairing the effect of the general grant
of powers of local government hereby bestowed.
   F.   The City shall have all powers, privileges and functions which by or
pursuant to the Constitution and laws of this State have been or could be
granted to or exercised by any city of the first class.
   G.   The City shall have the power to license and regulate by ordinance the
transportation of persons and property within the streets, alleys, and all
other public places in the City, and to prescribe by ordinance rules governing
all persons, corporations or vehicles engaged or used in such transportation.
   H.   All powers of the City shall, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, be vested in the officers and agents hereinafter provided for and
subject to distribution and delegation of such powers as provided in this
Charter, or by ordinance.
ARTICLE II. ELECTIONS
Section 3. Time of election–officials elected.
   A.   An election shall be held on the second Tuesday in February, 2015, and
each four (4) years thereafter in which there should be elected for the city at
large one mayor.
   B.   An election shall be held on the second Tuesday in February, 2013, and
each two (2) years thereafter in which there should be elected for the city at
large one chief of police, one city clerk and one city treasurer.
   C.   On the second Tuesday in February, 2012 and each year thereafter, an
election shall be held at which time one council member shall be elected from
each ward. It is the intention of this charter that each ward be represented on
the city council by two (2) council members, one council member to be elected
in odd-numbered years and one council member to be elected in even-numbered
years.
   D.   The terms of the officials elected hereunder shall begin on the first
Monday in May following the elections and they shall serve for a period of two
(2) years, except for the mayor who shall serve for four (4) years, and until
their successors are elected and qualified.
   E.   If necessary for any of the above positions, as provided under the
terms of article 2, section 6, a runoff election shall be held on the first
Tuesday in April.
   F.   In the event lawful election dates for the state of Oklahoma are
changed and these dates are no longer available for municipal elections, the
city council shall have the authority to set by resolution appropriate and
lawful dates for the election and runoff, if required, without the need to
further amend the charter.
(Res. 2011-5, passed 7-5-2011)
Section 4. Boundaries of wards.
For the purposes of election and of representation upon the city council, the
city is divided into four (4) wards which shall be bounded and described after
the adoption of this charter in the same manner as they were bounded and
described by ordinances immediately prior to its adoption. The mayor and
council may by ordinance create additional wards or change the boundaries of
the wards established by this charter for the purpose of creating and
maintaining more nearly equal representation of the people upon the city
council.
(Charter, adopted 1-16-1951)
Section 5. Qualifications of elective officers.
No person shall be eligible to be a candidate for or to hold any elective
office of the city unless he be a citizen of the United States and of the state
of Oklahoma, at least twenty five (25) years of age, an actual resident of the
city and a qualified voter of the city. To be eligible to be a candidate for or
to hold office as councilman from any ward, such candidate or official must
also be an actual resident and qualified voter of said ward.
(Amended Election March 1989, Res. 88-17, passed - -)
Section 6. Filing–manner of elections.
   A.   Any person possessing the qualifications of section 5 above may become
a candidate for any of the elective offices by filing with the county election
board secretary beginning the first Monday in December at eight o’clock (8:00)
A.M. until the following Wednesday at five o’clock (5:00) P.M. of each year his
or her written request to be placed upon the official ballot. The county
election board secretary shall prepare a sufficient number of official ballots
setting forth the names of the qualified candidates in accordance with such
requests and with the provisions of this charter and only such official ballots
shall be used at such election; however, candidates shall be listed on the
ballot according to the lot order randomly drawn by the secretary of the Mayes
County election board. In the event a candidate for any position upon which an
election is being held fails to receive in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the
total votes cast for that position there shall be a runoff election between the
highest two (2) candidates as provided in article 2, section 3 above. Such
election will be conducted in all respects as the regular election, and the
candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast for such office or offices
shall be declared elected to said office or offices. In the event of a tie, the
two (2) candidates with the highest number of votes cast for any office, the
council holding office at that time of said runoff election shall elect such
officer from the candidates voted upon at such runoff election.
   B.   In November of the year preceding any election(s), the city council
shall pass a resolution setting forth the dates for filing for candidacy,
general election, and runoff election. Upon passage said resolution shall be
forwarded to the secretary of the Mayes County election board.
(Res. 2011-5, passed 7-5-2011)
Section 7. Procedure in conducting elections.
With regard to precinct polling, printing of ballots, absentee ballots,
counting, and return of ballots and in all other respects not specifically
provided for herein, the city shall be governed at all elections including
special elections by the constitution and laws of the state of Oklahoma.
(Amendment adopted at election April 1988)
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
Section 8. Legislative powers.
The legislative powers of the city government shall be vested in the city
council composed of two (2) councilmen from each ward and in the mayor. The
mayor and council may exercise such legislative powers as may be authorized by
and not inconsistent with the constitution and general laws of the state of
Oklahoma and this charter, and shall set up such judicial authority as it may
deem necessary to enforce the ordinances of the city. The mayor and council
shall have executive and legislative authority over all affairs of the city,
except those specifically delegated to the utility board herein.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 9. Vacancies.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the council from any cause during the unexpired
term of a councilman, the mayor with the consent of the council shall appoint
an eligible person from the ward in which the vacancy occurs to fill such
vacancy until the next regular municipal election at which time a councilman
will be elected from such ward to fill such unexpired term; provided, that in
the event such vacancy occurs during the last year of such term, such
appointment shall be made for the whole unexpired term.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 10. Removal by Council.
Whenever any person elected or appointed to the council neglects or refuses or
fails to qualify within ten (10) days of the beginning of the term for which he
has been chosen, and whenever a councilman neglects or refuses or fails to
attend the meetings of the council for ninety (90) days without first having
the consent of the council entered upon its records, removes from the city, is
convicted of a felony or is judicially declared incompetent, as defined by
statute, the mayor and council may declare that a vacancy exists and proceed to
select a successor to such councilman in the manner provided for in the next
preceding section.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 11. Holding other offices.
No member of the council shall be appointed to any office or position under the
city during the term of office as councilman for which he was elected or
appointed.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 12. No direct interest in city expenditures.
No member of the council shall have any financial interest in or reap any
financial benefit directly or indirectly from any expenditures of the city,
save as the result of the general benefit arising from the maintenance of the
streets, alleys, parks and public places in the city of Pryor Creek.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 13. Presiding officer–President of the Council and Clerk.
The mayor shall preside over the council at its sessions. A president of the
council shall be elected by the council from its members, who shall preside in
the absence of or the disability of the mayor. The city clerk shall be clerk of
the council, and shall, with the mayor, sign and attest all ordinances and
resolutions.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 14. President of the Council.
In the event of the absence, disability, resignation or removal of the mayor,
the president of the council, elected as hereinbefore provided, shall act as
mayor until the mayor shall have returned or recovered from his disability, or
until a successor to the mayor shall have been elected and qualified.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 15. Regular meetings.
The council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Mondays of each
month or at such time as the council may by ordinance designate, and may hold
such adjourned meetings as it may find necessary for the dispatch of its
business; provided, that if the regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday
the meeting shall be held upon the succeeding day.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 16. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor, or by three
councilmen at any time on such notice as the council may prescribe by
ordinance, but the purpose of such meeting shall be set forth in such call and
no other business shall be transacted at such meeting.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 17. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a less number may adjourn to any date prior to the next regular
meeting. The council shall have and sit with open doors at legislative sessions
and shall keep a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 18. Rules of procedure.
The council shall, subject to the provisions of this charter, determine its own
rules of procedure.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 19. Final passage of ordinances.
No ordinance shall be passed finally on the date when it is introduced except
in case of public emergency, the nature of which emergency shall be clearly
stated in such ordinance. No ordinance making a grant of any franchise or
special privilege shall ever be passed as an emergency.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 20. Publication of ordinance adopted.
Every ordinance adopted shall be published once in a newspaper published and of
general circulation in the city and shall not take effect until thirty (30)
days after such publication except emergency ordinances passed as provided for
in this article, which shall take effect upon passage and publication, subject
always to the provisions of the referendum; and provided further, that this
section shall not apply to special assessment ordinances, but such ordinances
shall be governed by the provisions of the statutes of the state.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 21. Amendment, repeal.
No ordinance or section thereof shall be amended or repealed except by
ordinance adopted in the manner provided in this charter.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 22. Record of ordinances.
A true copy of every ordinance shall be left in a book marked “Ordinance
Record”, and authenticated by the signatures of the mayor and clerk.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 23. Proof of ordinance.
Any ordinance may be proved by a copy thereof certified by the clerk, under the
seal of the city; or when printed in a book or pamphlet form published by the
authority of the city, the same shall be received in evidence in all courts and
other places, without further proof.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 24. Administrative ordinances.
The council shall have the power, and it shall be its duty to pass ordinances
which may be proper and expedient to regulate and determine the organization
and procedure of administrative departments, except the utility board.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 25. Fire Pension Fund.
The city council shall adopt and enact such measures and ordinances as are
necessary to establish a firemen’s relief and pension fund and to entitle the
city to an allocation of funds by the insurance commissioner of the state of
Oklahoma under the laws of the state of Oklahoma in force at the time of the
adoption of this charter and shall continue in operation such system of relief,
pension and retirement for firemen until or unless the laws of the state of
Oklahoma are substantially changed.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 26. Police Pension Fund.
The city council is empowered and authorized to provide for a policemen’s
pension and retirement system for the benefit of the officers and employees of
the police department of the city. The council may provide funds for such
system by deducting a portion of the salaries of the officers and employees of
the police department and/or by setting aside funds from the general fund of
the city not to exceed five percent (5%) per annum of the total salaries of
such officers and employees of the police department. Such system shall be
administered by such officials and under such rules and regulations as the city
council may provide.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 27. Power to regulate intoxicating beverages.
The city council may adopt and enact such measures and ordinances not
prohibited by the constitution and general laws of the state of Oklahoma which
it deems expedient to prohibit the unlawful sale and possession of intoxicating
liquors within the city and to enforce its ordinances upon that subject
including provision for the issuance of search and seizure warrants to the city
policemen.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
ARTICLE IV. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section 28. Elected officers.
All elected officers in office at the time of the taking effect of this charter
shall continue in such office until their respective terms expire unless a
vacancy occurs by reason of death, resignation, removal from office or other
cause mentioned in this charter and the salaries of such elected officers shall
be and remain the same as they were immediately before the taking effect of
this charter until changed in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 29. Continuance in office.
All persons holding any nonelective office or employment under the city at the
time when this charter goes into force and effect shall continue in such office
or employment and shall draw the same rate of compensation as during the month
preceding the adoption of this charter until removed or until the compensation
is changed.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 30. Changes in compensation.
The council may by ordinance change, designate and fix the salary of the
elected officers of the city of Pryor Creek, said change to become effective at
the beginning of the succeeding term of office.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 31. Compensation of nonelective officers and employees.
The city council shall fix the compensation of all nonelective officers and
employees except the employees of the utility board.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 32. Selection of officers and employees of the City of Pryor Creek.
All officers and employees of the city of Pryor Creek, other than elective
officers and except as herein specifically provided, shall be appointed by the
mayor with the consent and confirmation of the council. Their term of office,
conditions of servitude and compensation shall be fixed and determined by the
mayor and council and they shall hold office during the pleasure of the mayor
and council.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 33. Removal of officers.
The mayor and council may by a vote of a majority of all its members, to be
entered upon the journal, remove for cause any officer except the mayor and
members of the utility board. The mayor may be removed from office for the
causes and in the manner now provided by the laws of the state of Oklahoma for
removal of county officers.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 34. Oath Of Office.
All elected officers shall upon assuming office take and subscribe to an oath
to support the constitution of the United States and of the state of Oklahoma
and the charter of the city of Pryor Creek and diligently to perform the duties
of their office, and not to advocate or give aid or support to any person,
group or party advocating the overthrow of the United States, state or
municipal government by force, violence or other unlawful means.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 35. Bonds.
The city council shall designate by ordinance or resolution what officers or
employees of the city shall give bond and the amount thereof in each case. The
bonds of all officials and employees of the city of Pryor Creek shall be good
and acceptable surety bonds of solvent surety companies and shall meet with the
approval of the mayor and council.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
Section 36. The Mayor.
   A.   The mayor shall sign all contracts, bonds, or other instruments
requiring the assent of the city and take care that the same are fully
performed.
   B.   The mayor shall call all special municipal elections as in this charter
or the laws of the state provided.
   C.   He shall perform such other duties not inconsistent with the purposes
and provisions of this charter as the council may assign to him.
(Charter, 1-16-1951)
   D.   He shall be employed by the city of Pryor Creek as the full-time chief
administrative officer of the city and shall have charge and supervision of all
branches of the city service except as otherwise provided in this charter.
(Amended Election 11-7-2006, Res. 2006-4, passed 8-1-2006)
   E.   He shall see to the faithful execution of all laws and ordinances of
the city and state.
   F.   He shall have power to dismiss any officer or employee appointed by him
whenever in his judgment the interest of the city services so requires, except
as herein provided.
   G.   He shall control and direct the several officers and departments of the
city administration, except as herein provided.
   H.   He shall have power at any time to investigate the affairs of any
department. He, or any person appointed by him for that purpose, shall have
power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers
and other evidence.
   I.   He shall attend all meetings of the Council and may take part in the
discussions but shall not vote except in case of a tie when he may cast the
deciding vote.
   J.   He shall have the power to sign or veto any City ordinance passed by
the Council. He may exercise such veto by failing or refusing to sign an
ordinance and returning the same with his objections in writing at the next
regular meeting of the Council, and should the Mayor neglect or refuse to sign
any ordinance without returning the same with his objections in writing at the
next regular meeting, the ordinance shall become a law without his signature;
provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over his veto by
a vote of two-thirds (2/3) or more of all the members of the Council
notwithstanding the veto and in the event that an ordinance is passed over the
veto of the Mayor it shall be the mandatory duty of the Mayor to sign such
ordinance although he may note thereon that it was passed over his veto.
   K.   He shall keep the Council advised of all the needs of the City and
shall recommend measures for its adoption.
   L.   He shall perform all such other duties as may be imposed on him by this
Charter or by Ordinance.
Section 37. Duties of the City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall be a recording officer and shall be the custodian of all
documents and records of the City of Pryor Creek, except such departmental
records as shall be delegated by the Council or herein reserved to be kept by
the departmental heads. The City Clerk shall keep the record of appropriations
and expenditures, of payment of indebtedness, minutes of all meetings of the
Council, and such other records as the Council may instruct the Clerk to keep.
Section 38. Duties of the Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds belonging to the City of
Pryor Creek. The City Treasurer shall keep a proper record and system of
accounts of all funds coming into his control.
Section 39. Duties of the Chief Of Police.
The Chief of Police shall enforce the laws of the State of Oklahoma and the
City of Pryor Creek and be subject, in the discharge of his duties, to the
orders of the Mayor.
ARTICLE V. MUNICIPAL UTILITY BOARD
Section 40. Board created.
There is hereby created a Municipal Utility Board which shall consist of five
(5) members possessing the same qualifications as elective officers of the
City.
Section 41. Appointment, terms.
The first members of the Utility Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent and confirmation of the Council and shall be appointed and take office
as soon as practicable after the taking effect of this Charter. The first
members of said Board shall hold office for varying or staggered terms to
expire on the first Monday in June in the years 1952, 1953, 1954, 1955, and
1956, respectively. The respective terms of office of the first members of said
Board appointed under this Charter shall be designated by the Mayor consistent
with the provisions hereof. As the respective terms of office of each of the
original and succeeding members of the Utility Board expire the remaining
members of said Board shall appoint or reappoint some qualified person to
membership on said Board to hold office for a term of five (5) years subject,
however to the approval and confirmation of such appointment by the City
Council. Each member of said Board shall hold office until his successor has
been appointed and confirmed and has qualified for such office.
Section 42. Removal of members of Utility Board.
All members of the Municipal Utility Board may be removed from office for
neglect of duty, corruption or malfeasance in office, or upon any other ground
for which a county officer may be removed, upon petition filed in the District
Court in and for Mayes County, Oklahoma, where proceedings shall be held in all
respects similar to proceedings governing the removal of a county officer. The
members of the Utility Board may declare a vacancy to any membership on said
Board for the same reasons that the City Council may declare a vacancy to exist
in the office of any Councilman as set forth in Section 10 above.
Section 43. Filling of vacancies.
Vacancies in the membership of said Utility Board by reason of death,
resignation, removal or any other cause except expiration of a term of office
shall be filled by the remaining members of said Utility Board appointing a
qualified person or persons to serve during the unexpired term or terms, such
appointment to require the concurrence of a majority of said remaining members.
Section 44. Compensation.
Members of the Utility Board shall receive like compensation as the members of
the City Council.
Section 45. Duties.
The Utility Board shall have the care, custody and management of the existing
electric system, water system, gas distribution system, street lighting system,
and sewage disposal system and may enlarge and extend them as the necessity
therefor arises except as otherwise provided herein. It shall have under its
control the complete operation of these utilities and such others as the people
of the City of Pryor Creek may acquire. All of these utilities shall be
collectively known as the Municipal Utility Department.
The Utility Board shall employ all persons necessary in the operation of the
utilities, and fix their salaries, conditions of servitude and terms of office.
The Utility Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary for the proper conduct of the business.
Section 46. Operation for benefit of city, no free service.
The Municipal Utility Department shall be operated for the general welfare,
safety and health of the City of Pryor Creek and the citizens thereof through
the furnishing of water, gas and electric service, a sewage disposal system,
and such other public services as may be placed upon it, for public and private
uses at reasonable rates, providing a reasonable profit to furnish revenue for
the operation of other governmental and administrative functions of the City.
The Municipal Utility Department shall not contribute or donate any free
service to any individual, firm, or organization and each Municipal department
shall pay said Municipal Utility Department for its public services at a rate
sufficient to meet the latter department’s cost of operation.
Section 47. Utility rates.
Effective with the September 1976 utility billing, the following base utility
rates are established:
   1.   Natural Gas: All customers within City limits — one dollar sixty cents
($1.60) per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet used per month. Minimum bill to be
the charge for one thousand (1,000) cubic feet.
   2.   Water: All customers within City limits — fifty cents ($0.50) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons used per month. Minimum bill to be the charge for two
thousand (2,000) gallons.
   3.   Electricity: All regular residential customers within City limits — two
and eight-tenths (2.8) cents per kilowatt hour used per month. Minimum bill to
be the charge for thirty eight (38) kilowatt hours.
When wholesale costs of purchased utilities change from May 1976 wholesale
rates, the Municipal Utility Board may increase with approval of the City
Council, and must decrease each retail rate by the same percentage of change in
the wholesale purchased utility cost.
(Amended by a vote of the people on August 17, 1976 pursuant to an election
called as authorized by Res. 76-10, approved and adopted on 7-6-1976.)
Section 48. Application of revenues.
The revenue derived from the operation of the Utility Department shall be
applied, first for the payment of the ordinary operating expenses of the
Utility Department and the retirement of Utility Department warrants or
certificates of indebtedness issued for such expenses within the scope of
operating expenses shall be included the cost of the ordinary operation, the
expenses incidental to the running of new services and the installation of new
meters without major extension of lines, cost of minor extension of lines and
cost of replacements due to obsolescence. Except as otherwise provided herein,
such expenditures shall not exceed and shall be paid out of the revenues of the
Utility Department for the year in which they arise.
The Utility Board shall set aside out of its revenues a reserve for
depreciation, replacement of obsolete equipment and for emergency repairs. Such
reserve shall be created for the purpose of ensuring a fund for the
replacement, without incurring Municipal indebtedness, of property, machinery,
equipment and supplies which the Board anticipates will become wornout or
obsolete in the future, and to provide an emergency fund in cases of
destruction or injury to utility properties by reason of fire, wind, lightning
and the like. If practicable, such reserve shall be created gradually and over
a period of years and in any event the revenues set aside for such reserve in
any one year shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the net profits of the
Utility Department for that year.
Section 49. Surplus revenues.
In the event that the revenues derived from the operation of the Utility
Department shall exceed the ordinary operating expenses as defined herein and
the reserve authorized to be set aside from such revenues in the next preceding
section, such surplus revenues shall be applied by the Mayor and the City
Council as follows:
   First: For the current interest and accruals in the Sinking Fund of the City
of Pryor Creek.
   Second: For the General Fund of the City of Pryor Creek.
Such surplus revenues shall be transferred to the Sinking Fund and General Fund
of the City at such times and intervals as the Mayor and Council shall
designate.
Section 50. Major improvements and extensions.
Major improvements and extensions of the Utility Department services
necessitating an indebtedness in excess of the revenues and appropriations for
the year in which such indebtedness is created may be made only with the
authority of a majority of the qualified electors voting at an election legally
called for that purpose. When authorized by a vote of the people for that
purpose the Utility Board may issue securities for improvements and extensions
of the Utility Department against the future revenues of the Department, or the
City may create bonded indebtedness for that purpose as provided by law.
Section 51. Elections to authorize incurring of indebtedness.
Upon demand therefor the Municipal Utility Board by its resolution presented to
him, the Mayor shall within ten (10) days after such presentation call a
special election and submit to the qualified electors any requested issue
relative to the authority of the Municipal Utility Department or the creation
of indebtedness to meet the needs of the Municipal Utility Department.
Section 52. Annual estimate of needs, appropriation.
The Utility Board shall cause to be prepared at the end of the fiscal year a
statement of its estimated needs for the ensuing year and shall appropriate
funds from the Department revenues to provide for said estimates and said
statement shall be made a part of and published with the financial statement
and estimated needs of the City of Pryor Creek.
ARTICLE VI. OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND BOARDS
Section 53. Departments established.
The City Administration under the Mayor shall consist of a Police Department,
Fire Department, Street Department, and such other departments as the City
Council may prescribe by ordinance.
   A.   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and as many
other subordinate police officers or employees as may be provided for by the
City Council. Such subordinate police officers or employees shall be appointed
by the Chief of Police with the consent and confirmation of the Mayor and a
majority of the members of the City Council.
   B.   The Fire Department shall be governed by the applicable laws of the
State of Oklahoma; provided, that members of said Fire Department shall not be
removed or discharged without a hearing after ten (10) days’ notice.
   C.   The Street Department shall consist of a Superintendent of Streets
appointed by the Mayor with the consent and confirmation of the Council and as
many other officers or employees as may be provided for by the Mayor and
Council.
(Amended Election, 3-5-1991, Res. 90-19, passed - -)
Section 54. Police Department.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to maintain order and to enforce
the laws and ordinances of the State and City and to that end every officer
shall have the power and it shall be his duty to make arrests upon warrant, or
without warrant when he shall be a witness to the violation of any law or
ordinance, and he shall bring the accused before the Court having jurisdiction
without unnecessary delay. The Police Department and all officers thereof shall
perform all such other duties as may be required of them by the laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations which may be made governing the Police
Department.
Section 55. Department of Public Health.
Repealed. Election 3-5-1991, Res. 90-19.
Section 56. Power of Health Officer to make arrest.
Repealed. Election 3-5-1991, Res. 90-19.
Section 57. Physicians report to Department.
Repealed. Election 3-5-1991, Res. 90-19.
Section 58. Quarantine.
Repealed. Election 3-5-1991, Res. 90-19.
Section 59. Library, Park and Cemetery Boards, powers.
The Mayor and Council may elect to place the operation of the City Library, the
City Parks and the City Cemetery under the control of boards whose members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the Council,
and serve without pay. They shall have the custody and care of the departments
under their control.
Boards so appointed shall employ all persons needed in the operation of their
departments and fix their compensation.
Thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year said boards shall
present to the City Council a detailed statement of the estimated needs and
expenses for the ensuing year.
ARTICLE VII. THE INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 60. Direct legislation.
Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the Mayor and Council by petition
signed by qualified electors of the City, equal in number to the percentage
hereinafter required.
Section 61. Twenty five percentum petition.
If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by qualified
electors equal in number to twenty five percentum (25%) of the total votes cast
for all candidates for Mayor at the preceding election and contains a request
that said proposed ordinance be submitted to a vote of the people, if not
passed by the Council, the Mayor and Council shall submit such proposed
ordinance to a vote of the qualified electors of the City at an election,
regular or special, to be held for that purpose, and unless such ordinance is
passed by the Mayor and Council, the form of such petition, the manner of
procuring and filing the same, and the time and manner within which election
shall be held thereunder, shall be governed by ordinance or ordinances
sufficient to carry out the purposes of this provision.
Section 62. Several ordinances at one election.
Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted on at the same election in
accordance with the provisions of this Article and the ordinances which may be
passed by the Council in furtherance thereof.
Section 63. Limit to special election.
There shall not be held under this Article of the Charter more than one special
election in any period of twelve (12) months for the submission of the same
proposition.
Section 64. Repeal of electoral ordinance.
The Council may submit a proposition for the repeal or amendment of any
ordinance so adopted by electoral vote to be voted upon at any succeeding
regular Municipal election, and should such proposition so submitted receive a
majority of the votes cast therefor at such election, such ordinance shall be
repealed or amended accordingly. No ordinance adopted by electoral vote can be
repealed or amended except by electoral vote.
Section 65. Mode of protesting against ordinances.
No ordinance passed by the Mayor and Council shall go into effect before thirty
(30) days from the time of its passage, except ordinances making a tax levy or
appropriations or in respect to improvement districts or sub-districts and
special assessments; and excepting also any ordinance for the immediate
preservation of the public health, peace or safety which contains a statement
of its urgency. If, during said thirty (30) days, a petition signed by the
qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least twenty five
percentum (25%) of the last preceding vote cast for all candidates for Mayor be
presented to the Mayor and Council, protesting against the going into effect of
such ordinance, the same shall be suspended from going into effect and it shall
be the duty of the Mayor and the Council to reconsider such ordinance and if
the same be not entirely repealed, the Mayor and Council shall submit the
ordinance to a vote of the qualified electors of the City, either at the next
regular Municipal election or at a special election to be called for that
purpose, and such ordinance shall not go into effect unless a majority of the
qualified electors voting on the same shall vote in favor thereof.
Section 66. Reference by the Council.
The Council may, on its own motion, submit to electoral vote for adoption or
rejection at a regular or special Municipal election any proposed ordinance, or
measure, in the manner and with the same force and effect as if a petition
therefor had been filed as provided in the last preceding section.
Section 67. Ordinance receiving the highest number of votes to prevail.
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances or measures adopted or
approved at the same election conflict, then the ordinance or measure receiving
the highest affirmative vote shall control.
Section 68. Regular procedure.
The form of petition for exercising the referendum, and of the procedure
thereunder, and for the reference by the Council of any matter upon its own
motion, and the matters and things pertaining to the carrying into effect of
this Charter shall be provided for by ordinance, and all such matters shall be
regulated and governed by such ordinances as the Mayor and Council may
prescribe.
Section 69. The enacting clause.
The style of every ordinance submitted to the vote of the people by initiative
petition or by the voluntary action of the Council shall be as follows: “Be it
ordained by the people of the City of Pryor Creek;” and every such ordinance
when passed by popular vote shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Clerk as so passed.
Section 70. Initiative ordinances repealed by electoral vote.
The Mayor and Council may submit the repeal of or any proposed amendment of any
ordinance so adopted to the electors to be voted upon at any succeeding regular
election, and should such proposal for repeal or amendment receive an
affirmative majority of all votes cast thereon such ordinance shall be repealed
or amended accordingly.
ARTICLE VIII. FRANCHISES
Section 71. Franchises granted upon vote.
No franchise shall ever be granted, extended, renewed or leased by the City
without the approval of a majority of the qualified electors residing within
the corporate limits who shall vote thereon at a special or regular election
and the question of its being granted shall not be submitted to such vote
except upon deposit with the Treasurer of the expense of such submission (to be
determined by the Council) by the applicant for said franchise.
Section 72. Franchise petitions.
Whenever a petition is signed by a number of qualified electors of the City of
Pryor Creek equal to twenty five percentum (25%) of the total number of votes
cast at the next preceding regular Municipal election, demanding that a
franchise be granted, extended or renewed, it shall be filed with the Mayor,
who shall within ten (10) days thereafter call a special election at which he
shall submit the question of whether or not such franchise shall be granted,
extended or renewed and if at said election a majority of the electors voting
thereon shall vote for the grant, extension or renewal of such franchise, the
same shall be granted by the Mayor and Council at the next succeeding regular
meeting of the Council.
Section 73. Franchise specify streets.
All franchises or privileges hereafter granted shall plainly specify on what
particular streets, alleys, ways or other public property the same shall apply;
and no franchise or privilege shall hereafter be granted by the City generally,
and all such franchises shall be void after a period of one year from the date
the same may be granted as to streets, alleys, ways or other public property
upon or within which work was not commenced within one year from the granting
of the franchise and prosecuted with due diligence to completion.
Section 74. Power to regulate rates and fares.
Subject to the power reserved by the Constitution of this State to the
Corporation Commission, all power to regulate the rates, fares and charge for
service by public utility corporations is hereby reserved to the people to be
exercised by them by ordinance of the Council or in the manner herein provided
for initiation or referring an ordinance. Any right of regulation shall further
include the right to require uniform, convenient and adequate service to the
public and reasonable extensions of such service and of such public utility
works.
Section 75. Ordinance in plain terms.
No franchise, right, privilege or license shall be considered as granted by any
ordinance except when expressed therein in plain and unambiguous terms and any
and every ambiguity therein shall be construed in favor of the City and against
the claimant under said ordinance.
Section 76. Franchise provide for safety, etc.
The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right of the
City, whether in terms reserved or not, to make all regulations which shall be
necessary to secure in the most ample manner the safety, welfare and
accommodation of the public, including among other things the right to pass and
enforce ordinances to require proper and adequate extensions of service of such
grant and to protect the public from danger or inconvenience in the operation
of any work or business authorized by the grant of the franchise and the right
to make and enforce all such regulations as shall be reasonably necessary to
secure extensions and accommodations for the people and ensure their comfort
and convenience.
Section 77. Exclusive franchise.
No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted.
Section 78. No franchise leased except.
No franchise granted by the City shall ever be leased, assigned or otherwise
alienated without the express and written consent of the City, and no rule of
estoppel shall ever be invoked against the City’s asserting the invalidity of
any attempted transfer in violation of this Section.
Section 79. Renewal.
No franchise shall be renewed before five (5) years prior to its expiration.
Section 80. Terms not longer than twenty five years compensation.
No franchise, lease or right to use the streets or the public places or
property of the City shall be granted by the City for a period longer than
twenty five (25) years, nor without fair compensation to the City therefor, and
in addition to the other forms of compensation to be therein provided, the
grantee shall be required to pay annually to the City such percentage of the
gross receipts arising from the use of such franchise and of the plant used
therewith as shall be fixed in the grant and said franchise. Every grant of a
franchise shall fix the amount and manner of the payment of the compensation to
be paid by the grantee for the use of the same, but this shall not exempt the
grantee from any lawful taxation upon his or its property nor from any
licenses, charges or impositions not levied on account of such use.
Section 81. City may purchase– procedure.
Every grant of a franchise or right shall provide that the City may upon the
payment therefor of its fair evaluation, to be made as provided in the grant,
purchase and take over the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in
part. The procedure to effect such purchase shall be prescribed by ordinance.
Section 82. Matters in Charter not to impair right of Council to insert other
matters in franchises.
The enumeration and specification of particular matters in this Charter which
must be included in every franchise or grant shall never be construed as
impairing the right of the City to insert in such franchise or grant, such
other further matters, conditions, covenants, terms, restrictions, limitations,
burdens, taxes, assessments, rates, fares, rentals, charges, controls,
forfeitures or any other provisions whatever, as may be deemed proper to
protect the interests of the people.
ARTICLE IX. PUBLIC MONEYS AND FINANCE
Section 83. Sinking funds.
All sinking funds collected and accumulated from time to time for the purpose
of meeting any future maturing bonded or other indebtedness, except such as may
from time to time be invested in lawful securities, are hereby required to be
placed on time deposit in solvent banks, which are members of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation, at the highest rate of interest that can be
secured from such bank or banks upon certificates of deposit for such funds,
and no part of such funds shall be at any time deposited in any bank at a lower
rate of interest when another qualified bank in the City is willing to accept
the same on time deposit and pay a higher rate of interest on such deposit;
provided however, that the deposit in any one bank shall never be in excess of
its capital and surplus. On making deposits of such sinking funds, the
Treasurer shall take from each institution or institutions as security for such
deposits negotiable interest bearing United States, State, County, School
District, General Assessment Municipal Bonds, or surety company bonds in an
amount not less than the amount of such deposit. In the investment and
application of such sinking funds, the provisions of section 541, of Title 62,
Oklahoma Statutes 1941, and such other existing laws of the State of Oklahoma
as may be applicable shall govern the officers of the City of Pryor Creek in
such investment and application, and by reference are hereby incorporated as
provisions of this Charter.
Section 84. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on the first day of July and end on
the last day of June of the succeeding year.
Section 85. Audits.
The Mayor and Council shall have power in case of necessity to employ special
counsel and special expert accountants or auditors for the purpose of making
special examinations of the books and accounts of any officer or department of
the City of Pryor Creek, and annually at the close of the fiscal year shall
cause the books and accounts of all officers and departments, including the
Utility Department, to be audited by a certified public accountant. Said
accountant shall prepare a detailed statement of all expenditures and revenues
of all departments of the City for the preceding year and furnish same to the
Mayor and Council in time to be made a part of the City’s annual statement of
revenues and expenditures and estimated needs for the ensuing year.
Section 86. Appropriations.
The Mayor and Council shall receive the statement of the probable needs of the
various officers and heads of departments under their control, shall consider
the sufficiency and necessity in said statement, and from these statements and
the anticipated revenues for the ensuing year, they shall compile a statement
of estimated needs and appropriations for the general government of the City
for the ensuing year.
Section 87. State laws applicable.
The laws of the State of Oklahoma relative to purchase orders and the filing of
claims against cities and all other laws of the State of Oklahoma relative to
public moneys and public finance, applicable to cities of the first class and
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or any amendments thereto
shall govern and control the City of Pryor Creek.
ARTICLE X. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 88. Signature and seal.
All documents of the City of Pryor Creek shall bear the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk, and the Official Seal of the City.
Section 89. Present ordinances continue in force.
All laws, ordinances, resolutions, bylaws, orders, rules or regulations in
force in the City of Pryor Creek at the time this Charter takes effect, and not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter, whether enacted by the
authority of the City or by any other authority, shall continue in full force
and effect until the Council otherwise by ordinance provides, notwithstanding
any change of organization effected by this Charter.
Section 90. Continuing bonds, etc.
All official bonds, recognizances, obligations, contracts and all other
instruments entered into or executed by or to the City before this Charter
takes effect, and all taxes, fines, penalties and forfeitures due or owing to
the City, and all writs, prosecutions, actions and causes of action, except as
herein provided, shall continue and remain unaffected by this Charter.
Section 91. Official book, records, etc.
   A.   All books, records and papers of every office, department, board or
commission are City property and must be kept as such by the proper officers or
employees during their continuance in office and then delivered to their
successors, who shall give duplicate receipts therefor, one of which shall be
filed with the Clerk.
   B.   Certified copies of extracts from the books, records and files shall be
given by the officer, board, commission or employee having the same in custody,
to any person demanding the same and paying a reasonable price therefor.
   C.   All equipment, collections, models, materials, instruments, tools and
implements which are collected, maintained, used or kept by the City of Pryor
Creek or by any department officer, Board or Commission shall be City property
and be duly accounted for or turned over to their respective successor.
Section 92. Constitution and laws of the State Of Oklahoma.
All provisions of the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, other
than the laws especially applicable to cities of the first class, in force at
the time this Charter becomes effective or that may be thereafter adopted or
enacted, all provisions of the laws of the State of Oklahoma relative to Cities
of the first class, in force at the time this Charter becomes effective or that
may be hereafter adopted, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter
or any amendments thereto, and all provisions of the State of Oklahoma
applicable to cities having a Charter form of government are hereby recognized
as governing and controlling in and upon the City of Pryor Creek.
Section 93. Amendment.
This Charter may be amended, revised or repealed in the manner authorized by
the laws of the State of Oklahoma.
Section 94. Effect of unconstitutionality of any section.
If any section, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this Charter shall be declared
unconstitutional or void for any reason by any court of final jurisdiction,
such fact shall not in any manner invalidate or affect any other section,
paragraph, sentence or phrase of this Charter for the same shall continue in
full force and effect.
Proposed and signed this 28th day of November, 1950.
BOARD OF FREEHOLDERS OF THE CITY OF PRYOR CREEK
By O.J. Borum, Chairman
C.H. Fawks, Secretary
Chester W. Sharp
V.W. West
A.E. Kinnamon
Ellis R. Jones
H.L. Ray
T.L. Snodgrass
Members.
   CERTIFICATE
State of Oklahoma   )
               )
County of Mayes   )
I, the undersigned, duly elected, qualified and acting Mayor and chief
executive officer of the City of Pryor Creek, Mayes County, Oklahoma, hereby
certify that, at a special election held in said City on the 16th day of
January, 1951, a proposed Charter for said City, a true and correct printed
copy of which is hereto attached, was submitted to the qualified electors of
said City and was ratified by a majority of the qualified electors voting
thereon, the vote being six hundred seventeen (617) for, and two hundred twenty
five (225) against, the adoption and ratification of said Charter.
Dated this 30th day of January, 1951.
         Earl Ward
         MAYOR OF THE CITY OF PRYOR CREEK
ATTEST: (SEAL OF CITY)
Eva Boan, CITY CLERK
   APPROVAL
It appearing that the proposed Charter of the City of Pryor Creek, Mayes
County, Oklahoma, as shown by the printed copy thereof, hereto attached, is not
in conflict with the Constitution or laws of the State of Oklahoma, the same is
hereby approved by me, this 30th day of January, 1951.
         Johnston Murray
         GOVERNOR OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA
ATTEST: (SEAL)
John D. Conner
SECRETARY OF STATE
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Official City Code
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Code alterations
   
10.05   Ordinances in effect outside city limits
Savings Clause
   
10.20   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.21   Public ways and public utility ordinances
   
10.22   Court proceedings
   
10.23   Severability clause
Definitions
   
10.35   Construction of words
   
10.36   Definitions, general
   
10.37   Catchlines
 
   
10.99   Penalty
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   Upon the adoption by the City Council, this city code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Pryor Creek,
Oklahoma. This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the Pryor
Creek City Code and is hereby published by authority of the City Council and
shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as
provided in §
10.03 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in §
10.20 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Numbering; repealed provisions. All ordinances passed subsequent to
this code of ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code of
ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code
and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any
chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may
be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.
   (B)   Amending language. Amendments to any of the provisions of this code
may be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of
this code in substantially the following language: “Be it ordained by the City
Council of the City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma, that Section                   of
the code of ordinances of the City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma, is hereby amended
to read as follows:” (set out new provisions in full).
   (C)   New provisions. When the City Council desires to enact an ordinance of
a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the
code, which the city desires to incorporate into the code, a section in
substantially the following language may be made part of the ordinances:
“Section               : Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Pryor Creek, Oklahoma, that the provisions of this Ordinance shall become and
be made a part of the code of ordinances of the City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma,
and the sections of this Ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish this
intention”.
   (D)   Repealed by reference. All sections, articles, chapters or provisions
of this code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or
chapter number, as the case may be.
   (E)   Codification. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be
immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall
be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this city code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted
in each individual copy of the city code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.04 CODE ALTERATIONS.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or
deface in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the City
Clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the City Clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by
order of the City Council. Any person violating any provision of this section
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.05 ORDINANCES IN EFFECT OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended
to all real property belonging to or under the control of the city outside the
corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as
they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in
the future shall also apply to and be in full effect within the boundaries of
all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any
ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to
the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also the
outlying real property belonging to or under the control of the city, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-5)
SAVINGS CLAUSE
§ 10.20 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of
this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city
code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; budget and salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; ordinances establishing and prescribing street
grades; ordinances dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision; and all
special ordinances. The continuance in effect of temporary or special
ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from the code, shall not
be affected by such omission.
   (B)   The repeal of the ordinances as provided in division (A) of this
section shall not affect any debt or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed,
any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue
of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person holding office
at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance
have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded.
   (C)   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as
those ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall
be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 10.21 PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of
the preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending
such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.22 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this city code.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.23 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this city
code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-4)
DEFINITIONS
§ 10.35 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the
plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included,
although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to in this city code by words importing the
singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or
persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to
any section of this city code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
   (B)   (1)   The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the city has
been changed in the content of this city code to “Title”, “Chapter”, “section”
and/or “division” or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only.
      (2)   Such change to the city’s ordinances is not meant to amend passage
and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
§ 10.36 DEFINITIONS, GENERAL.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CITY. The City of Pryor Creek, County of Mayes, State of Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL. Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of
Pryor Creek.
   CODE. The city code of the City of Pryor Creek.
   COUNTY. The County of Mayes, State of Oklahoma.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
City of Pryor Creek”.
   FEE. A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the July 1 and
end on June 30 of the succeeding year.
   GENDER. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   LAW. Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and
statutes of the State of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city and when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MONTH. Any calendar month.
   NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS. Words and phrases which are not
specifically defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted
usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OATH. Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases, the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of
Pryor Creek”.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OR/AND. OR may be read AND; AND may be read OR, if the sense requires it.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON. Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
   STATUTORY REFERENCES. References to statutes of the State of Oklahoma, as
they now are or as they may be amended to be.
   STREET. Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   WEEK. Seven days.
   WHOLESALER and WHOLESALE DEALER. As used in this code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of
resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person’s proper mark.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
§ 10.37 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty.
      (1)   Misdemeanor fine, imprisonment. Except as otherwise provided by
state law, whenever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city an act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, or no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this
code shall include a fine of up to $200 for all traffic related offenses
related to speeding or parking; and the violation of any other provision of
this code or any ordinance, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not
exceeding $500, plus a $150 administrative fee for all public nuisance
abatement or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of
this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   Aid, abet or assist in violation. Any person who shall aid, abet or
assist in the violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
as provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
   (B)   Application of provisions.
      (1)   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section.
      (2)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)
   (C)   Liability of officers. No provision of this code designating the
duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer
or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform
such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
   (D)   Fines recoverable by civil action. All fines shall be recoverable by
civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction in addition to any
other method provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 1-19-2010)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
      
34.   ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
      
35.   ELECTIONS AND WARDS
      
36.   CITY POLICIES
      
37.   FEES AND CHARGES
      
38.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
39.   CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCIES
      
40.   MUNICIPAL COURT
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Mayor-Council form of government
   
30.02   Duties of officials
   
30.03   Meetings of City Council; Budget Committee
   
30.04   Quorum
   
30.05   Rules of procedure
   
30.06   Creation of committees
   
30.07   Content of resolution to create committees
   
30.08   Persons eligible to be appointed to committees
   
30.09   Nomination and appointment of persons to be appointed to committees
   
30.10   Compensation of committee members for service
Charter reference:
   Similar provisions, see
Charter Articles III and
IV
§ 30.01 MAYOR-COUNCIL FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The city is governed by the Mayor-Council form of government. The powers of
the city are vested in the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)
§ 30.02 DUTIES OF OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council and
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by
it. The Mayor is not considered a member of the City Council for voting
purposes, except that he or she may vote on questions under consideration by
the City Council only when the Council is equally divided. The Mayor may sign
or veto any city ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council. The Mayor
shall be chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the
city government. He or she is also recognized as the head of the city
government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of
military law. He or she shall have such powers and duties as may be prescribed
by law or ordinance.
   (B)   City Council. The City Council shall consist of eight Council members,
two elected from each ward of the city. The City Council shall elect from among
its members a President of the City Council. The Council President shall act as
Mayor in the absence of the Mayor. While presiding in the place of the Mayor,
he or she shall have all the powers, rights and privileges as other members of
the City Council. The City Council shall have the powers and duties as
prescribed by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)
§ 30.03 MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL; BUDGET COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Regular. The City Council shall hold a regular meeting at 6:00 p.m. on
the first and third Tuesdays of every month. If such a Tuesday falls on a
holiday, the regular meeting shall be held at that time on the next succeeding
day which is not a holiday.
   (B)   Special. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or at least three
members of the City Council, specifying the object and purpose of such meeting,
by request or notice in writing, which shall be read at the meeting and entered
at length in the journal and no business shall be transacted at such meeting
except that specified in the request.
   (C)   Budget Committee.
      (1)   Established. The Budget Committee shall meet monthly in the City
Hall at a date and time set by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Open meeting. The Budget Committee shall notify the City Clerk and
the City Clerk shall cause to be prepared and filed the dates, times and place
for the committee in order to comply with the applicable provisions of the Open
Meeting Act, 25 O.S. § 311.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-3) (Ord. 98-1, passed 1-6-1998, eff. retroactive to 1-1-
1998; Ord. 2003-11, passed 10-7-2003; Ord. 2006-3, passed 6-6-2006)
§ 30.04 QUORUM.
   In all cases, it shall require a majority of the Council members elected to
constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day
to day and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under
such penalties as the City Council may by ordinance have previously prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-4)
§ 30.05 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Determine rules; compel attendance. The City Council may determine its
own rules, and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and
under penalties as the City Council may prescribe.
   (B)   Order of business. The order of business for each meeting of the City
Council may be as follows:
      (1)   Call to order by Mayor or presiding officer;
      (2)   Opening prayer;
      (3)   Pledge of allegiance;
      (4)   Roll call;
      (5)   Consider and act on the consent agenda. Use of a consent agenda is
intended to speed up the process for considering routine business. All items on
the consent agenda will be approved by one motion. Prior to approval, any
member of the City Council may request removal of any item for discussion and
action on the regular agenda:
         (a)   Approve minutes of previous City Council meeting;
         (b)   Approve payroll purchase order;
         (c)   Approve maintenance purchase orders;
         (d)   Hear the City Clerk’s report and act on requests or
recommendations; and
         (e)   Hear the City Treasurer’s report and act on requests or
recommendations.
      (6)   Hear, consider and possibly act on petitions from audience;
      (7)   Consider and possibly approve proposed ordinances;
      (8)   Consider and possibly approve proposed resolutions;
      (9)   Hear the City Attorney’s report and act on requests or
recommendations;
      (10)   Hear board, commission and committee reports, act on requests or
recommendations:
         (a)   Planning and Zoning Commission;
         (b)   Municipal Utility Board;
         (c)   Library Board;
         (d)   Cemetery Board;
         (e)   Park Board;
         (f)   Budget and Personnel Committee;
         (g)   Street and Health/Sanitation Committee;
         (h)   Beautification Committee;
         (i)   City Properties and Maintenance Garage Committee;
         (j)   Police/Civil Emergency Management-Code Enforcement/Safety
Committee;
         (k)   Ordinance and Insurance Committee;
         (l)   City negotiating team;
         (m)   Personnel Committee; and
         (n)   Fire Committee.
      (11)   Consider and possibly act on any unfinished business;
      (12)   Consider and possibly act on any new business (any matter not
known about or which could not have been reasonably foreseen prior to the
posting of the agenda); and
      (13)   Adjournment.
   (C)   Call; agenda posting. The meetings of every board, commission or
committee as set out above shall be called and an agenda posted in conformance
with the Oklahoma Meeting Act only by or with the consent of the Chairperson of
that board, commission or committee, or by the Mayor.
   (D)   Minutes. Every board, commission or committee as set out above shall
approve its own minutes of previous meetings, however, copies of the minutes of
all meetings shall be submitted to the Mayor and each Council member for their
review.
   (E)   Agenda for Council meeting. An agenda for each City Council meeting
shall be posted by the Mayor in conformance with the Open Meeting Act of the
state. The agenda shall contain a proper listing of the business to be
transacted at each meeting by the Council as required by law. Such agenda items
shall be placed upon the meeting agenda for each meeting of the City Council as
may be specified by the Mayor together with such additional agenda items, as to
each of which additional items, not less than three City Council members have
requested each item be placed upon the agenda in a writing addressed to the
Mayor and delivered to the Mayor or the City Clerk by mail, personal delivery
or electronic means not less than 60 hours prior to any regular meeting.
   (F)   City Council meetings; rules of procedure. The following rules of
procedure shall apply to any regular or special meeting of the City Council,
unless three members agree to waive the rule or rules:
      (1)   Motions reduced to writing. At the request of the Mayor or any
Council member, all motions shall be reduced to writing;
      (2)   Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any of the proceedings
of the City Council shall not be entertained unless it be made by a member who
previously voted in the majority;
      (3)   Debate of motion. No motion shall be debated or put until it be
seconded and stated by the Mayor. It is then and not until then in possession
of the City Council and cannot be withdrawn but by leave of the City Council.
      (4)   Motion to adjourn.
         (a)   A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as
follows:
            1.   When repeated without business or discussion;
            2.   When made as an interruption of a member while speaking;
            3.   When the previous question has been ordered; or
            4.   While a vote is being taken.
         (b)   A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which
the meeting is adjourned.
      (5)   Question under debate. When a question is under debate which
several motions shall have precedence in the order they stand arranged, no
motion shall be received but:
         (a)   To adjourn;
         (b)   To lay on the table;
         (c)   For the previous question;
         (d)   To postpone to a day certain;
         (e)   To commit;
         (f)   To amend; or
         (g)   To postpone indefinitely;
      (6)   Motion to postpone. When a proper motion is made, but information
is wanted, the motion is to postpone to a day certain;
      (7)   Matters claiming present attention. Matters claiming present
attention for which it is desired to reserve for more suitable occasion, the
order is a motion to lay on the table; the matter may then be called for at any
time. If the proposition needs further consideration at the hands of a
committee, the motion is to refer to a committee, but if it need but a few and
simple amendments, the City Council shall proceed to consider and amend at
once;
      (8)   Amendments. On an amendment being moved, a member who has spoken on
the main question may speak again to the amendment;
      (9)   Order of question. The question is to be put first on the
affirmative and then on the negative side. After the affirmative part of the
question has been put, any member who has not spoken before to the question may
arise and speak before the negative be put;
      (10)   Reconsideration after moved and seconded. When a question has been
moved and seconded and has been put by the presiding officer in the affirmative
and negative, it cannot be debated unless under motion for reconsideration; and
      (11)   Robert’s Rules Of Order. Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern
matters not included or covered in this code or in rules adopted by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-5) (Ord. 2018-2, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 30.06 CREATION OF COMMITTEES.
   For the purpose of fulfilling the responsibilities of the Mayor and Council
over the executive and legislative matters of the city as set forth in the
Charter Article III, § 8, the Mayor and Council may, by resolution passed by a
simple majority vote of the Council, establish such committees as deemed to be
in the best interest of the city for purposes of making investigations of the
various matters involving the city and providing committee recommendations upon
such matters to the Mayor and Council for their consideration.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-6) (Ord. 2018-1, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 30.07 CONTENT OF RESOLUTION TO CREATE COMMITTEES.
   When the Mayor and Council act to create a committee under §
30.06 of this chapter the resolution to form the committee shall include the
following provisions which shall be applicable to the committee’s purpose, form
and function:
   (A)   Specification of the number of persons to be appointed to the
committee;
   (B)   The period of time for which the committee shall exist. A beginning
date shall be specified. The time period may be for a specific time period or
specified as an indefinite period of time until the Mayor and Council shall
take action by resolution to dissolve the committee;
   (C)   The purpose for the creation of the committee shall be included in the
resolution and shall be stated in such terms as to reasonably define its
purpose, scope and function; and
   (D)   The resolution creating a committee may include such other and further
terms and provisions as deemed by the Mayor and Council to be appropriate to
the accomplishment of the purpose for which the committee is formed.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-7) (Ord. 2018-1, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 30.08 PERSONS ELIGIBLE TO BE APPOINTED TO COMMITTEES.
   Any person who has attained the age of legal majority previous to the time
of his or her appointment, regardless of the person’s place of residency, shall
be eligible for appointment to a committee assignment by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-8) (Ord. 2018-1, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 30.09 NOMINATION AND APPOINTMENT OF PERSONS TO BE APPOINTED TO COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Nomination and appointment of individuals to serve on committees
formed by the Mayor and Council shall be made and voted at any regular or
special City Council meeting where the matter of nomination and appointment of
member(s) of a committee is a proper agenda item for the City Council meeting.
   (B)   Nominations shall commence upon a motion, second and vote in favor of
opening the matter for nominations of persons to serve on the committee under
consideration.
   (C)   Nomination of a person to serve on a committee may be made by the
Mayor or any member of the City Council.
   (D)   A second to the nomination of any person to serve shall be required
for a vote on the appointment of such person, and the failure to receive a
second to the nomination shall act to remove the name of the person so
nominated from the consideration for appointment.
   (E)   Nominations of persons to serve shall cease upon a motion, second and
vote to close nominations.
   (F)   Following a vote in favor to close the nominations, a vote upon each
nomination shall proceed to be taken wherein appointments may be made by a
simple majority vote upon each such person nominated.
   (G)   Prior to, or at the meeting at which any person is nominated to serve,
the person so nominated shall have indicated his or her acceptance of the
nomination to serve in writing or in person to the Mayor or City Council prior
to his or her appointment being voted by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-9) (Ord. 2018-1, passed 2-6-2018)
§ 30.10 COMPENSATION OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS FOR SERVICE.
   Members nominated and appointed to serve on committees shall serve without
compensation save and except members of the Council who are appointed to
committees whom shall be compensated as provided by §
31.002 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 1-5-10) (Ord. 2018-1, passed 2-6-2018)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Appointment of necessary personnel
   
31.002   Compensation
   
31.003   Bond required
   
31.004   Hours of operation for city offices
   
31.005   Personnel Board
   
31.006   Use of city vehicles
City Clerk
   
31.020   Officer of city; term
   
31.021   Duties
   
31.022   Assistant City Clerk
City Treasurer
   
31.035   Officer of city; term
   
31.036   Duties
   
31.037   Assistant City Treasurer
City Attorney
   
31.050   Duties
   
31.051   Assistant City Attorney
   
31.052   Compensation
Safety Director
   
31.065   Created; powers and duties
   
31.066   Compensation
   
31.067   May serve as Civil Defense Director
City Administrator
   
31.080   Office created
   
31.081   Appointment and tenure
   
31.082   Qualifications
   
31.083   Bond
   
31.084   Compensation
   
31.085   Removal; Acting City Administrator
   
31.086   Duties
   
31.087   Powers
   
31.088   Noninterference
   
31.089   Conflict of interest
Charter reference:
   City Clerk, see Charter §§
3,
13 and
37
   City Treasurer, see Charter §§
3 and
38
   Officers and employees, see
Charter Article IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 APPOINTMENT OF NECESSARY PERSONNEL.
   The Mayor, with consent and confirmation of the City Council, shall appoint
such other personnel as may be necessary to exercise the powers and perform
duties for the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)
§ 31.002 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Officials. Effective at the beginning of the term of office succeeding
the present term of office of the Mayor, Council members, City Clerk, City
Treasurer and Chief of Police, compensation shall be as follows:
      (1)   Mayor. Seven thousand five hundred eighty-five dollars and thirty-
four cents ($7,585.34) per month ($91,024.08 annually) with reimbursement for
out of pocket expenses and mileage paid at the rate set by the Internal Revenue
Service regulations (26 U.S.C. § 267(b));
      (2)   Council members. One hundred dollars per regular meeting attended;
$75 per special meeting attended; and $50 per committee and board meeting
attended of which he or she is a member;
      (3)   City Clerk. Five thousand three hundred sixty-five dollars and
fifty cents ($5,365.50) per month ($64,386 annually);
      (4)   City Treasurer. One thousand seven hundred eighty-eight dollars and
nine cents ($1,788.09) per month ($21,457.08 annually); and
      (5)   Chief of Police. Seven thousand one hundred fifty-one dollars and
ninety-two cents ($7,151.92) per month ($85,823.04 annually).
   (B)   Other personnel. The City Council, by motion or resolution, may fix
the compensation of other personnel.
   (C)   Cost of living increase. For the positions of City Clerk, City
Treasurer and Chief of Police, effective with the adoption of the budget for
the fiscal year 2009 through 2010 (July 1, 2009), any increase in compensation
voted by the City Council, for the employees of the city, as a whole which is
intended to reflect an adjustment based upon an increase in the cost of living
for said employees shall be automatically equally applicable to the above
stated positions in the fiscal years indicated without a separate and
independent vote of the City Council. In the event the City Council passes
increases in compensation for the employees of the city, as a whole which
contain adjustments based upon factors other than only a cost of living
increase, the City Council shall so specify what portion of said increase is
attributable to a cost of living adjustment and only that portion shall be
automatically applicable to the above stated positions.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-2) (Ord. 2009-2, passed 1-6-2009; Ord. 2023-4, passed 7-5-
2023)
§ 31.003 BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   Officials specified. Before entering upon their official duties, the
following personnel of the city government shall provide bonds for the faithful
performance of their official duties, payable to the city, with a surety
company authorized to operate within the state:
      (1)   City Clerk;
      (2)   Assistant City Clerk;
      (3)   City Treasurer;
      (4)   Assistant City Treasurer;
      (5)   Court Clerk; and
      (6)   All other officers and employees, individual or blanket bond.
   (B)   Other officials. The City Council, by motion or resolution, may
require other officers and employees in such positions as it may designate to
be bonded.
   (C)   Premiums paid by city. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-3)
§ 31.004 HOURS OF OPERATION FOR CITY OFFICES.
   All city offices shall be open on every day of the week, except Saturday and
Sunday and required legal holidays, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The City
Council, by motion or resolution, may vary this requirement temporarily when it
deems it for the good of the city; provided, that the Police Department and the
Fire Department shall have appropriate personnel on duty status at all hours of
every day.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-4)
§ 31.005 PERSONNEL BOARD.
   (A)   Created; term. There is hereby established a Personnel Board, as
authorized by the statutes of the state, consisting of three members and
alternate member. Appointment of members and alternate member shall be made by
the Mayor with confirmation of the appointment by the Council. The terms of the
members and the alternate member shall be for staggered terms of eight years.
The terms of the original three members shall expire on the first Monday in May
at 7:30 p.m. in each succeeding even numbered year following the enactment of
this section in order to achieve the staggered terms of service. The term of
the alternate member shall expire on the first Monday in May at 7:30 p.m. in
the next succeeding even numbered year following the enactment of this section.
The terms of their successors shall be for eight years, beginning at 7:30 p.m.
on the first Monday in May. Members shall serve until their successors are
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. The Mayor, after adequate
opportunity for a public hearing, may remove a member for the good of the
service, and may fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. The Board shall
consist of mixed representation of two female and two male members, one of
which will serve as the alternate member. The members of the Board may not be
comprised of City Council members or city employees.
   (B)   Officers; meetings.
      (1)   At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of each newly
appointed member, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the members of the
Personnel Board shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary.
      (2)   The Secretary need not be a member of the Board. The Board shall
determine the time and place of its regular meetings and the Chairperson or two
members may call special meetings of the Board.
   (C)   Duties. The Personnel Board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
of any layoff, suspension, demotion, disciplinary action or removal of an
employee of the city who has completed a probationary period of six months, or
given as soon as practicable after an appeal has been filed. The Personnel
Board shall not have a duty or authority to act concerning employees of the
Municipal Utility Department which by Charter are under the authority of the
Municipal Utility Board. The duty and authority to act of the Personnel Board
shall extend to all non-elected employees of the city.
   (D)   Report findings and recommendations. The Personnel Board shall report
in writing its findings and recommendations to the Mayor as the municipal
officer designated by the city’s Charter §
32, in the charge of appointment of all employees of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-5) (Ord. 98-3, passed 5-19-1998; Ord. 2023-5, passed 7-5-
2023; Ord. 2023-7, passed 11-21-2023)
§ 31.006 USE OF CITY VEHICLES.
   Employees of the city may use qualified nonpersonal use vehicles, including
clearly marked police or fire vehicles, and/or unmarked law enforcement
vehicles, provided said use is in conjunction with employment purposes and not
used more than a de minimis amount for personal purposes, all as defined and
set forth by the Internal Revenue Code. Said use shall not be considered a
working condition fringe benefit, provided said use conforms to the Internal
Revenue Code.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-6) (Ord. 2004-13, passed 5-4-2004)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.020 OFFICER OF CITY; TERM.
   The City Clerk is an officer of the city, elected for a two-year term as
provided in this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-6A-1)
§ 31.021 DUTIES.
   (A)   Generally described. The City Clerk shall attend meetings of the City
Council and shall keep a journal of its proceedings, as provided by law. He or
she shall enter at length all ordinances passed by the City Council in the
ordinance book, as required by law. He or she shall keep the seal of the city
and affix it to documents as required by law or ordinance. He or she shall keep
such other records as the City Council may instruct.
   (B)   Revenues; financial transactions. The City Clerk shall collect or
receive revenues and other money for the city as provided by law. He or she
shall keep proper books of accounts and other financial records, properly
recording all financial transactions.
   (C)   Powers and duties prescribed by law. He or she shall have all other
powers and duties prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-6A-2)
§ 31.022 ASSISTANT CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created the office of Assistant City Clerk,
who shall be authorized and empowered to perform all of the duties and exercise
all of the powers of the City Clerk when the latter is absent from the county
or is otherwise incapacitated or unable for any reason to do so, or when a
vacancy occurs in the office of the City Clerk pending the appointment or
election of a successor as City Clerk and may perform such other duties as the
City Clerk or City Council shall prescribe.
   (B)   Appointment; term; compensation. Such Assistant City Clerk shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent and confirmation of the City Council
for a term of office coinciding with that of the City Clerk and shall receive
such compensation as the City Council by motion or resolution shall authorize.
   (C)   Bond required. The assistant City Clerk shall be required to furnish
bond conditioned and in the penal sum required by law, including the ordinances
of this city for the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1-6A-3)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.035 OFFICER OF CITY; TERM.
   There shall be a City Treasurer, who is an officer of the city, elected for
a two-year term, as provided in the Charter.
(Prior Code, § 1-6B-1)
§ 31.036 DUTIES.
   The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds belonging to the city
and shall receive all monies of the city paid to him or her in accordance with
law or ordinance. He or she shall deposit daily all funds coming into his or
her hands in such depositories as the City Council may designate. He or she
shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable law or
ordinance. He or she shall keep proper books of account and other financial
records, properly recording all financial transactions. He or she shall have
such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 1-6B-2)
§ 31.037 ASSISTANT CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created the office of Assistant City
Treasurer, who shall be authorized and empowered to perform all of the duties
and exercise all of the powers of the City Treasurer when the latter is absent
from the county or is otherwise incapacitated or unable for any reason to do
so, or when a vacancy occurs in the office of the City Treasurer pending the
appointment or election of a successor as City Treasurer and may perform such
other duties as the City Treasurer or City Council shall prescribe.
   (B)   Compensation; appointment; term. Such Assistant City Treasurer shall
receive such compensation as the City Council by motion or resolution shall
authorize. The Assistant City Treasurer appointed hereunder shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent and confirmation of the City Council for a term
to coincide with that of the Mayor.
   (C)   Bond required. The Assistant City Treasurer shall furnish bond
conditioned and in the sum required by law, including the ordinances of this
city, for the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 1-6B-3)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.050 DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the City Attorney to:
   (A)   Advise Mayor and City Council. Advise the Mayor and City Council upon
all legal questions relating to the duties of their offices and to the
interests of this city, as may from time to time be referred to him or her;
   (B)   Represent city. Prepare all papers for or on behalf of the city and
appear and prosecute all persons charged with violation of any ordinance of
this city, and appear and represent this city before any and all courts,
commissions or tribunals in any cause in which this city may be a party to or
interested in the cause;
   (C)   Advice to city departments. Give advice to all city departments and
department heads;
   (D)   School of instruction. Conduct periodically a school of instruction
for the Police Department; and
   (E)   Other required services. Perform such other services as may be
required of him or her by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-6C-1)
§ 31.051 ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Appointment. There shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and confirmation of the City Council an Assistant City Attorney possessed of
the same qualifications as the City Attorney. His or her appointment shall be
for the same term and made in the same manner as that of the City Attorney. He
or she shall act as City Attorney in any case or situation where the City
Attorney is disqualified or has a conflict of interest, or is unable to act
because of absence from the city or otherwise. Upon request of the City
Attorney, he or she shall also assist the City Attorney in any city matter
where assistance is required to effectuate a more efficient, timely and orderly
disposition of city legal business or affairs.
   (B)   Compensation. An Assistant City Attorney shall be paid an amount as
set by motion or resolution of the City Council, however, payments to an
Assistant City Attorney shall not exceed the salary set for the City Attorney
in whose stead he or she sits.
(Prior Code, § 1-6C-2) (Ord. 98-6, passed 6-2-1998)
§ 31.052 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   (1)   The attorney appointed by the city for services rendered in the
performance of both the duties as City Attorney and as Assistant City Attorney
generally on behalf of the city or on behalf of any department of the city,
including, but not limited to, attendance at all regular and special City
Council meetings, attendance at all various committee meetings at which their
presence is required, drafting of all ordinances and resolutions, conferences
with all city officials and all other professional services rendered of a
general nature to the city, except as hereinafter provided, shall be paid the
sum per month as set by the City Council.
      (2)   This amount shall be paid from the City Attorney retainer and fees
account or such other account as the Mayor and City Council shall direct.
   (B)   (1)   The law firm appointed in division (A) of this section shall be
compensated for all services for both the City Attorney and Assistant City
Attorney regarding all matters relating to the representation of the city in
the Municipal Court in and for the city in the sum per month as set by the City
Council.
      (2)   These fees shall be paid from the Municipal Court cash account.
   (C)   All representation by the law firm appointed herein for professional
services not specified above, i.e., representation of the city in District
Court litigation in either the District Court of this county or any other
county, in the United States District Court of either the Northern or Eastern
District of Oklahoma, or before any other board, tribunal or panel, shall be
compensated for at an hourly rate as set by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-6C-3)
SAFETY DIRECTOR
§ 31.065 CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Safety program; objectives. There is hereby created the position of
Director of Safety for the city. The Director of Safety shall be responsible
for carrying out the safety program of the city, which program shall contain
the following objectives:
      (1)   Safe working environment. To establish and maintain a safe working
environment for all working employees;
      (2)   Better relationships. To create better relationships between
supervisors and employees, thereby stimulating employee morale concerning
safety and accident prevention;
      (3)   Compliance with OSHA. To ensure compliance with the Occupational
Safety and Health Act;
      (4)   Reduce accident costs. To reduce the frequency and costs related to
employee/visitor accidents through an ongoing risk management program; and
      (5)   Conduct studies. To conduct quality assurance studies in the areas
of safety.
   (B)   Authority. The Safety Director shall have all necessary power and
authority to form committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate the
chairperson or chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to fulfill the
above stated objectives.
(Prior Code, § 1-6D-1)
§ 31.066 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Set by City Council. The salary of the Safety Director shall be as set
by the City Council.
   (B)   Safety organization. All members of the safety organization, except
the Safety Director, shall serve without compensation. The city shall not be
liable for any personal injury received by any nonsalaried member of such
organization while acting in the line of duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-6D-2)
§ 31.067 MAY SERVE AS CIVIL DEFENSE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The position of Safety Director and the position of Civil Defense
Director may be occupied by the same individual.
   (B)   However, this provision does not mandate that the same individual must
occupy both positions.
(Prior Code, § 1-6D-3)
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.080 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created and established the office of City Administrator for
the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-1) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 31.081 APPOINTMENT AND TENURE.
   A qualified person shall be appointed City Administrator by the Mayor; such
appointment shall be approved by a majority of the City Council. The person so
appointed shall serve for an indefinite term.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-2) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 31.082 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person appointed to the office of City Administrator shall be at least
25 years of age and shall be a resident of the city; shall have a working
knowledge of government standard accounting principles (GASB); shall be a
registered voter in the city; and shall be a graduate of an accredited
university or college majoring in public or municipal administration, or shall
have the equivalent qualifications and experience in financial, administration
and/or public relations fields.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-3) (Ord. 2006-1, passed 2-7-2006)
§ 31.083 BOND.
   The City Administrator, before entering upon the duties of his or her
office, shall file with the city a bond in the amount of $50,000; such bond
shall be approved by the City Council and such bond shall insure the city for
the faithful and honest performance duties of the City Administrator and for
rendering a full and proper account to the city for funds and property which
shall come into the possession or control of the City Administrator. The cost
of such bond shall be paid by the city; however, should the City Administrator
be covered by a blanket bond to the same extent, such individual bond shall not
be required.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-4) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 31.084 COMPENSATION.
   The City Administrator shall receive such compensation as may be determined
from time to time by the City Council and such compensation shall be payable
semimonthly.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-5) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 31.085 REMOVAL; ACTING CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Suspension; removal. The City Administrator shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor. The Mayor, with the consent of a majority of the City
Council, may remove the City Administrator from office at will, and such City
Administrator may also be removed by a two-thirds majority vote of the City
Council independently of the Mayor’s approval or disapproval. If requested, the
Mayor and City Council shall grant the City Administrator a public hearing
within 30 days following notice of such removal. During the interim, the Mayor,
with the approval of a majority of the City Council, or by a two-thirds
majority vote of the City Council without the Mayor’s approval, may suspend the
City Administrator from duty, but shall continue his or her salary for two
calendar months following the final removal date, provided, however, that if
the City Administrator shall be removed for acts of dishonesty or acts of moral
turpitude, such salary shall not be continued.
   (B)   Acting City Administrator. If the City Administrator is absent from
the city, or is unable to perform his or her duties, or if there is a vacancy
in the office of the City Administrator, the Mayor may appoint an Acting City
Administrator to serve until the City Administrator returns, until his or her
disability or suspension ceases, or until another City Administrator is
appointed or qualified as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-6) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 31.086 DUTIES.
   (A)   Administrative office. The City Administrator shall be the chief
administrative assistant to the Mayor. Except as otherwise specified by Charter
of the city, or by the laws of the state, the City Administrator shall
coordinate and generally supervise the operation of all departments of the city
(except the Police Department and Municipal Utility Department); under the
guidance and direction of the Mayor.
   (B)   Purchasing. The City Administrator shall be the purchasing agent for
the city and all purchases amounting to $500 or more shall be made under his or
her direction and supervision, and all such purchases shall be made in
accordance with purchasing rules and procedures approved by the City Council.
   (C)   Budget. The City Administrator shall be the budget officer of the city
and shall assemble estimates of the financial needs and resources of the city
for each ensuing year and shall prepare a program of activities within the
financial power of the city, embodying in it a budget document with proper
supporting schedules and an analysis to be proposed to the Mayor for his or her
concurrence and presentation to the City Council for their final approval.
   (D)   Financial reports. The City Administrator shall make quarterly reports
to the Mayor and City Council relative to the financial condition of the city.
Such reports shall show the financial condition of the city in relation to the
budget.
   (E)   Annual report. The City Administrator shall, with the prior approval
of the Mayor, prepare and present to the Mayor and City Council an annual
report of the city’s affairs, including in such report a summary of reports of
department heads and such other reports as the Mayor and City Council may
require.
   (F)   Personnel system. The City Administrator shall act as the personnel
officer of the city and shall recommend an appropriate position classification
system and pay plan to the Mayor and City Council. The City Administrator,
after consultation with department heads, shall approve advancement and
appropriate pay increases within the approved pay plans and position
classification system. The City Administrator has the power to appoint and
remove, with the prior approval of the Mayor, in accordance with the personnel
policy approved by the City Council, all subordinate employees of the city.
   (G)   Policy formulation. The City Administrator shall recommend to the
Mayor and City Council adoption of such measures as he or she may deem
necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the city or for the
improvement of administrative services for the city.
   (H)   Boards and committees. The City Administrator shall work with all city
boards and committees to help coordinate the work of each.
   (I)   Attend City Council meetings. The City Administrator shall attend all
meetings of the City Council.
   (J)   Bid specifications. The City Administrator shall supervise the
preparation of all bid specifications for services and equipment, and receive
sealed bids for presentation to the Mayor and City Council.
   (K)   State and federal aid programs. The City Administrator shall
coordinate federal and state programs which may have application to the city.
   (L)   Conference attendance. The City Administrator shall attend state and
regional conferences and programs applicable to his or her office and the
business of the city, whenever such attendance is directed and approved by the
Mayor and City Council.
   (M)   Press releases. The City Administrator shall be responsible for
keeping the public informed and the purposes and methods of city government
through all available news media as directed by the Mayor.
   (N)   Record keeping. The City Administrator shall keep full and accurate
records of all actions taken by him or her in the course of his or her duties
and he or she shall safely and properly keep all records and papers belonging
to the city and entrusted to his or her care; all such records shall be and
remain the property of the city and be open to inspection by the Mayor and City
Council at all times.
   (O)   Miscellaneous. In addition to the foregoing duties, the City
Administrator shall perform any and all other duties or functions prescribed by
the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-7) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000; Ord. 2006-1, passed 2-7-
2006)
§ 31.087 POWERS.
   (A)   City property. The City Administrator shall have the responsibility
for all real and personal property of the city. He or she shall have
responsibility for all inventories of such property for the upkeep of all such
property. Personal property may be sold by the City Administrator only with the
approval of the Mayor and City Council. Real property may be sold only with the
approval of the Mayor and City Council by resolution or ordinance.
   (B)   Set administrative policies. The City Administrator shall have the
power to prescribe such rules and regulations that he or she shall deem
necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to
his or her authority, and he or she shall have the power to revoke, suspend or
amend any rule or regulation of the administrative services except those
prescribed by state statute, City Charter, or the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Investigate and report. The City Administrator shall have the power to
investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operations of any
department of the city under his or her jurisdiction, and shall report on any
condition or fact concerning the city government requested by the Mayor or City
Council.
   (D)   Appear before the City Council. The City Administrator shall have the
power to appear before and address the City Council at any meeting.
   (E)   No action supersedes Mayor or Council. At no time shall the duties or
powers of the City Administrator supersede an action by the Mayor or City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-8) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000; Ord. 2006-1, passed 2-7-
2006)
§ 31.088 NONINTERFERENCE.
   Except for the purpose of inquiry, no member of the City Council shall
directly interfere with the conduct of any department or duties of employees
subordinate to the City Administrator without specific approval of the Mayor.
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service
solely through the Mayor or City Administrator; and neither the City Council,
nor any member thereof, may give orders on administrative matters to a
subordinate of the Mayor or City Administrator either publicly or privately.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-9) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
§ 31.089 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   The City Administrator shall not sell or barter anything to the city;
or to a contractor to be supplied to the city; or make any contract with the
city; or purchase anything from the city other than those things the city
offers generally to the public (for example, utility services), and then only
on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any violation of this section,
with the knowledge express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting
with the city, shall render the contract voidable by the Mayor and City
Council. This division (A) shall not apply in cases in which the city acquires
property by condemnation.
   (B)   The City Council by ordinance or personnel rules may further regulate
conflict of interest and ethics of officers and employees of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-6E-10) (Ord. 2000-8, passed 10-3-2000)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Fire Department
   
32.01   Established
   
32.02   Departmental duties
   
32.03   Fire Chief; powers and duties
   
32.04   Assistant Chief
   
32.05   Fire Marshal
   
32.06   Rules and regulations
   
32.07   Terms and conditions of fire and emergency service and fees
   
32.08   Department considered agent of state
Volunteer Fire Department
   
32.20   Definition
   
32.21   Company officers
   
32.22   Bylaws
   
32.23   Firefighters serving outside city; compensation
Police Department
   
32.35   Created; Chief of Police
   
32.36   Departmental duties
   
32.37   Police officers
   
32.38   Services outside city
   
32.39   Fingerprinting
   
32.40   Use of automated license plate readers (ALPRS)
Charter reference:
   Fire Department, see Charter §§
32 and
53
   Police Department, see Charter §§
39,
53 and
54
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the Chief of
the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-1)
§ 32.02 DEPARTMENTAL DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish fires; to
rescue persons endangered by fire; to provide first responder medical
assistance, resuscitate and to administer first aid to persons injured in or
about burning structures or elsewhere in case of an emergency; to promote fire
prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating
to fires, fire prevention and safety of persons from fire in public and private
buildings.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-2) (Ord. 2010-9, passed 5-4-2010)
§ 32.03 FIRE CHIEF; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be the administrative head of the Department,
subject to the laws of the state, ordinances of the city and the rules and
regulations adopted in this subchapter.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have the following powers and duties, and he or
she may assign duties to other members of the Department:
      (1)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the Department, the training of members and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him or her. He or she shall have
supervision and control of the Fire Department subject to the supervision and
control of the City Council;
      (2)   The Fire Chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of
the Department, the fire hydrants, cistern and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year;
      (3)   The Fire Chief may maintain a library or file of publications on
fire prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best
advantage of all members;
      (4)   The Fire Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and
direct the officers and members in the performance of their duties;
      (5)   The Fire Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on
fire hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department;
      (6)   The Fire Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated
to determine its cause, and in the case of suspicion of incendiarism or arson,
shall notify proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence
for future use in the case;
      (7)   The Fire Chief is authorized to enter any building or premises in
the city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to
serve written notice on persons for any violations that may be found; and
      (8)   The Fire Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all
fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information of
the Department and shall make reports to the City Council as it may require.
The Fire Chief shall keep the City Council informed regarding the Fire
Department and its needs.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-3)
§ 32.04 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence of the Fire Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall command
the Department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the Fire Chief. The Assistant Chief shall be
selected from among the members of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-4)
§ 32.05 FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   Established. There shall be a Fire Marshal, who shall work under the
direction of the Mayor and the City Council. It shall be included within the
duties of the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief that each be a Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Powers. The Fire Marshal shall be deemed a peace officer with powers
of a peace officer, including the right to execute legal process and make
arrests.
   (C)   Duties. The Fire Marshal’s duties are to make investigations of arson,
suspected arson or conspiracy to defraud in connection with fire, to preserve
the public peace, to protect life and property, to prevent crime and to enforce
the state law and city ordinances concerning fires, combustion in any form,
hazardous materials, explosives and potentially explosive devices, air quality
standards, building regulations and all statutes and ordinances designed to
prevent or otherwise regulate fires and the problems normally associated
therewith. The Fire Marshal is given further authority to enforce any state law
and city ordinances applicable to parking in designated fire lanes.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-5) (Ord. 2004-10, passed 4-6-2004)
§ 32.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Established by City Council. The City Council by motion or resolution
may adopt and change regulations relating to the Fire Department, its
organization, operation and compensation.
   (B)   Equipment use. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for
any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper
authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department.
No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any
apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless accompanied by, or
having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the
Department.
   (C)   Answering outside calls. The Fire Department is hereby authorized and
directed to answer all outside calls outside the corporate city limits in the
discretion of the Fire Chief. The Fire Department may not answer such outside
calls if, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, it is inexpedient to do so on
account of another fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous
highways or other physical conditions.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-6)
§ 32.07 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE AND FEES.
   (A)   Outside city limits. The city, upon such terms and conditions of
service as may be approved by the City Council from time to time by ordinance
or resolution, acting by and through the Mayor, Fire Chief, Assistant Fire
Chief or other officer or officers as may be designated by the Mayor or Fire
Chief, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or agreements
with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or political
subdivisions of the state, regarding the provision of fire protection services
by the Fire Department for the city outside the corporate limits of the city,
and to contract to provide fire protection services jointly with other
organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   Inside city limits. Such fire protection services and emergency
services as may be provided by the city’s Fire Department within the corporate
city limits shall be provided to residents of the city free of charge, save and
except as stated in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section:
      (1)   (a)   Fire protection services and/or emergency services rendered
to property, or to any person upon property, which property at the time of the
rendering the service was:
            1.   An “abandoned building” as defined by 11 O.S. § 22-112.4E1;
            2.   A “dilapidated building” as defined by 11 O.S. § 22-112C1;
            3.   An “unsecured building” as defined by 11 O.S. § 22-112.1C11B;
            4.   A property which has been the subject of a notice to clean the
property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property has been
issued within the previous 30 days and where the condition for which the notice
was issued has not been abated; or
            5.   A property which has been formally and previously declared and
found to be a public nuisance or upon which a condition constituting public
nuisance has been previously formally declared and found to exist following
such a determination having been made by the city pursuant to the proper
procedures for same as set forth by state law or by this code; and the
condition giving rise to the finding of the nuisance has not been abated.
         (b)   Where the condition described in any of the preceding divisions
(B)(1(a)1. through (B)(1)(a)5. of this section was the cause or a contributing
cause to the need for the services rendered.
      (2)   Fire protection and emergency services rendered inside the
corporate city limits, not involving real property and premises, to people who
are not residents of the city.
   (C)   Terms; fees.
      (1)   All contracts entered into by the city pursuant to division (A) of
this section with an individual, firm, private corporation or association, for
fire protection services, or mutual aid for fire protection, to be rendered
outside of the corporate limits of the city shall provide for payment by the
individual, firm, private corporation or association, to the city for such fire
protection services or mutual aid for fire protection at those prices and/or
rates as set by the City Council from time to time by ordinance or resolution
and set forth in
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   All monies received as payment upon contracts arising under
division (A) of this section or otherwise charged and received as payment for
fire protection and emergency services under this section shall be placed in
the fire truck special purchase cash account or such other account as the City
Council may hereinafter designate.
      (3)   There is hereby created a schedule of rates to be charged to
persons and firms for services rendered by the Pryor Fire Department. Services
for which payment is sought:
         (a)   Scene and safety control at traffic accidents and any other
emergency scene;
         (b)   Disentanglement operations and assist with rescue including:
extrication from vehicles;
         (c)   Fluid mitigation at traffic accidents;
         (d)   Fire suppression, including, but not limited to, vehicle,
structure and wildland fire;
         (e)   Hazard mitigation operations;
         (f)   Expenses incurred during scene operations;
         (g)   Expenses incurred by receiving or giving mutual aid assistance;
and
         (h)   Any other response requiring manpower and equipment of the
Department.
   (D)   Definitions of services provided. The following definitions shall
apply to services for which fees may be charged.
      COMMAND AND CONTROL SCENE SAFETY AND SCENE OPERATIONS. Positioning of
fire apparatus and personnel so as to protect the scene from traffic and deny
entry into the scene of unauthorized personnel. This may also include, but is
not limited to, using traffic cones, signs, flares, emergency lighting and
other warning devices. This may also include having fire apparatus standing by
and/or a pulled hose line for protection on scene from possible fires from
fumes, flammable materials and other hazards. The most important function is
establishing incident command at the scene and to coordinate with other
responding agencies for their needs at the scene.
      DISENTANGLEMENT/EXTRICATION. Anytime a person has to be lifted or taken
out of an emergency situation or forcible entry is necessary to gain proper
access to victims. This could include, but is not limited to, car accidents,
industrial accidents, confined spaces, below grade rescues, or even high angle
rescues to name just a few. Ropes, ladder devices, air monitoring equipment,
self-contained breathing apparatus, hydraulic equipment, shoring, saws,
cribbing, air bags are just a few of the types of equipment used in extrication
issues.
      FIRE SUPPRESSION. Anytime Fire Department personnel have to contain or
extinguish a fire. It can also be, but is not limited to, the laying of hose
lines and positioning a hand line for the protection of individuals and
property at the scene because of fire, smoke, leaking fluids or gases.
      HAZARD MITIGATION. Hazardous or nonhazardous substances will be contained
when possible via containment, absorption, damming or diversion, or any other
means necessary to safely contain material. This could be, but is not limited
to, such events as a car accident, trucking accident or a fixed facility. The
Fire Department action will be to contain the substance as possible. The Fire
Department will not be responsible for cleanup of any substances.
      MUTUAL AID. Any service rendered while in the service at the request of
another department or agency authorized pursuant to federal, state or local law
and/or mutual aid contractual agreement.
   (E)   Billable/nonbillable events.
      (1)   Basic response. Basic response is a minor call that may include
false alarm, minor fire or a service call. The city shall not bill for fire
responses made to citizens and calls to property within the corporate city
limits.
      (2)   Major incidents. Incidents including, but not limited to, calls
which involve hazardous materials, mutual aid response, government agency,
private entity response, technical rescue, and/or major fire response. The city
shall bill for all major incidents regardless of the corporate city limits.
      (3)   Other entity charges. The Fire Department shall have the right to
pass on any fees or costs charged by other government agencies or private
entities for their assistance.
      (4)   Fire Chief review. All responses and services rendered by the Fire
Department shall be reviewed by the Fire Chief, and forwarded to the City Clerk
for billing.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-7) (Ord. 2017-1, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 32.08 DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE.
   The Fire Department answering any fire alarm or call, or performing any fire
prevention services outside the corporate limits of the city, shall be
considered as an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone in a
governmental capacity, and the city shall not be liable in damages for any act
of commission, omission or negligence while answering or returning from any
fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work.
(Prior Code, § 4-1A-8)
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER. One who is enrolled as a member of the Fire
Department and who serves in that capacity without receiving a regular salary.
The size of the Volunteer Fire Department shall be composed of not less than 12
nor more than 20 members.
(Prior Code, § 4-1B-1)
§ 32.21 COMPANY OFFICERS.
   (A)   Selection criteria. Company officers of the Volunteer Fire Department
shall be selected by the Fire Chief based upon the following criteria:
      (1)   Knowledge of firefighting;
      (2)   Leadership ability; and
      (3)   Knowledge of firefighting equipment.
   (B)   Secretary-Treasurer. One member elected by the members of the Fire
Department shall be a Secretary-Treasurer. His or her duties shall consist of
the following:
      (1)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      (2)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      (3)   Collecting any money due the Fire Department by the members.
   (C)   Probation. New members of the Volunteer Fire Department shall be on
probation for one year after their appointment. Upon completion of their
probation period, new members must be approved by the majority of the other
members of the Fire Department and the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-1B-2)
§ 32.22 BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Volunteer Fire Department shall include the following:
   (A)   All Volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies;
   (B)   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters;
   (C)   At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month;
   (D)   Any member having two unexcused absences in succession or three
unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from the Fire
Department rolls;
   (E)   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Fire Chief;
   (F)   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the Department will be dropped; and
   (G)   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls for
the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      (5)   Conviction of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 4-1B-3)
§ 32.23 FIREFIGHTERS SERVING OUTSIDE CITY; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All volunteer firefighters of the Fire Department attending and
serving at fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of
the city, as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular
line of duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of
the city.
   (B)   These firefighters shall be entitled to all the benefits of any
Firemen’s Pension and Relief Fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or
fire prevention work was being done within the corporate limits of the city.
Compensation of firefighters shall be as provided by the City Council by
ordinance or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 4-1B-4)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.35 CREATED; CHIEF OF POLICE.
   There shall be a Police Department, the head of which is the Chief of Police
or Police Chief. The Chief of Police is an officer of the city, and has
supervision and control of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1)
§ 32.36 DEPARTMENTAL DUTIES.
   It is the duty of the Police Department to apprehend and arrest on view or
on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to its
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs,
executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to it; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law,
and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all
duties pertaining to the office of police officers. The Police Department has
charge of and operates the city jail.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-2)
§ 32.37 POLICE OFFICERS.
   Police officers shall perform such duties as shall be required of them by
the Chief of Police, city ordinances, federal, state and county regulations and
any other actions required in the maintenance of good order and public peace.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3)
§ 32.38 SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY.
   (A)   Authority. The city authorizes the Chief of Police to respond to any
request from any other jurisdiction with the state for law enforcement
assistance in case of emergency.
   (B)   Request.
      (1)   The city authorizes members of the regular Police Department, upon
request of the County Sheriff or a designee, or upon request by a member of the
State Highway Patrol, to serve as law enforcement officers for the Sheriff’s
office or the State Highway Patrol, respectively.
      (2)   The city authorizes members of the regular Police Department, upon
request of the Mayor or a designee, or Chief of Police or designee, of any
other municipality, to serve as police officers in the municipality requesting
their assistance.
   (C)   Compensation, benefits. The city authorizes that salaries, insurance
and other benefits shall be provided in the regular manner by the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) (Res. 98-6, passed 7-7-1998)
§ 32.39 FINGERPRINTING.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall determine the fees to be
charged for fingerprinting by the City Police Department. See
Appendix A, Schedule of fees and Charges, of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. 2012-4, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 32.40 USE OF AUTOMATED LICENSE PLATE READERS (ALPRS).
   (A)   Authorization for use.
      (1)   The Police Department is authorized to install and utilize ALPR
technology within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of capturing
and storing digital license plate data and images.
      (2)   All data and images gathered by an ALPR is for the official use of
the Police Department.
   (B)   Operation of ALPR.
      (1)   An ALPR may only be used for official law enforcement business.
      (2)   An ALPR may be used in conjunction with any routine patrol
operation or criminal investigation.
      (3)   No ALPR operator may access confidential city’s Police Department,
state or federal data unless authorized to do so.
      (4)   No ALPR shall be utilized for the purpose of tracking any right
protected by the United States Constitution or the Constitution of the state
including, but not limited to: right to religion; right to express; right to
assemble; and the right to petition.
   (C)   Data storage.
      (1)   All stored ALPR data should be retained for a period of ten
calendar days. Thereafter, ALPR data should be purged unless it has become
evidence in a criminal investigation or is subject to a discovery request or
other lawful action to produce records.
      (2)   In those circumstances, the applicable data should be downloaded
onto portable media and booked into evidence. Under no circumstance shall any
data be sold, distributed or given to any third party unless required by law.
   (D)   Releasing ALPR data. The ALPR data may be shared only with other law
enforcement or prosecutorial agencies for official law enforcement purposes or
as otherwise required by law.
   (E)   Punishment and sentence. Any person who intentionally misuses the
system or intentionally sells, shares or distributes any information collected
by an ALPR shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Department policy.
      (1)   The Police Department shall develop and maintain a department
policy regarding the use of license plate readers and the data collected.
      (2)   The policy must be consistent with federal, state and local
ordinances.
   (G)   Third parties. All third-parties who provide services to the city for
the use of an ALPR, or the storage of data collected from an ALPR, shall also
be required to follow all provisions regarding privacy and data storage
contained within this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-11-1) (Ord. 2023-8, passed 12-19-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 33: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Section
   
33.01   Social Security
   
33.02   Fire pension system
   
33.03   Police pension system
   
33.04   Employee retirement system
   
33.05   Municipal Utility Department retirement system
§ 33.01 SOCIAL SECURITY.
   (A)   Policy and purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose
of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the employees and officials of
the city, the benefits of the system of federal old-age and survivors insurance
as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and 51
O.S. §§ 121 et seq. In pursuance of this policy, the officers and employees of
the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.
   (B)   Execution of agreements. The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed
to execute all necessary agreements and amendments with the State Department of
Human Services to accomplish the provisions of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Withholdings. Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and
officials for the purposes provided in division (A) of this section are hereby
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the
state or federal agency designated by the laws or regulations.
   (D)   Contributions. Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts
appropriated for these purposes from available funds to the designated state or
federal agency in accordance with applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
   (E)   Records maintained; reports. The city shall keep such records and
submit such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations.
   (F)   Exclusions. Excluded from this section authorizing the extension of
Social Security benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
      (1)   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
      (2)   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any position,
employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1)
§ 33.02 FIRE PENSION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Local Fire Pension And Retirement Board. There is hereby created a
Local Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board composed of the Mayor, the
City Clerk, the City Treasurer and three members from the Fire Department. The
Board shall have the membership, organization, powers, duties and functions as
prescribed by 11 O.S. §§ 49-103 et seq.
   (B)   Operation of Fund. The city’s Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement
System and Fund shall be operated in accordance with state law relating to the
fund and system.
   (C)   Contributions to Fund.
      (1)   The City Clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid
member of the Fire Department the amounts which are required by applicable
state law. If the members of the Fire Department, by a majority vote of its
paid members, vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts
authorized by this division (C) shall be increased to reflect the amounts
approved by the majority vote. The City Treasurer shall deposit with the
Oklahoma Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board the amounts deducted
pursuant to this division (C). Any amounts deducted from the salary or wages of
a Fire Department member shall be made at the time of each payroll. The
deductions shall be set forth in the payroll so that each member may be able to
ascertain the exact amount which he or she is contributing.
      (2)   The City Treasurer shall deposit with the Oklahoma Firefighters’
Pension and Retirement Board the amounts of money which are required by
applicable state law for each paid member of the Fire Department.
      (3)   For each volunteer member of the Fire Department, the City
Treasurer shall deposit with the Oklahoma Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement
Board the amounts of money which are required by applicable state law. These
amounts may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as set by the
Oklahoma Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-2)
§ 33.03 POLICE PENSION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Name of system. The system herein established for the purpose of
providing pension retirement allowances and other benefits for police officers,
their spouses and children, shall be designated and known as the police pension
and retirement system of the city, and by such name all of its business
transacted, all of its funds handled, and all of its cash and securities and
other property be held.
   (B)   Board of Trustees. There is hereby created a Board of Trustees which
shall have the operation and management of the police pension and retirement
system of the city, which Board of Trustees shall consist of the City Clerk,
City Treasurer and three members of the Police Department, which is designated
and known as the Board of Trustees of the pension and retirement system of the
city.
   (C)   State provisions adopted. The city hereby adopts the provisions of the
state law governing the Oklahoma Police Pension and Retirement System and
amendments thereto for the purpose of providing the police officers of the city
with a retirement program. The city agrees to make contributions to the system
in such amounts as are required by law.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-3)
Charter reference:
   Similar provisions, see Charter §
26
§ 33.04 EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   Created. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state
and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the
part of city employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby
authorized, created, established, approved and adopted the plan designated
Defined Contribution Money Purchase Prototype Adoption Agreement (hereinafter
called “agreement”), and as amended from time to time, an executed counterpart
of which and all amendments thereto are marked Exhibit A to the ordinances
adopting or amending the agreement. Said Exhibit A and amendments are on file
in the city office.
   (B)   Administration. For the purpose of administration of the agreement,
there is hereby established a Board of Trustees, which shall be the members of
the City Council as now existing or as from time to time duly elected or
appointed and constituted. The powers and duties of the Board of Trustees shall
be set forth in the agreement instrument marked Exhibit A as mentioned in
division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Fund. A Fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of
the person entitled to benefits under the agreement. All contributions to such
Fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the City
Treasurer, who shall be the Treasurer of the agreement. Such Fund shall be
pooled for purposes of management and investment, in accordance with a duly
executed contract for such purpose, which shall hold such contributions in the
form received, and from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the
Hartford Insurance Company, as duly authorized and directed by the Board of
Trustees. The Fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing
any levy when the annual estimate is made to the County Excise Board. The Fund
and agreement shall be evaluated each year for actuarial soundness by a
qualified actuarial firm.
   (D)   Appropriations. The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary
expenses for the establishment, operation and administration of the system and
to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized to
appropriate annually such amounts as are required, in addition to employee
contributions, to maintain the agreement and the Fund on a sound actuarial
basis in accordance with the respective annual actuarial valuation. However,
the amount so appropriated in any one fiscal year of the city to maintain the
agreement and Trust Fund shall not exceed 10% of the current annual salaries of
all employees covered by the agreement. Any appropriation so made to maintain
the agreement and Fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries and for the
payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration, including
separate annual appropriations to be transferred to Hartford Insurance Company
for such purposes, and shall be paid into the Fund when available, through the
City Treasurer, to be by him or her duly transferred to Hartford Insurance
Company.
   (E)   Execution. The Mayor and City Clerk be and they are each hereby
authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall
constitute an original) the original agreement instrument, amendment number
one, adopted September 1, 1975, and to do all other acts and things necessary,
advisable and proper to put the agreement and amendments and related trust into
full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to
qualify the same under §§ 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the
United States. The counterpart marked as Exhibit A, which has been duly
executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of the ordinance codified
herein, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)
§ 33.05 MUNICIPAL UTILITY DEPARTMENT RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a retirement system for the
employees of the Municipal Utility Department, such system to be known as the
employee retirement system of the Municipal Utility Department of the city.
   (B)   Board created. The system shall be administered by a Board of
Trustees, consisting of five persons, who shall be the same persons who
comprise the Municipal Utility Board of the city. Any change in the Municipal
Utility Board shall automatically substitute the new member of the Municipal
Utility Board as a new member of the Board of Trustees of the employee
retirement system of the Municipal Utility Department.
   (C)   Administration of funds. The Board of Trustees are hereby empowered
and authorized to enter into a contract with a trust or insurance company for
the administration of the funds of the retirement system. The Board of Trustees
and the City Treasurer are authorized to disburse such funds retained from
employees’ earnings and from the ordinary operating funds of the Municipal
Utility Department as may be necessary to effect the retirement system.
   (D)   Contributions. The Board of Trustees of the retirement system shall
establish the contribution from the ordinary operating funds of the Municipal
Utility Department. The contribution of such Department shall not exceed 10% of
the then current annual salaries of all employees. The contribution of the
participating employees shall not exceed the portion to be paid by the
Department.
   (E)   Duties of Board. The Board of Trustees of the retirement system shall
determine:
      (1)   The qualifications of the persons eligible for retirement benefits;
      (2)   The minimum age for retirement of employees;
      (3)   The limitations of the amounts to be paid to persons eligible for
retirement benefits; and
      (4)   The rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section
applicable for the administration and regulation of the system and the laws of
the state applicable from time to time with reference to such system.
   (F)   Eligibility, retirement date, contributions and benefits. Employee
eligibility, retirement date, contributions, retirement income, death benefits
and all other aspects of the retirement system shall be as set forth in the
original Ordinance 65-18, and as amended from time to time, which ordinance and
amendments are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. A copy is
on file in the City Clerk’s office.
   (G)   Termination of employment.
      (1)   A terminating employee may elect to receive a refund of his or her
contributions, plus compound interest, at any time before retirement income
begins or may leave his or her contributions at interest with the carrier of
the annuity contracts and receive at normal retirement date the retirement
income bought by his or her contributions.
      (2)   In addition, if the employee does not withdraw his or her
contributions and has completed at least ten years of continuous employment
with the Municipal Utility Department and has attained age 45, he or she will
remain entitled to the retirement income accrued to the date he or she
terminates.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)
CHAPTER 34: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Section
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Application
   
34.03   Definitions
   
34.04   Filings to be made with the City Clerk
   
34.05   Requirement for administrative decision in writing
   
34.06   Time limit to file appeal
   
34.07   Hearing date and notice
   
34.08   Time period calculations
   
34.09   Form of appeal
   
34.10   City Council to hear and decide appeals
   
34.11   Rules of evidence for appeals
   
34.12   Record of hearing
§ 34.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the procedure by which appeals
concerning final administrative decisions made by administrative officers of
the city may be had by an aggrieved party.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-1) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.02 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply generally to all appeals of final administrative
decisions made by administrative officers of the city. Where a particular
section of this code prescribes a specific procedure for appeal of a particular
matter which is different in part, or in whole from the procedures as set forth
in this chapter the specific procedure(s) prescribed for the particular matter
shall govern the appeal in such matters.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-2) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. An employee or other representative of the city or a
board or commission of the city which is vested with the authority under this
code, or by designation of such authority by the City Council or Mayor to make
final decisions in matters from which a right of appeal exists pursuant to the
applicable provisions of this code.
   AGGRIEVED PARTY. A “party in interest” as that term is generally recognized
at law, possessed of a legally cognizable interest in the particular final
administrative decision from which the appeal is taken, who is alleged to be
aggrieved by the final administrative decision.
   APPELLANT. The person submitting an appeal to the city.
   FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. A written decision by an “administrative
officer” rendered by that officer in his or her official capacity with the city
upon a matter submitted to the officer for decision.
   LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE. A party’s attorney or other legal representative
recognized as such by the laws of the state such as an attorney in fact,
guardian or conservator.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-3) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.04 FILINGS TO BE MADE WITH THE CITY CLERK.
   (A)   All documents required by this chapter to be filed relating to an
appeal shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   All filings with the City Clerk shall be deemed effectively filed when
received by the office of the City Clerk.
   (C)   All documents required to be filed, or otherwise filed with the City
Clerk which relate to an appeal shall be date stamped by the City Clerk
indicating the date of receipt.
   (D)   All documents filed with the City Clerk relating to an appeal,
including notices given the parties, shall be maintained in a separate file
pertaining to the specific appeal matter in the office of the City Clerk in
accordance with the city’s record retention policy.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-4) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.05 REQUIREMENT FOR ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION IN WRITING.
   (A)   Final administrative decisions may be effectively rendered either in
writing or orally.
   (B)   In instances in which a final administrative decision is rendered
orally, an aggrieved party may, within 30 days of the rendering of the
decision, request that the administrative officer provide the decision in
writing.
   (C)   A written final administrative decision rendered by an administrative
officer shall set forth:
      (1)   A concise explanation of the question or matter submitted to the
officer for decision;
      (2)   A statement of the action taken (approval or denial) on the
question or matter submitted to the officer for decision;
      (3)   A concise statement of the facts and circumstances relevant to the
decision made; and
      (4)   The provisions of this code, city policy or other basis for the
decision rendered as being in the best interest of the city.
   (D)   No appeal may be taken from a final administrative decision which has
not been provided in writing.
   (E)   The failure of an aggrieved party to request, within the time period
set forth in division (B) of this section, that a final administrative decision
which was rendered orally be provided in writing shall result in the waiver of
the right to appeal the decision.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-5) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.06 TIME LIMIT TO FILE APPEAL.
   An appeal from a final administrative decision must be filed within 30 days
from the date the decision was provided in writing by the administrative
officer.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-6) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.07 HEARING DATE AND NOTICE.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall cause the appeal to be set
for hearing before the City Council on a date and at a time certain to be
conducted within 45 days of the date of filing of the appeal.
   (B)   Written notice of the hearing, and any rescheduled hearing, shall be
given by the City Clerk to the appellant or the appellant’s legal
representative at the address provided pursuant to §
34.09(I) of this chapter by mail, which may be by regular mail, not less than
ten days prior to the scheduled hearing. Notice shall be effective upon mailing
by the Clerk and the date of mailing shall be noted in a certificate of mailing
signed by the Clerk and attached or incorporated into the notice mailed.
   (C)   A complete copy of the signed notice shall be filed in the case file
maintained by the Clerk.
   (D)   For good cause shown, or by agreement of the parties the hearing may
be continued by the Mayor upon written application to the Mayor and submitted
to the City Clerk to be filed in the matter stating in the application the
reasons for the requested continuance.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-7) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.08 TIME PERIOD CALCULATIONS.
   Time periods prescribed in this chapter shall be on a calendar day basis.
Where a prescribed time period falls on a city holiday or weekend the time
period shall be extended to the next following business day. The initial day of
decision, filing or mailing, where required, shall not be included in the
calculation of the time period.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-8) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.09 FORM OF APPEAL.
   All appeals must satisfy the following requirements for filing or will be
rejected for filing by the Clerk and ineffective for purposes of perfecting the
appeal within the stated time period. Appeals shall:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Be signed by the person submitting the appeal or by the person’s legal
representative;
   (C)   Include a complete copy of the final administrative decision as an
attachment;
   (D)   Be dated as of the date the appeal is filed with the city;
   (E)   Include a concise written statement by the appellant of the question
or matter which was submitted to the administrative officer for decision.
Reference to the copy of the final administrative decision attached to the
appeal shall satisfy this requirement;
   (F)   Include a concise written statement by the appellant of the final
administrative decision rendered by the administrative officer. Reference to
the copy of the final administrative decision attached to the appeal shall
satisfy this requirement;
   (G)   Set forth a statement by the appellant of the facts and circumstances
believed to be relevant to the question or matter originally submitted to the
administrative officer for decision by the appellant and which serve as grounds
for the appeal of the decision by the appellant;
   (H)   Set forth a statement by the appellant of the applicable provisions of
this code, city policy or other basis for the decision to be made upon which
serve as grounds for the appeal of the decision by the appellant; and
   (I)   Include designation by the appellant of the address to which all
notices and other mailings to be given the appellant in the appeal are to be
mailed.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-9) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.10 CITY COUNCIL TO HEAR AND DECIDE APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals under this chapter shall be heard and decided by the City
Council by simple majority vote of the quorum present at a regular or special
City Council meeting at which the matter is set upon the agenda to be decided.
   (B)   Decisions by the City Council shall render either at the conclusion of
the hearing or within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing if the matter is
voted to be taken under advisement by the Council.
   (C)   Decisions of the City Council on appeals shall be reduced to writing
within a reasonable time period following the decision and in no event more
than ten days following the decision. The written decision shall contain:
      (1)   A concise restatement of question or matter submitted for appeal;
      (2)   A statement of the action taken (approval or denial) of the appeal;
      (3)   A concise statement of the facts and circumstances relevant to the
decision made; and
      (4)   The provisions of this code, city policy or other basis for the
decision rendered as being in the best interest of the city.
   (D)   When a matter is voted to be taken under advisement for decision
pursuant to division (B) of this section the announcement of the final decision
on the appeal shall be made in a regular or special meeting of the Council
pursuant to a proper agenda item for same.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-10) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.11 RULES OF EVIDENCE FOR APPEALS.
   The general rules of evidence for the admissibility of evidence and
testimony of the state shall generally apply to hearings of appeals before the
City Council, but however the Council shall have broad latitude in the liberal
interpretation of same and may vary from the rules where the circumstances
demonstrate a sufficient degree of reliability of evidence in the discretion of
the Council to receive the evidence for consideration to give it such weight as
the individual Council members may decide.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-11) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 34.12 RECORD OF HEARING.
   Hearings of appeals under this chapter shall be tape recorded but no written
record shall be taken. A party to an appeal may cause a written record of the
proceedings to be made by a certified court reporter. The party desiring such
record shall be responsible for the costs associated with the record and shall
be responsible for providing the court reporter.
(Prior Code, § 1-5A-12) (Ord. 2016-4, passed 11-1-2016)
CHAPTER 35: ELECTIONS AND WARDS
Section
Elections
   
35.01   Election of officials; terms
Wards
   
35.15   Map of city designated as official map
   
35.16   Ward boundaries
Charter reference:
   Wards, see Charter §
4
ELECTIONS
§ 35.01 ELECTION OF OFFICIALS; TERMS.
   The terms of the elected officers shall be as established in Charter Article
II, §
3.
(Prior Code, § 1-8-1) (Res. 2011-5, passed 7-5-2011)
WARDS
§ 35.15 MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP.
   The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as
the official map of the city and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all
annexations made to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)
§ 35.16 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   The four wards of the city shall include the territory described as follows.
   (A)   Ward 1. Ward 1 consists of that part of the city lying westerly of the
centerline of Elliott Street, extended to the northerly boundary line of the
corporate limits, and northerly of the following described line, to-wit:
beginning at the intersection of the centerline of southeast 9th Street and the
westerly boundary line of the corporate limits, thence easterly along the
centerline of southeast 9th Street to its intersection with the centerline of
U.S. Highway No. 69, thence northerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 69
to its intersection with the centerline of Park Avenue, thence easterly along
the centerline of Park Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of
Elliott Street.
   (B)   Ward 2. Ward 2 consists of that part of the city lying easterly of the
centerline of Elliott Street, extended to the northerly boundary line of the
corporate limits, and northerly of the centerline of southeast 9th Street,
extended to the easterly boundary line of the corporate limits.
   (C)   Ward 3. Ward 3 consists of that part of the city lying northerly of
the following described line, to-wit: beginning at the intersection of the
centerline of southeast 17th Street and the westerly boundary line of the
corporate limits, thence easterly along the centerline of southeast 17th Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Willow Road, and easterly of the
following described line, to-wit: beginning at the intersection of the
centerline of southeast 17th Street and Willow Road, then northerly along the
centerline of Willow Road, to its intersection with the centerline of southeast
14th Street, thence easterly along the centerline of southeast 14th Street to
its intersection with the centerline of Elliott Street, thence northerly along
the centerline of Elliott Street to its intersection with the centerline of
Park Avenue, and southerly of the following described line to-wit: beginning at
the intersection of the centerline of southeast 9th Street and the westerly
boundary line of the corporate limits, thence easterly along the centerline of
southeast 9th Street to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Highway
No. 69, thence northerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway No. 69 to its
intersection with the centerline of Park Avenue, thence easterly along the
centerline of Park Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Elliott
Street.
   (D)   Ward 4. Ward 4 consists of that part of the city lying southerly of
the following described line, to-wit: beginning at the intersection of the
centerline of southeast 17th Street and the westerly boundary line of the
corporate limits, thence easterly along the centerline of southeast 17th Street
to its intersection with the centerline of Willow Road, thence northerly along
the centerline of Willow Road to its intersection with the centerline of
southeast 14th Street, thence easterly along the centerline of southeast 14th
Street to its intersection with the centerline of Elliott Street, thence
northerly along the centerline of Elliott Street to its intersection with the
centerline of Southeast 9th Street, thence easterly along the centerline of
Southeast 9th Street extended to the easterly boundary line of the corporate
limits.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)
CHAPTER 36: CITY POLICIES
Section
Professional Liability Insurance
   
36.01   Professional designated
   
36.02   Policy limits
   
36.03   Proof required annually
Records Access and Management
   
36.15   Custodians
   
36.16   Requests for public records
   
36.17   Inspection and copying procedure
   
36.18   Fees
Identity Theft Prevention Program
   
36.30   Definitions
   
36.31   Findings
   
36.32   Establishing a covered account
   
36.33   Access to covered account information
   
36.34   Credit card payments
   
36.35   Sources and types of red flags
   
36.36   Prevention and mitigation
   
36.37   Updating the program
   
36.38   Program administration
   
36.39   Outside service providers
   
36.40   Treatment of address discrepancies
   
36.41   Consumer address to consumer reporting agency
   
36.42   Methods of confirming consumer addresses
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
§ 36.01 PROFESSIONAL DESIGNATED.
   Any professional designated below who renders services to the city shall be
required to maintain in full force and effect during the entire period said
services are being rendered, professional liability insurance in the amounts
hereinafter designated:
   (A)   Attorneys;
   (B)   Architects;
   (C)   Engineers; and
   (D)   Certified public accountants.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-1)
§ 36.02 POLICY LIMITS.
   The insurance required herein shall be a “claims made” policy coverage, with
limits no less than $250,000 for single occurrence and $500,000 aggregate.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-2)
§ 36.03 PROOF REQUIRED ANNUALLY.
   On an annual basis, said professionals shall provide the City Clerk with
proof of insurance and shall update said evidence as requested by the City
Clerk or when said coverage or company is changed.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-3)
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
§ 36.15 CUSTODIANS.
   (A)   Appointment of official custodians. The following city officials are
hereby appointed as official custodians for purposes of the Oklahoma Open
Records Act and are charged with responsibility for compliance with that Act
with respect to the following listed public records:
      (1)   City Clerk. All public records kept and maintained in the City
Clerk’s office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this
subchapter;
      (2)   City Treasurer. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Treasurer’s office;
      (3)   Chief of Police. All public records not on file in the office of
the City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Police Department;
      (4)   Fire Chief. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Fire Department;
      (5)   City Attorney. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the City Attorney’s office;
      (6)   Court Clerk. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the Municipal Court; and
      (7)   City Librarian. All public records not on file in the office of the
City Clerk and kept and maintained in the city library.
   (B)   Additional custodians designated.
      (1)   Each of the official custodians appointed in division (A) of this
section is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees
to serve as record custodian. The record custodians shall have such duties and
powers as are set out in the Oklahoma Open Records Act.
      (2)   Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a
record custodian, he or she shall notify the City Clerk of such designation and
the City Clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations.
   (C)   Duties of custodians. All city officials and employees appointed or
designated under this subchapter shall protect records from damage and
disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the
city; provide assistance and information upon request; ensure efficient and
timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public
records; and shall carry out the procedures adopted by this city for inspecting
and copying open public records.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-1)
§ 36.16 REQUESTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   Submit to custodian. All members of the public, in seeking access to
or copies of a public record in accordance with the provisions of the state’s
Open Records Act, shall address their requests to the custodian charged with
responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or
copied.
   (B)   Record unavailable from custodian. Whenever any city official or
employee appointed or designated as a custodian under this chapter is presented
with a request for access to or copy of a public record, which record the
custodian does not have in his or her possession and which he or she has not
been given responsibility to keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise
the person requesting the record. The person making the request shall be
informed as to which custodian the request should be addressed to, if such is
known by the custodian receiving the request.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-2)
§ 36.17 INSPECTION AND COPYING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Generally described. The following procedures are hereby adopted and
shall be applied by each official custodian and record custodian:
      (1)   Consistent with the policy, duties and procedures established by
the state’s Open Records Act, record custodians shall provide full access and
assistance in a timely and efficient manner to persons who request access to
open public records;
      (2)   Record custodians shall protect the integrity and organization of
public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected
and copied;
      (3)   Record custodians may prevent excessive disruptions of essential
functions and provide the record at the earliest possible time;
      (4)   All inspections and copying of open public records shall be
performed by, or under the supervision of, the record custodian responsible for
such records;
      (5)   All persons requesting the inspection of or a copy of open public
records shall make such request in writing prior to the request being honored,
except that no form shall be required for requests made for records which have
been reproduced for free public distribution;
      (6)   All record inspection and copying forms are to be completed by the
person requesting the record. The record custodian may demand reasonable
identification of any person requesting a record;
      (7)   Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time
the records, or copies thereof, are provided to the requester, unless the
record custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be
made. Fees are to be paid to the record custodian or City Clerk;
      (8)   The record custodian or City Clerk shall demand full or partial
prepayment of fees whenever the estimate for such fees exceeds the amount set
out in §
36.18(E) of this chapter;
      (9)   No record search or copying charge shall be assessed against
officers or employees of the city who make requests which are reasonably
necessary to the performance of their official duties;
      (10)   Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all
regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours;
      (11)   Removal of open public records from the office where kept and
maintained, for purposes of inspection or the making of copies, shall not be
permitted; and
      (12)   The above procedures, as well as any other inspection and copying
procedures, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record
custodian.
   (B)   Inspection procedure. The following procedures are hereby adopted and
shall be applied by every official custodian and record custodian:
      (1)   Record custodians shall handle all inspection requests in
accordance with their duties to protect and preserve public records and to
assist persons requesting inspection of open public records;
      (2)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
record. In all cases, the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
record custodian and presented to the record custodian;
      (3)   A written request is sufficient if it reasonably describes the
record sought. In instances where the requester cannot provide sufficient
information to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such
identification; and
      (4)   The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection
request, forward a copy of the denial to the Mayor.
   (C)   Copying procedure. The following procedures are hereby adopted and
shall be applied by each official custodian and record custodian:
      (1)   Record custodians shall handle all copy requests in accordance with
their duties to protect and preserve public records and to assist persons
requesting copies of open public records;
      (2)   All request forms must be completed by the party requesting the
copies. In all cases the party so requesting must sign his or her individual
name to the form. Written requests shall be made on the form provided by the
record custodian;
      (3)   Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it
is the judgment of the record custodian that any available means of
mechanically reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to such
record; and
      (4)   No copy fee shall be assessed when multiple copies of the record
requested have been prepared for free public distribution, or when the record
custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling the fee exceeds the
cost of providing a copy without charge. (Refer to Appendix A following this
code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 1-12-3)
§ 36.18 FEES.
   (A)   Inspection; no fee. Where a request has been made for the inspection
of an open public record, no fee shall be charged.
   (B)   Copying. A fee per page as set by the City Council by motion or
resolution shall be charged for photocopying an open public record, such fee to
cover the cost of labor, materials and equipment. (Refer to Appendix A
following this code of ordinances.)
   (C)   Mechanical reproduction. For copying any open public record, which
cannot be reproduced by photocopying, such as a computer printout or a
blueprint, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the city,
including the cost of labor, materials and equipment. (Refer to Appendix A
following this code of ordinances.)
   (D)   Search fee. A search fee shall be charged a requester who is using the
record solely for a commercial purpose. Such fee shall be the actual cost to
the city of producing the record, including the cost of labor, materials and
equipment. (Refer to Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
   (E)   Prepayment of fees. A record custodian may demand prepayment of a fee
whenever the estimated amount exceeds $20. The prepayment amount shall be an
estimate of the cost of copying, mechanical reproduction or searching for the
record. Any overage or underage in the prepayment amount shall be settled prior
to producing the requested record or delivering the copy or mechanical
reproduction of the record. (Refer to Appendix A following this code of
ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 1-12-4)
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
§ 36.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
   COVERED ACCOUNT.
      (1)   An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or
maintains, primarily for personal, family, recreational or household purposes,
that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such
as a credit card account, or utility account, or municipal court or library
imposed fine or costs; and
      (2)   Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers
or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or
to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from
identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation or
litigation risks.
   CREDIT. The right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt
or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and
defer payment therefor.
   CREDITOR. Any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any
person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of
credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the
decision to extend, renew or continue credit and includes utility companies.
   CUSTOMER. A person that has a covered account with a creditor.
   IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using identifying information
of another person without authority.
   PERSON. A natural person, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association.
   PERSONAL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. A person’s credit card account
information, debit card information, bank account information and driver’s
license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security
number, mother’s birth name and date of birth.
   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.
   SERVICE PROVIDER. A person that provides a service directly to the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-1) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.31 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 due to its
provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in
arrears.
   (B)   The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing
covered account, making payments on such accounts have been identified as
potential processes in which identity theft could occur.
   (C)   The city limits access to personal identifying information to those
employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered
accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided
to such employees is entered directly into the city’s computer system and is
not otherwise recorded.
   (D)   The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft
occurring in the following ways:
      (1)   Use by an applicant of another person’s personal identifying
information to establish a new covered account;
      (2)   Use of a previous customer’s personal identifying information by
another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer’s
name;
      (3)   Use of another person’s credit card, bank account or other method
of payment by a customer to pay such customer’s covered account or accounts; or
      (4)   Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer’s covered
account of another person’s credit card, bank account or other method of
payment.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-2) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.32 ESTABLISHING A COVERED ACCOUNT.
   (A)   As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each
applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the
customer as may be reasonably requested by the employee opening said account.
Such information shall be entered directly into the city’s computer system and
shall not otherwise be recorded.
   (B)   Each account shall be assigned an account number. The city may utilize
computer software to randomly generate assigned PINS and to encrypt accounts.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-3) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.33 ACCESS TO COVERED ACCOUNT INFORMATION.
   (A)   Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be
limited to authorized city personnel.
   (B)   Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to
be reported immediately to the Mayor and the password changed immediately.
   (C)   Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is
considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be
immediately forwarded to the Mayor and the City Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-4) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.34 CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS.
   (A)   In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet
are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service
provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention
program in place that is applicable to such payments.
   (B)   All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city’s website
shall be entered directly into the customer’s account information in the
computer database.
   (C)   Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include
only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used
for payment of the covered account.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-5) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.35 SOURCES AND TYPES OF RED FLAGS.
   All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a
covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and
such red flags may include:
   (A)   Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or
service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer
report;
      (2)   A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer
report;
      (3)   A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting
agency; or
      (4)   Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is
inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or
customer, such as:
         (a)   A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
         (b)   An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
         (c)   A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect
to recently established credit relationships; or
         (d)   An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of
account privileges by a financial institution or creditor.
   (B)   Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
      (1)   Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or
forged;
      (2)   Identification on which the photograph or physical description is
inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer;
      (3)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
information provided by the applicant or customer;
      (4)   Identification on which the information is inconsistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution
or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or
      (5)   An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or
appears to have been destroyed and reassembled.
   (C)   Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change.
Examples of suspicious identifying information include:
      (1)   Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external
information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example:
         (a)   Address does not match any address in the consumer report; or
         (b)   The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is
listed on the Social Security Administration’s death master file.
      (2)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of
birth;
      (3)   Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is
associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by
internal or third party sources used by the financial institution or creditor;
      (4)   Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing addresses,
maildrop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or
answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity;
      (5)   The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants
or customers;
      (6)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar
to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large
number of applicants or customers;
      (7)   The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal
identifying information on an application or in response to notification that
the application is incomplete;
      (8)   Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal
identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or
creditor; or
      (9)   The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information
beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer
report.
   (D)   Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account.
Examples of suspicious activity include:
      (1)   Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account,
the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the
account;
      (2)   A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly
associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer
fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent
payments;
      (3)   An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with
established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example,
nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; a material
change in purchasing or spending patterns;
      (4)   An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used
(taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage
and other relevant factors);
      (5)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the
customer’s account;
      (6)   The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper
account statements;
      (7)   The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in
connection with a customer’s account; or
      (8)   The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another
person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity
theft.
   (E)   Notice. Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other
reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to
covered accounts.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-6) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.36 PREVENTION AND MITIGATION.
   (A)   In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in
restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered
account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with
respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her
discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags
suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such
employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely
or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the
Mayor. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is
unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags the
employee shall convey this information to the Mayor, who may in his or her
discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the Mayor in his
or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee
shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be
appropriate by the Mayor:
      (1)   Contact the customer;
      (2)   Make the following changes to the account if after contacting the
customer it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the
customer’s covered account;
         (a)   Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes or other
security devices that permit access to an account; or
         (b)   Close the account;
      (3)   Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and
decline to sell the customer’s account to a debt collector in the event that
the customer’s account has been accessed without authorization and such access
has caused additional charges to accrue;
      (4)   Notify a debt collector within 72 hours of the discovery of likely
or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to
such debt collector in the event that a customer’s account has been sold to a
debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of
identity theft relating to such account;
      (5)   Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the
customer has accessed the customer’s account causing additional charges to
accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or
      (6)   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity
theft.
   (B)   In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in
opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible
identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee
shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or
combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her
discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity
theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red
flags to the Mayor. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that
identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to
reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the Mayor,
who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary.
If the Mayor in his or her discretion determines that further action is
necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following
responses, as determined to be appropriate by the Mayor:
      (1)   Request additional identifying information from the applicant;
      (2)   Deny the application for the new account;
      (3)   Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or
      (4)   Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity
theft.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-7) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.37 UPDATING THE PROGRAM.
   (A)   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor the City Council shall annually
review and, as deemed necessary by the Council, update the administrative rules
for the “identity theft prevention program” along with any relevant red flags
in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft.
   (B)   In so doing, the City Council shall consider the following factors and
exercise its discretion in amending the program:
      (1)   The city’s experiences with identity theft;
      (2)   Updates in methods of identity theft;
      (3)   Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate
identity theft;
      (4)   Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains;
and
      (5)   Updates in service provider arrangements.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-8) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.38 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Mayor is responsible for oversight of the program and for program
implementation. The Mayor is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by
staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending
material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the Mayor, to
address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types
of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be
submitted to the City Council for consideration by the Council.
   (B)   The Mayor will report to the City Council at least annually, on
compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material
matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as:
      (1)   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in
addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered
accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Service provider arrangements;
      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the program.
   (C)   The Mayor is responsible for providing training to all employees
responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an
existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with
respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention
program. The Mayor shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the
amount and substance of training necessary.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-9) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.39 OUTSIDE SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity
in connection with one or more covered accounts the Mayor and City Attorney
shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to
ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider’s
activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed
upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in
the performance of the service provider’s activities and take appropriate steps
to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-10) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.40 TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES.
   (A)   Pursuant to 16 C.F.R. § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to
establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief
that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a
consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address
discrepancy.
   (B)   In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy,
the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose
of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall
perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be
appropriate by such employee:
      (1)   Compare the information in the consumer report with:
         (a)   Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer’s
identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information
program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5315(1);
         (b)   Information the city maintains in its own records, such as
applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account
records or tax records; or
         (c)   Information the city obtains from third party sources that are
deemed reliable by the relevant city employee.
      (2)   Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-11) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.41 CONSUMER ADDRESS TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY.
   (A)   In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address
provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide
such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a
notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information
is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when:
      (1)   The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer
report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report;
      (2)   The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and
      (3)   The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides
information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice
of address discrepancy.
   (B)   Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as
part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the
reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the
customer.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-12) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 36.42 METHODS OF CONFIRMING CONSUMER ADDRESSES.
   The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or
her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the
following methods:
   (A)   Verifying the address with the consumer;
   (B)   Reviewing the city’s records to verify the consumer’s address;
   (C)   Verifying the address through third party sources; or
   (D)   Using other reasonable processes.
(Prior Code, § 1-13-13) (Ord. 2009-04, passed 5-5-2009)
CHAPTER 37: FEES AND CHARGES
Section
   
37.01   Schedule of fees and charges
§ 37.01 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Created.
      (1)   There is hereby created a schedule of fees and charges, which shall
contain those fees and charges for the various licenses, permits and other fees
and charges as designated by the City Council. Where a fee or charge is
authorized to be collected by the city in any ordinance, the amount of the fee
or charge shall be as set by resolution or motion and entered into the schedule
of fees and charges. The schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk, to whom all fees and charges shall be paid, unless otherwise
provided. A copy may be obtained upon payment of a fee as set forth in the
schedule of fees and charges.
      (2)   The processing of credit or debit card payments for fees and
charges of the city shall require a minimum charge/payment of $10.
   (B)   Citation. The schedule of fees and charges hereby created shall also
be known and may be cited as the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-1) (Res. 2019-2, passed 2-5-2019)
Cross-reference:
   Schedule of Fees and Charges, see
Appendix A
CHAPTER 38: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Finance and Budget Administration
   
38.001   Depositories designated; funds to be deposited
   
38.002   Funds secured by unit collateral system
   
38.003   Purchasing policy
   
38.004   Surplus or obsolete property
   
38.005   Authorized officers to make deposits
   
38.006   Petty cash checking account
   
38.007   Capital Outlay Fund
   
38.008   Returned check charge
Sales Tax
   
38.020   Citation
   
38.021   Definitions
   
38.022   Tax Collector designated
   
38.023   Classification of taxpayers
   
38.024   Subsisting state permits
   
38.025   Effective date
   
38.026   Purpose of revenues
   
38.027   Tax rate; sales subject to tax
   
38.028   Exemptions
   
38.029   Tax due when; returns; records
   
38.030   Payment of tax; brackets
   
38.031   Tax constitutes debt
   
38.032   Vendor’s duty to collect tax; penalties
   
38.033   Returns and remittances; discounts
   
38.034   Interest and penalties
   
38.035   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
38.036   Fraudulent returns
   
38.038   Records confidential
   
38.039   Amendments
   
38.040   Provisions cumulative
Hotel/Motel Tax
   
38.055   Citation
   
38.056   Definitions
   
38.057   Administration; enforcement
   
38.058   Subsisting state permits
   
38.059   Effective date; termination
   
38.060   Registration, authority certificates
   
38.061   Tax levied
   
38.062   Exemptions; proof required
   
38.063   Bond required
   
38.064   Use of funds
   
38.065   Returns
   
38.066   Payment of tax
   
38.067   Operator responsibilities
   
38.068   Compensation to operator
   
38.069   Assessment by city
   
38.070   Delinquency; interest
   
38.071   Refunds
   
38.072   Notices
   
38.073   Confidential records
   
38.074   Fraudulent returns
   
38.075   Amendments
   
38.076   Remedies exclusive
   
38.077   Provisions cumulative
Telephone Exchange Fee
   
38.090   Imposed
   
38.091   In lieu of other taxes and assessments
Utilities Tax
   
38.105   Tax levied
   
38.106   Applicability; exceptions
   
38.107   Term of tax
   
38.108   Failure or refusal to pay
   
38.109   Lien on assets
Use Tax
   
38.120   Title
   
38.121   Purpose
   
38.122   Definitions
   
38.123   Classification of taxpayers
   
38.124   Tax levied
   
38.125   Exemptions to tax
   
38.126   Due and payable
   
38.127   Collection of taxes by retailer or vendor
   
38.128   Remunerative deductions
   
38.129   Delinquency
   
38.130   Tax constitutes debt
   
38.131   Subsisting state permits
   
38.132   Revoking permits
   
38.133   Records confidential
   
38.134   Fraudulent returns
   
38.135   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
38.136   Cumulative provisions
911 Emergency Service Tax
   
38.150   Tax imposed
   
38.151   Collection of tax
   
38.152   Administrative fee
 
   
38.999   Penalty
FINANCE AND BUDGET ADMINISTRATION
§ 38.001 DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED; FUNDS TO BE DEPOSITED.
   All banks and all savings and loan associations in this city which are
incorporated under federal or state law are hereby designated as depositories
for the funds of the city. The City Treasurer shall deposit daily all public
funds received by him or her in such banks or savings and loan associations.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)
§ 38.002 FUNDS SECURED BY UNIT COLLATERAL SYSTEM.
   The deposits of the city shall be secured by the unit collateral system
provided by the Oklahoma Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)
§ 38.003 PURCHASING POLICY.
   (A)   Contractual services defined. For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      CONTRACTUAL SERVICES. For the purpose of this section, means services
performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, and may
include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection
with the services under express or implied contract. CONTRACTUAL SERVICES shall
include travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph;
utilities; rents; printing out; binding; repairs, alterations and maintenance
of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges, and other physical facilities of
the city; and other services performed for the city by persons not in the
employment of the city.
   (B)   Purchases.
      (1)   Authorization required. All purchases of supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services for the offices, departments and agencies of
the city government, shall be made by the City Council or by other city
personnel in accordance with purchase authorizations issued by the City
Council.
      (2)   Purchasing limits; emergency.
         (a)   Any purchase of $1,000 or more shall be approved by the Mayor
prior to making the purchase. Any department head or authorized purchasing
agent is hereby authorized to make purchases on behalf of the city for a sum
not to exceed $1,000.
         (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to approve purchases on behalf of
the city for sums exceeding $1,000 but less than $2,500.
         (c)   Any purchase in excess of $2,500 shall be approved by Council.
         (d)   If an emergency exists and the Mayor is unavailable, the
committee chairperson the appropriate committee and a majority of the committee
members may approve the purchase without the prior approval of the Mayor.
   (C)   Bidding; when required. No public contract for the purchase of
equipment, vehicles and any other fixed asset or improvement to property,
whether real or personal, which purchase is in excess of $2,500, or any other
purchase that the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the appropriate committee
chairperson and majority of the committee, feels the necessity to bid shall be
purchased until there has been a solicitation for competitive quotations on
prices or bids which shall be submitted to the City Council for consideration.
The City Council shall authorize the purchase, decline to approve the purchase
or request new quotations or bids. However, the $2,500 quote/bid requirement
may be waived by the City Council if the City Council determines that the same
will be prudent to do so and in the best interest of the city. Further, this
requirement shall not apply to the purchases of inventory, consumable supplies
or professional services, including, but not limited to, architectural,
engineering and legal services.
   (D)   Affidavit required; over $25,000.
      (1)   On every invoice submitted to the city for payment of an architect,
contractor, engineer or supplier of materials of $25,000 or more, there shall
be included the following signed and notarized statement:
STATE OF OKLAHOMA)
) ss.
COUNTY OF MAYES)
The undersigned (architect, contractor, engineer or supplier), of lawful age,
being first duly sworn, upon oath says that this invoice or claim is true and
correct. Affiant further states that the (work, services or materials) as shown
by this invoice or claim have been (completed or supplied) in accordance with
the plans, specifications, orders or requests furnished by the affiant. Affiant
further states that she/he has made no payment directly or indirectly to any
elected official, officer or employee of the City of Pryor Creek, of money or
any other thing of value to obtain payment.
      _______________________________________
   Architect, Contractor, Supplier, Engineer
Subscribed and sworn to me this ______ day of ________, 20____.
      _________________________________
   Notary Public (or clerk or judge)
My Commission expires:
      (2)   Any contract executed with an architect, contractor, supplier or
engineer for work, services or materials which are needed on a continual basis
from such architect, contractor, supplier or engineer under the terms of such
contract, or executing more than one contract during the physical year with
such architect, contractor, supplier or engineer, may require that the
architect, contractor, supplier or engineer complete a signed and notarized
affidavit in substantial form as provided by division (D)(1) of this section,
which shall apply to all work, services or materials completed or supplied
under the terms of the contract or contracts and shall be in lieu of all
individual affidavits for each invoice submitted in relation to such contract
or contracts required in division (D)(1) of this section.
   (E)   Purchase order process. The Mayor and City Clerk shall be responsible
for the compilation and approval of purchase order procedures for all claims
made against the city, exclusive of the Municipal Utility Department. The City
Council shall approve this procedure prior to its implementation. Minimal
requirements for the procedure shall include the following.
      (1)   Claims. All claims shall be made on a pre-numbered purchase order
form. Each department head or authorized purchasing agent of the city will be
responsible to obtain at least three quotes unless the item or service
purchased is from a sole source vendor, the purchase or service obtained is
under $1,000 or the Mayor approves the purchase and it does not exceed $2,500.
The department head or authorized purchasing agent shall prepare a purchase
order prior to commitment of city funds. The purchase orders shall include
documentation of quotes obtained or reasons quotes were not obtained.
      (2)   Less than $500. Purchases of less than $500 may be made by
department heads or authorized purchasing agents without the necessity of
encumbering funds before the purchase is made. Any purchase over $500 must be
made in accordance with the state purchase order requirements as outlined in
the statutes of the state.
      (3)   Encumbrances. No department shall have in excess of $1,000 in
committed purchases unencumbered in total at any time.
      (4)   Invoices. Invoices presented for payments from city funds shall be
reviewed and approved by the department head or authorized purchasing agent and
then forwarded to the City Clerk’s office for processing and presentation for
City Council approval.
      (5)   Blanket orders. Blanket purchase orders may be issued by authorized
purchasing agents or department heads. However, such blanket purchase orders
must be approved by the City Council prior to usage and the date of City
Council approval is to be entered on the blanket purchase order.
   (F)   Gifts or donations of public funds.
      (1)   Prohibited. No purchase order shall contain any amount of gift or
donation of public funds directly by the payment of money or by providing free
rent, utilities or other services indirectly by lending public equipment or
employees when the primary benefit goes to a private corporation, association
or individual. This includes charities, civic or youth groups, or any other
private organization.
      (2)   Exception.
         (a)   There is a need for providing the senior citizens of the city
with locations for social functions, recreation, meeting, eating meals and
other social gatherings in locations to obtain information on such things as
health services, tax preparation assistance and Social Security information.
There is a need for providing the youth of the city with locations for social
functions, recreation, meetings, social gatherings and sports activities. There
is a need for promoting tourism and economic development. It is in the interest
of the city and its residents to have the above services provided by
individuals and/or organizations to include, but not be limited to:
            1.   Pryor Area Chamber of Commerce;
            2.   Pryor Sertoma Senior Citizens;
            3.   Pryor Senior Citizens Center, Inc.;
            4.   Pryor Youth Organization, Inc.;
            5.   Mayes County Soccer Association;
            6.   Mom and Pop Little League; and
            7.   Additional youth/senior citizen/tourism and promotion
individuals and/or organizations as may be recognized by the Mayor and City
Council from time to time.
         (b)   Each private corporation, association or individual receiving
payment of money or receiving free rent, utilities or other services directly
or indirectly from the city shall annually present a written projection of
service to be provided and a projected operating budget prior to July 1 of each
year.
   (G)   Purchases only for city operation. No purchase or contract shall be
made from any fund of the city which is not a legitimate cost as a part of the
operation of the department, board, commission or the operation, maintenance or
improvement of property or equipment owned, leased to or under direct control
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-3) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-7-1995; Ord. 95-6, passed 12-19-
1995; Ord. 97-5, passed 10-21-1997; Ord. 2006-15, passed 9-19-2006; Ord. 2009-
3, passed 3-17-2009)
§ 38.004 SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SCRAP. Property which, because of its worn, damaged, deteriorated,
incomplete condition or specialized nature has no reasonable prospect of sale
or use as designed.
      SURPLUS PROPERTY. Items, commodities, materials, supplies or equipment
owned by the city which is determined by the city to be excess, obsolete,
antiquated, unused, scrap or not needed.
   (B)   Identification of surplus property. Periodically, as is necessary for
the efficient administration of the city or upon request of the Mayor, the
department heads of the city shall compose lists of city owned property under
the control of their respective departments which they deem to be surplus
property. Such lists shall be submitted to the Mayor and shall include:
      (1)   A description of the item(s);
      (2)   The number/quantity of each item(s);
      (3)   The model number, serial number, VIN number or other identifying
numbers as applicable to each item;
      (4)   A statement by the department head as to each item indicating
whether it is sought to be declared surplus based on its status as either:
         (a)   Excess;
         (b)   Obsolete;
         (c)   Antiquated;
         (d)   Unused;
         (e)   Not needed; or
         (f)   Scrap.
      (5)   A concise written explanation concerning each item setting forth
the factual basis describing why the item is believed by them to be excess,
obsolete, antiquated, unused, not needed or scrap; and
      (6)   A written statement as to each item indicating the opinion and
providing a short explanation of the basis of the opinion of the department
head as to whether the property can be sold for a value exceeding the probable
cost of selling the item. The department head’s written opinion and explanation
must include, set forth and be supported by a reasonable inquiry made by the
department head of:
         (a)   The possible manner(s) of sale by which the property might be
sold;
         (b)   The probable cost(s) associated with the sale of the property;
and
         (c)   The probable range of sale prices the property may receive in a
sale.
   (C)   Presentation of lists to the Council. Lists of surplus property as
prescribed in division (B) of this section which have been submitted to the
Mayor shall be presented to the Council by the Mayor for consideration and
possible action to declare the property “surplus” and determine the method of
disposal of the “surplus property”.
   (D)   City Council action. The City Council, when presented with the list,
shall consider the information concerning the property contained in the list
and in their judgment, make a formal declaration of the property’s status as
surplus. The City Council may, in its discretion, defer its decision as to all
or some part of the property set forth on the list to a future date and may
require further inquiry and investigation be made of the property’s status and/
or appropriate method(s) of disposal and reporting thereof to the Council. The
City Council shall, at the time it declares property to be surplus, determine
and prescribe the method of disposal of the property to be made.
   (E)   Methods of disposal of surplus property. The methods of disposal of
surplus property are:
      (1)   Sealed bid. The City Council may determine that the property should
be sold by sealed bid.
         (a)   If the Council determines the property should be sold by sealed
bid the Council shall additionally:
            1.   Specify a date and time certain as a deadline for bids to be
received by the city; and
            2.   Specify a date and time certain at which the bids will be
opened and sale awarded.
         (b)   The City Clerk shall be the designated agent for purposes of
receiving and holding such sealed bids and shall, at the date of sale, open the
bids and determine the successful bidders as those persons offering the highest
price.
      (2)   Public auction. The City Council may determine that the property
should be sold by public auction. In such event, the City Council shall also
determine whether the public auction shall be held as a tangible event at a
public location or an electronic event or listing of the property on an
internet sales site which is made available to the public via the internet.
         (a)   If the City Council determines that the auction shall be held as
a tangible event at a public location, then it shall additionally specify:
            1.   The date and time of the auction; and
            2.   The place of the auction.
         (b)   If the City Council determines that the auction shall be held as
an electronic event or listing of the property on an internet sales site, then
it shall additionally specify:
            1.   The date by which the property shall be listed;
            2.   The site upon which the property shall be listed; and
            3.   The date by which the listing shall be removed and buyer
determined.
      (3)   Scrap. If the City Council determines that said property should be
sold as scrap the Mayor shall be charged to cause market quotes to be obtained
from at least three sources and to make a report of the quotes received to the
Council which shall take action to approve or not approve the sale thereof to
the highest bid. In the alternative, the Mayor may cause the quotes to be
obtained prior to the determination of the Council that the property be sold as
scrap which may be presented to the Council contemporaneously upon the same
agenda for approval of sale following the Council’s declaration that the
property be sold as scrap. In the discretion of the Council, it may make such
other and further requirements of the sale as deemed by it to be in the best
interest of the city to facilitate a sale at market prices, inclusive of the
other methods of disposal prescribed by this section.
      (4)   Trade-in. The City Council may determine and prescribe that the
property be disposed of by “trade-in” for replacement equipment at such values
and prices as deemed to be in the best interest of the city and consistent with
market rates.
      (5)   Disposal by other means. Property may be disposed of by other
specified means which are deemed by the Council to be in the best interest of
the city upon specified grounds demonstrating the “best interest”. Disposal may
include disposal of the property as refuse where the costs associated with
selling the property would be reasonably likely to exceed the value to be
received in a sale of the property.
   (F)   Sales to city employees. Sales of property to employees of the city is
prohibited unless the property is sold by sealed bid or public auction
inclusive of both tangible events at a public location or an electronic event
or listing of the property on an internet sales site which is made available to
the public via the internet.
   (G)   Lump sum bid. In the event bids are received stating a single, lump
sum price to be paid for the entire list or a portion thereof, the City Clerk
shall total the highest bids submitted on the individual items of property
which are the subject of the lump sum bid and if the lump sum bid is greater
than the aggregate of the highest bids submitted on an individual basis, shall
declare the lump sum bid the successful bidder. If the lump sum bid is less
than the aggregate of the highest bids submitted on an individual basis, the
property shall be sold to the individual bidders.
   (H)   Notification to successful bidder. Persons determined to be the
successful bidders shall be notified by the City Clerk within seven days by
mail that they have been determined to be the successful bidder and they have
five days in which to collect the property. If such property is not collected
by the bidder within the five-day period, that bid will be discarded and the
next highest bidder will be determined to be the successful bidder.
   (I)   Notice of sale.
      (1)   In the event of a sale by public auction as a tangible event at a
public location or by sealed bid, notice of sale of city surplus or obsolete
property shall be by a single publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city, at least ten days but not more than 20 days prior to the date of
sale. The notice shall include:
         (a)   Type of sale. Whether the sale is to be by sealed bid or by
public auction; and
         (b)   List of items. A list of the items to be sold which sufficiently
discloses the type of property to be sold.
      (2)   In the event of a sale by public auction as a tangible event at a
public location, the notice shall additionally provide the location, time and
date of the sale.
      (3)   In the event of a sale by sealed bid the notice shall additionally
provide:
         (a)   The name and address of the city’s agent for purposes of
receiving bids;
         (b)   The deadline for receiving bids;
         (c)   The location of the property to be sold and the days and times
at which the property may be viewed by persons interested in bidding for its
purchase; and
         (d)   A statement to bidders requiring the bids received to contain
the name, address and telephone number of the person submitting the bid.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-4) (Ord. 2017-2, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 38.005 AUTHORIZED OFFICERS TO MAKE DEPOSITS.
   The following individuals are authorized to deposit those city monies they
collect in connection with their official duties into the appropriate city bank
accounts:
   (A)   City Clerk;
   (B)   Pool Manager;
   (C)   Director of Golf;
   (D)   Summer Park Program Director; and
   (E)   City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)
§ 38.006 PETTY CASH CHECKING ACCOUNT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of the petty cash checking account is to pay for
immediate cash needs for the various city departments.
      (2)   Any funds so expended on behalf of a city department from the petty
cash checking account shall be reimbursed by the city department making the
expenditure.
   (B)   Created. There is hereby created a city petty cash checking account.
   (C)   Signatures authorized. The following positions shall have signature
authority on the account:
      (1)   Mayor;
      (2)   City Clerk;
      (3)   Assistant City Clerk;
      (4)   City Treasurer; or
      (5)   Assistant City Treasurer.
   (D)   Check issuance; signatures required. To issue a check from the
account, it shall be necessary for only one signature of the authorized
individuals.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)
§ 38.007 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND.
   (A)   Created. There is hereby created a Capital Outlay Fund for the city.
   (B)   Purpose. The Capital Outlay Fund shall be used to purchase real
estate, fund building projects and other capital improvements for the city.
   (C)   Funding. All collections of use tax receipts shall be placed in the
Capital Outlay Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-7) (Ord. 96-4, passed 8-6-1996)
§ 38.008 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.
   The fee for a check which has been given by an individual, corporation or
organization to any office or department of the city and given within the
course of conducting business with the city, and the check is returned due to
insufficient funds, account closed or any other reason, shall be set by the
Mayor and City Council by ordinance, motion or resolution. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 2-1-8)
Cross-reference:
   False or bogus checks, see §
133.19
SALES TAX
§ 38.020 CITATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “City of Pryor Creek
Sales Tax Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)
§ 38.021 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the Oklahoma
Sales Tax Code; 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq., and 68 O.S. §§ 2701 et seq., are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS RECEIPTS. The definition of “gross receipts” in the State Sales Tax
Code is hereby augmented to contain the additional following words: “the total
retail sales price received for the sale, preparation or service of mixed
beverages, ice and nonalcoholic beverages to be mixed with alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises where such sale, preparation or service occurs
shall constitute the gross receipts from such transaction”.
      SALE. A sale shall include the sale, preparation or service of ice or
nonalcoholic beverages that are sold, prepared or served for the purpose of
being mixed with alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where such
sale, preparation or otherwise occurs.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-2) (Ord. 2002-1, passed 3-14-2002)
§ 38.022 TAX COLLECTOR DESIGNATED.
   The term TAX COLLECTOR, as used in this subchapter, means the department of
the city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law
or contract, and authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax
levied in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-3)
§ 38.023 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Sales
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-4)
§ 38.024 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)
§ 38.025 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   This subchapter became effective as to each cent tax after approval of
a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the ordinance in the
manner prescribed by 11 O.S. § 16-112 .
   (B)   Subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city
voting on same as prescribed by law, to be held on May 14, 2002, the tax in
Ordinance 2002-1 shall commence and be effective June 1, 2002; provided, that
the sales tax enacted pursuant to Ordinance 2002-1 shall terminate as follows:
      (1)   One-half of one percent (0.50%) sales tax used for debt service on
the Municipal Recreation Center Facility shall terminate at the earliest
possible date that sales tax revenues are sufficient to retire the indebtedness
issued to acquire, construct and equip the Municipal Recreation Center
Facility, but in no event to exceed 15 years after said sales tax becomes
effective; and
      (2)   One-fourth of one percent (0.25%) sales tax used for operation and
maintenance expenses on the Municipal Recreation Center Facility shall continue
on a permanent or unlimited basis.
   (C)   The sales tax pursuant to Ordinance 2017-6 shall become effective on
and after September 15, 2017, subject to approval of a majority of the
registered voters of the city voting on same as prescribed by law, said
election to be held August 8, 2017.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-6) (Ord. 2017-6, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 38.026 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   (A)   Revenue. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of Ordinance 72-16 to
provide revenues for the operation of the Street Department for the purposes
of, but not limited to, street, sidewalk and drainage maintenance and
improvement; to provide revenue for the extension and improvements of public
utilities; to provide revenue for the making of capital outlay to the city; and
to provide revenue for the General Fund of the city.
   (B)   Allocations.
      (1)   The revenue generated by the sales tax pursuant to Ordinance 72-16
from funds received by the city from October 1, 1994, until November 1, 1999,
shall be allocated as follows:
         (a)   Street Department, 65%;
         (b)   Public utilities, 10%;
         (c)   Capital outlay, 12.5%; and
         (d)   General Fund, 12.5%.
      (2)   The revenues generated by the sales tax pursuant to Ordinance 72-16
for funds received by the city from and after November 1, 1999, shall be
allocated as follows:
         (a)   Street Department, 65%;
         (b)   Capital outlay, 12.5%;
         (c)   General Fund, 12.5%); and
         (d)   General Fund and Street Department to be allocated between the
two by resolution of the City Council, 10%.
      (3)   The proceeds of the 0.75% sales tax levied and assessed by
Ordinance 2002-1 shall be used as follows.
         (a)   One-half of one percent (0.50%) of the sales tax revenues
generated shall be used for the payment of the debt service, including payment
of interest and principal and premium, if any, as the same become due, whether
at the stated maturity thereof, by acceleration, call for redemption or
otherwise, on indebtedness incurred by the city, or a public trust issuing
indebtedness on behalf of the city, the proceeds of which are to be used to
acquire, construct and equip the Municipal Recreation Center Facility.
         (b)   One-fourth of one percent (0.25%) of the sales tax revenues
shall be used for the payment of operation and maintenance expenses on said
Municipal Recreation Center Facility, provided, any funds generated in excess
of the actual operation and maintenance expenses, if any, may be used to pay
debt service on or acquire equipment for use at said Municipal Recreation
Center Facility at the option of the city.
   (C)   General support. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of Ordinance
2017-6 to provide revenues for the general support of the functions of the
municipal government of the city, and all lawful expenditures of the city
related thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-7) (Ord. 2017-6, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 38.027 TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the State Sales Tax Code,
including, but not exclusive of, the following (see
Appendix A of this code of ordinances):
   (A)   Tangible personal property;
   (B)   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam or any other
utility or public service, except water and those specifically exempt by this
subchapter;
   (C)   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of
transportation for hire;
   (D)   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall
include all services and rental charges having any connection with transmission
of any messages;
   (E)   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds and characters and the
service of printing or overprinting, including the copying of information by
mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter
in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
   (F)   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming
house, motel, public lodging house or tourist camps;
   (G)   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots;
   (H)   Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or software
or coding sheets, cards or magnetic tapes on which pre-written programs have
been coded, punched or otherwise recorded;
   (I)   Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
   (J)   Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this subchapter;
   (K)   Dues or fees to clubs, including free or complimentary dues or fees,
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business;
   (L)   Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports entertainment,
exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made;
   (M)   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of
activity, when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis, racquetball
or handball courts;
   (N)   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports,
entertainment or recreational activity, such as trampolines or golf carts;
   (O)   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or other
recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts or other
sports and athletic equipment;
   (P)   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without any
deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person
who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom;
   (Q)   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible
personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when the
rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered; provided if the rental or lease
charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making the
rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the rental
or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement,
bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall
be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
   (R)   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or instrument
whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances or
rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast by any method
are transferred; provided, persons regularly engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed
under this subchapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in respect
to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts,
cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features, and the sale or licensing of
such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this
subchapter;
   (S)   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or not
same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or nursery
business in this state, including all orders taken by a state business for
delivery in another state; provided, all orders taken outside this state for
delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by this
subchapter;
   (T)   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or
other salesmen, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will lose
tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this subchapter because of:
      (1)   The operation of the business;
      (2)   The nature of the business;
      (3)   The turnover of independent contractors;
      (4)   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep
records;
      (5)   Lack of adequate records;
      (6)   The persons are minors or transients;
      (7)   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
      (8)   Any other reasonable reason.
   (U)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property, including
materials, supplies and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable; and
   (V)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairmen, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-8)
§ 38.028 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Sales subject to other tax. There is hereby specifically exempted from
the tax levied by this subchapter the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted
from the State Sales Tax Code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from
the:
      (1)   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax,
gasoline excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
      (2)   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the state motor vehicle excise tax levied
by state law has been paid;
      (3)   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This division (A) shall not
operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of
this state; and
      (4)   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to 68 O.S. §§
6001 through 6004 has been paid.
   (B)   Governmental and nonprofit entities. There are hereby specifically
exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state, any political subdivision of this state or any
agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, state or any of its political subdivisions shall not be
exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
      (2)   Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by
agencies or instrumentalities of the United States government if ownership and
possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States
government;
      (3)   Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities
of this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
      (4)   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools,
high schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for
teachers and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for
profit;
      (5)   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof; provided, such societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a
profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof
to the exclusion of other members;
      (6)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
      (7)   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
      (8)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the Council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax;
      (9)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state system of
higher education and the Grand River Dam Authority, or to any person with whom
any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly entered
into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such public
contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract. Any person making
purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state shall certify,
in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of this state and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency.
Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that purchases are for any
of the above named subdivision or agencies of this state or who otherwise
violates this division (B)(9) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to double the amount of the
sales tax involved or incarcerated for not more than 60 days or both;
      (10)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to private
institutions of higher education and private institutions of higher education
and private elementary and secondary institutions of education accredited by
the State Department of Education or registered by the State Board of Education
for purposes of participating in federal programs or accredited as defined by
the State Regents for Higher Education which are exempt from taxation pursuant
to the provisions of § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, including
materials, supplies and equipment used in the construction and improvement of
buildings and other structures owned by the institutions and operated for
education purposes. Any person making purchases on behalf of any institution,
agency or subdivision in this state, shall certify in writing, on the copy of
the invoice of sales ticket, the nature of the purchases, and violation of this
division (B)(10) shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in division (B)(9) of this
section;
      (11)   Tuition and education fees paid to private institutions of higher
education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education
accredited by the State Department of Education or registered by the State
Board of Education for purposes of participating in federal programs or
accredited as defined by the State Regents for Higher Education which are
exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of § 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code; and
      (12)   Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private
schools for grade levels kindergarten through twelfth grade, a public school
district, public school board, public school student group or organization or
public school district personnel for purposes of raising funds for the benefit
of such school, school district, school board, student group or organization.
For purposes of this division (B)(12), PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL shall mean any
public or private institution of education accredited by the State Department
of Education or registered by the State Board of Education for purposes of
participating in Federal programs. Sale of tangible personal property in this
division (B)(12) shall not include sale of admission tickets or concessions at
athletic events.
   (C)   Specific exemptions. There are hereby specifically exempted from the
tax levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles;
      (2)   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed $1, or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a
municipality except by taxicab;
      (3)   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed $0.75. A carrier is a person who regularly delivers
newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route;
      (4)   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling
the articles purchased, whether within or without the state; provided, that
such sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax
permits have been issued as provided in this subchapter. This exemption shall
not apply to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such
persons purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged
in the business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of
tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do
not have an established place of business and a sales tax permit;
      (5)   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and
billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic
media, including radio, television and cable television;
      (6)   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons
regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any
other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of
raising the same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and
extended to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in
the raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor, that he or she
is regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the
items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to
the State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant
the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor
shall be a misdemeanor;
      (7)   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption
shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by 59 O.S. §
353.1;
      (8)   Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled or
filled returnable oil drums to any person who is not regularly engaged in the
business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty, partially
filled or filled returnable oil drums;
      (9)   Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are
purchased in whole or in part with coupons issued pursuant to the federal food
stamp program as authorized by 7 U.S.C. §§ 2011 through 2029, as to that
portion purchased with such coupons. The exemption provided for such sales
shall be inapplicable to such sales upon the effective date of any federal law
that removes the requirement of the exemption as a condition for participation
by the state in the federal food stamp program; and
      (10)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales
tax levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in
effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to
previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
   (D)   Agriculture. There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax
levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the
producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold
at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         (a)   Farm, orchard or garden products;
         (b)   Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the
cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
         (c)   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; or
         (d)   The provisions of this division (D)(1) shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserymen or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business except as set out herein.
      (2)   Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules or other domestic or
draft animals, sold by the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock
sale;
      (3)   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs; provided, that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor, that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
      (4)   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes and subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk
or meat for human consumption;
         (b)   Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
         (c)   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies;
         (d)   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
         (e)   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such
as dogs, cats, birds or such other fur-bearing animals; and
         (f)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy.
      (5)   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. Each such
purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket
to be retained by the vendor, that he or she is so engaged in farming or
ranching and that the material purchased will be used only in such business;
         (b)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing,
on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that he
or she is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands owned or
leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business
of farming or ranching, and shall show in the certificate the name or names of
such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on which the
materials are to be applied to each such land, and he or she shall further
certify that his or her contract price has been reduced so as to give the
farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
         (c)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceuticals and
biologicals to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a
contract or custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors
under this subchapter, and the sales shall not be considered to be taxable
sales within the meaning of the State Sales Tax Code. As used in this division
(D)(5)(c), AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER, PHARMACEUTICALS and BIOLOGICALS mean any
substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes, or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants or animals;
         (d)   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. This division (D)
(5)(d) shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is
packaged and sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
         (e)   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person
regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. For the
purposes of this division (D)(5)(e), agricultural chemical pesticides shall
include any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling or mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird,
nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or
animal life or virus, bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses,
bacterial or other microorganisms on or in living man, or any substance or
mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or
desiccant; and
         (f)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production
of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy
of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall
certify to the State Tax Commission that the contract price of the items has
been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by
the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor and, upon violation and
conviction for a second offense, the State Tax Commission shall revoke the
vendor’s sales tax permit.
      (6)   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil,
lubricants and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he or she is engaged in farming or
ranching and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used
only in farming or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply
to motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the
invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall
certify to the State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been
reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the
purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor and, upon violation and conviction
for a second offense, the State Tax Commission shall revoke the vendor’s sales
tax permit.
   (E)   Manufacturers. There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax
levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of
being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such goods,
wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured,
compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products or are consumed in the
process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing
products for resale. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and
generally recognized as such;
      (2)   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending the
same with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
      (3)   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in the state, and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in the state. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this subchapter. The term
MANUFACTURING PLANTS means those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
      (4)   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise
transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this subchapter.
This exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials
delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely
essential to the sale of the sold merchandise;
      (5)   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in Oklahoma when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state; or
      (6)   Machinery, equipment, fuels and chemicals incorporated into and
directly used or consumed in the process of treatment to substantially reduce
the volume of harmful properties or controlled industrial waste at treatment
facilities specifically permitted pursuant to the Controlled Industrial Waste
Disposal Act and operated at the place of waste generation, or facilities
approved by the State Department of Health for the cleanup of a site of
contamination. The term CONTROLLED INDUSTRIAL WASTE may include low level
radioactive waste for the purpose of this division (E)(6).
   (F)   Corporations and partnerships. There are hereby specifically exempted
from the tax levied in this subchapter:
      (1)   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
         (a)   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this division (F)(1)(a), the term REORGANIZATION
means a statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation
of substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         (b)   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of
a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
         (c)   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the
property prior to the transfer;
         (d)   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the property
prior to the transfer; or
         (e)   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of such partnership;
      (2)   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-9)
§ 38.029 TAX DUE WHEN; RETURNS; RECORDS.
   The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the State
Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-10)
§ 38.030 PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   (B)   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the Tax
Collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the Tax Collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the state sales tax.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-11)
§ 38.031 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   The taxes, penalty and interest due under this subchapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-12)
§ 38.032 VENDOR’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX; PENALTIES.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It is the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from
the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this subchapter, or
an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent
thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner
as other debts.
   (C)   A vendor, as defined hereunder, who willfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
subchapter, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply
with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly
or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein
levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any
statement which infers that he or she is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax
for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this subchapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any
person that willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect
the sums required to be collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-13) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.033 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the State Sales Tax Code for
collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-14)
§ 38.034 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Delinquency. 68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this
subchapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein
specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in
reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter. The failure or refusal
of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the
time and manner required by this subchapter shall cause such tax to be
delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five
days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under
this subchapter.
   (B)   Waiver. The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by
reason of a taxpayer’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in
administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220. To accomplish
the purposes of this division (B), the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-15)
§ 38.035 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made
to any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purpose of
this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-16)
§ 38.036 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter, shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-17) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.038 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code,
68 O.S. §§ 205 et seq., and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by
reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city
sales tax as if here set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-18)
§ 38.039 AMENDMENTS.
   The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance, hereby
authorize the City Council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this subchapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the
use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the
qualified electors of the city as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-19)
§ 38.040 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
or all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. The tax imposed under
Ordinance 2017-6 is imposed as an excise tax (sales tax) of 0.25% in addition
to any and all other excise taxes (sales tax) now in force; said excise tax to
be levied upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales
taxable under the State Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-20) (Ord. 2017-6, passed 5-16-2017)
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
§ 38.055 CITATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Pryor Creek Hotel/
Motel Tax Ordinance of 1998”, and is hereinafter referred to as this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-1) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.056 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. Any building or buildings, structures, trailers or other
facilities in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations in which three or more rooms are used for the accommodation of
transient guests whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term
shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or
courts, lodging houses, bed and breakfast inns, inns, rooming houses, trailer
houses, trailer motels, apartments and sleeping rooms not occupied by
“permanent residents”, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping
accommodations or spaces are furnished for a consideration. The term shall not
include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, university dormitories or other
educational or charitable institutions.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to use or possess any room or
rooms in a hotel/motel or the right to the use or possession of the
furnishings, or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and
possession of the room or rooms.
   OCCUPANT. A person who for a consideration possesses, or has the right to
the use or possess, any room or rooms in a hotel/motel under any lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement.
   OPERATOR. Any person operating a hotel/motel in this city, including, but
not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, subleasee, mortgagee in
possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel/motel.
   RENT. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction
therefrom whatsoever.
   RETURN. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
   ROOM. Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel/motel
which is available for or let out or used or possessed for any purpose other
than a place of assembly. As used herein, PLACE OF ASSEMBLY means a room or
space which is not capable of being occupied for lodging purposes and which is
used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall include
dance halls; cabarets; nightclubs; restaurants; any room or space for public or
private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings; lodge and meeting
halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums; swimming pools; billiards, bowling
and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms used for public or private catering
purposes; funeral parlors; markets; recreational rooms; concert halls;
broadcasting studios; and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
   TAX. The tax levied pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-2) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.057 ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Accounting. All revenues from the hotel/motel tax shall be accounted
for separately from any and all other revenues, maintained in its own
independent, interest bearing account and administered separate from other city
monies.
   (B)   City Treasurer duties. In addition to all other powers granted to the
City Treasurer, he or she is hereby authorized and empowered to:
      (1)   Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
collection of taxes pursuant to this subchapter;
      (2)   Extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period
not exceeding 60 days; and, for cause shown, to waive, remit or reduce
penalties or interest;
      (3)   Delegate his or her functions hereunder to an assistant or other
employee of the city;
      (4)   Assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed
by this subchapter; and
      (5)   Prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents.
   (C)   Allocation Board.
      (1)   Selection of Board.
         (a)   Members. The Hotel/Motel Tax Allocation Board shall consist of
five members.
         (b)   Selection procedure.
            1.   No Board member shall be knowingly affiliated with any
applicant or funding request. In the event a Board member becomes aware of such
an affiliation he or she shall abstain from reviewing and/or voting on said
grant application.
            2.   Appointments shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the
City Council.
         (c)   Term.
            1.   One member approved by the Council will fill a two-year term.
            2.   One member approved by the Council will fill a three-year
term.
            3.   Three members approved by the Council will fill a four-year
term.
            4.   As each member’s term expires, they resign or are removed,
they will be replaced by a new member to be elected from individuals nominated
by the organization that nominated the original Board member.
            5.   Notwithstanding the terms set forth in this section, all
members elected to this Board shall serve until their successors are elected
and qualified.
            6.   Should any position on the Board remain unfilled for 30 days
without replacement nomination as set forth above, the City Council shall fill
said position from nominations made in open City Council proceedings.
            7.   The City Council may remove any member who has failed to
attend three scheduled meetings in the previous 12 months.
      (2)   Officers. The Board shall select officers to include:
         (a)   Chairperson (one-year term);
         (b)   Vice Chairperson (Chairperson elect) (one-year term); and
         (c)   Secretary.
      (3)   Duties.
         (a)   The Board shall meet a minimum of three times each year to
review any new applications. In June of each year the Board shall review all
previous applicants/awardees and make recommendations, if any, to the Budget
Committee.
         (b)   The Board shall notify the public that applications for the
following year’s award cycle shall be accepted from June 1 through July 1 of
the following year.
         (c)   1.   The Hotel/Motel Tax Allocation Board shall recommend to the
Budget Committee the allocation of hotel/motel tax receipts prior to the second
Council meeting in August of each year. Said awards shall be for the purpose of
encouraging, promoting and fostering conventions, conferences and tourism
development in the city; promotion of cultural, recreational, commercial,
industrial, educational and economic events for economic development of the
city; solicitation of visitor attractions, events, tourism, conferences,
conventions and meetings in the city; park and recreation activities and other
city development projects, activities and/or events.
            2.   The maximum amount of funds to be allocated shall not exceed
the total amount of funds received in the hotel/motel tax fund during the
previous year, plus any amount carried over from previous years.
   (D)   Legal, enforcement fees. In the event a suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction is caused to be filed, either on behalf of or against the city,
and said cause is the direct result of the conditions, stipulations or
requirements herein set forth, an amount necessary to pay all legal fees
incurred by the city, as well as fines or penalties imposed against it, shall
be set aside from the monies authorized to be collected hereby in payment
thereof, regardless of whether said cause was for the purpose of enforcing or
defending the provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-3) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998; Ord. 98-5, passed 6-19-
1998; Ord. 2003-6, passed 8-5-2003; Ord. 2005-3, passed 3-1-2005)
§ 38.058 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business by the State Tax Commission
pursuant to the State Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this subchapter,
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-4) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.059 EFFECTIVE DATE; TERMINATION.
   This subchapter shall become and be effective on or after June 24, 1998,
subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city, voting
on the same in the manner proscribed by law; provided, that upon approval of
the voters as required above, this subchapter shall remain in effect and not be
repealed unless repealed by a majority of the registered voters of the city,
voting to repeal same in the manner as required by its approval.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-5) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.060 REGISTRATION, AUTHORITY CERTIFICATES.
   Every operator shall file with the City Treasurer a registration certificate
in a form prescribed by the City Treasurer within ten days after the effective
date hereof or, in the case of operators commencing business or opening new
hotels/motels after such effective date, within three days after such
commencement or opening. The City Treasurer shall, within five days after the
filing of such certificate, issue without charge to each operator a certificate
of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and
duplicates thereof for each additional hotel/motel. Each certificate or
duplicate shall state the hotel/motel to which it is applicable. Such
certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such
manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons
seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable
and shall be surrendered immediately to the City Treasurer upon the cessation
of business at the hotel/motel, or upon its sale or transfer.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-6) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.061 TAX LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 5% of the gross rental receipts
derived from all sales taxable under the State Sales Tax Code upon the service
of furnishing rooms by hotels or motels within the city, except that the tax
shall not be assessed where the rent is less than $5 per day. This excise tax
shall be in addition to any existing sales taxes imposed by the city or the
state.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-7) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.062 EXEMPTIONS; PROOF REQUIRED.
   (A)   Officers, agents, representatives or employees of any government,
corporation, organization or association that is legally exempted from state
sales taxation or city sales taxation and whose occupancy of the room is
required in connection with the official business or affairs of said
government, corporation, organization or association, shall be exempt from the
tax levied by this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person claiming to be exempt from the tax pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall display proof of exemption and tax identification number
certifying that the corporation, organization or association with which he or
she is affiliated is exempt from the tax.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-8) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.063 BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   Where the City Treasurer believes that any operator is about to cease
business, leave the state or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other
similar reason he or she deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under
this subchapter, he or she may require such operator to file with the city a
bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state
in such amount as the City Treasurer may fix to secure the payment of any tax
or penalties and interest due, or which may become due, from such operator. In
the event that the City Treasurer determines that an operator is to file such
bond, he or she shall give notice to the operator specifying the amount of bond
required, which shall in no event exceed twice the amount of the sum in
controversy. The operator shall file the bond within five days after receiving
the notice unless within such five days, the operator shall request in writing
a hearing before the City Council, at which time the necessity and amount of
the bond shall be determined by the City Council. Such determination shall be
final and shall be complied with within 15 days thereafter.
   (B)   In lieu of such bonds, securities approved by the City Treasurer, or
cash in such amount as he or she may prescribe, may be deposited with the City
Treasurer, who may at any time after five days’ notice to the depositor, apply
them to any tax and/or any penalties due, and for that purpose, the securities
may be sold at private or public sale.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-9) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.064 USE OF FUNDS.
   Funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be set
aside and used by the Mayor and City Council for one or more of the following
purposes: city development activities and/or events identified by the Hotel/
Motel Tax Allocation Board and approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-10) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.065 RETURNS.
   (A)   Date; forms. The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable to the
City Treasurer on the first day of each month, except as herein provided, by
any person liable for the payment of any tax due under this subchapter. For the
purpose of ascertaining the amount of the tax payable under this subchapter, it
shall be the duty of all operators, on or before the fifteenth day of each
month, to deliver to the City Treasurer, upon forms prescribed and furnished by
him or her, returns, under oath, showing the gross receipts or gross proceeds
arising from rents received from occupancy of hotel rooms during the preceding
calendar month. The returns shall show such further information as the City
Treasurer may require to correctly compute and collect the tax herein levied.
In addition to the information required on returns, the City Treasurer may
request and the operator shall furnish any information deemed necessary for a
correct computation of the tax levied herein. Such operator shall compute and
remit to the City Treasurer the required tax due for the preceding calendar
month. The remittance or remittances of the tax shall accompany the returns
herein required. If not paid on or before the fifteenth of such month, the tax
shall be delinquent after such date; provided, that no interest or penalty
shall be charged on such return filed on or before the twentieth day of such
month.
   (B)   Exceptions; amendments. The City Treasurer may permit or require
returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as he or
she may specify. The form of return shall be prescribed by the City Treasurer
and shall contain such information as he or she may deem necessary for the
proper administration of this subchapter. The City Treasurer may require
amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice, which amended return
shall contain the information specified in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-11) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.066 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator
shall pay to the City Treasurer the tax imposed by this subchapter upon the
rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the
operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-12) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.067 OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Designate tax. The operator shall separately designate, charge and
show all taxes on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of
charges or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator.
   (B)   Collection. The operator shall be responsible for the collection of
the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax.
   (C)   Records maintenance. It shall be the duty of every operator required
to make a return and pay any tax under this subchapter to keep and preserve
suitable records of the gross daily rentals, together with other pertinent
records and documents which may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due
hereunder and such other records as will substantiate and prove the accuracy of
such returns. All records shall remain in the city and be preserved for a
period of three years, unless the City Treasurer, in writing, has authorized
their destruction or disposal at an earlier date, and shall be open to
examination at any time by the City Treasurer or by any of his or her duly
authorized agents. The burden of proving that a sale was not a taxable sale
shall be upon the operator who makes the sale.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-13) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.068 COMPENSATION TO OPERATOR.
   In order to compensate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports
and remitting the tax when due, a discount equal to that allowed by the State
Tax Commission for the collection of sales tax shall be allowed upon all taxes
paid prior to the time they become delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-14) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.069 ASSESSMENT BY CITY.
   If a return required by this subchapter is not filed, or if a return when
filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by
the City Treasurer from such information as may be obtainable and, if
necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as
number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of
accommodations and services, number of employees or other factors. Written
notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the
collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and
irrevocably fix and determine the tax unless the person against whom it is
assessed, within 90 days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall
apply in writing to the City Council for a hearing or unless the City
Treasurer, upon his or her own initiative, shall reassess the same. After such
hearing, the City Council shall give written notice of its determination to the
person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-15) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.070 DELINQUENCY; INTEREST.
   If any tax levied by this subchapter becomes delinquent, the person
responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at
the rate of 1.5% per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency
until said unpaid balance is paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-16) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.071 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Procedure. The City Treasurer shall refund or credit any tax
erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected if written application
to the City Treasurer for such refund shall be made within 90 days from the
date of payment thereof. For like causes and in the same period, a refund may
be made upon the initiative and the order of the City Treasurer. Whenever a
refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such
application may be made by the person upon whom such tax was imposed and who
has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be made by the person who
has collected and paid such tax to the City Treasurer; provided, that the
application is made within 90 days of the payment by the occupant to the
operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he or she
has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is
made. The City Treasurer, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow
credit therefor on payments due from the applicant.
   (B)   Determination; hearing.
      (1)   Upon application for a refund, the City Treasurer may receive
evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he or she deems
necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the City Treasurer
shall give notice thereof to the applicant.
      (2)   Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within 90
days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the City Council for a
hearing.
      (3)   After such hearing, the City Council shall give written notice of
its decision to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-17) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.072 NOTICES.
   Any notice provided for under this subchapter shall be deemed to have been
given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or
deposited in the United States mail addressed to the last known address of the
operator.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-18) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.073 CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to
protect the same, the provision of 68 O.S. § 205 of the State Sales Tax Code,
and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully
effective and applicable to the administration of this subchapter as if herein
set forth.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-19) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.074 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and
remittances herein required, or the making of any false or fraudulent report
for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or a portion thereof
rightfully due under this subchapter, shall be an offense against the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-20) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.075 AMENDMENTS.
   The people of the city, by their approval of the ordinance codified in this
subchapter, at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the City Council,
by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or
additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this
subchapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except
that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval
of the qualified voters of the city as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-21) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.076 REMEDIES EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided in this subchapter shall be exclusive remedies
available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-22) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
§ 38.077 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-23) (Ord. 98-4, passed 5-19-1998)
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
§ 38.090 IMPOSED.
   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each
and every person operating a telephone exchange in the city in an amount equal
to 2% of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone
transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city, to
compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to
the exercise of its police power, supervision, police regulation and police
control of the construction of lines and equipment of said telephone company in
the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on
or before May 1 of each year and shall be paid into and appropriated and
expended from the General Revenue Fund of the city. (Refer to Appendix A
following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 2-3-1)
§ 38.091 IN LIEU OF OTHER TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this subchapter by
the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and
continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes;
provided however, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any
existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit,
duct space or pole contacts of said company for the fire alarm and/or police
call systems of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)
UTILITIES TAX
§ 38.105 TAX LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax upon the gross receipts
from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas, electricity
or water in the city, in the sum of 2% of the gross receipts from such
residential and commercial sales. (Refer to Appendix A following this code of
ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 2-4-1)
§ 38.106 APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   The tax authorized and levied under this subchapter, shall apply to all
persons engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water, except it shall not apply to any person operating under a
valid franchise from the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-2)
§ 38.107 TERM OF TAX.
   The tax assessed under this subchapter shall be levied for a term of not
less than one year; and, shall be payable monthly and placed in the General
Revenue Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-3)
§ 38.108 FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO PAY.
   Any such person failing or refusing to pay such tax, when assessed and
levied, shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city; and,
in addition thereto an action may be maintained against such person for the
amount of the tax and all expenses of collecting the same, including a
reasonable attorney fee.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-4)
§ 38.109 LIEN ON ASSETS.
   The tax so imposed hereby shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the
assets located within the city of any person engaged in the business of selling
power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-5)
USE TAX
§ 38.120 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “City of Pryor Creek Use
Tax”.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-1)
§ 38.121 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenue for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the City
Council for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-2)
§ 38.122 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the State Use Tax
Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter. In addition thereto, for the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the city government or the official agency
of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law,
to administer the collection of the tax herein levied.
   TRANSACTION. Sale.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-3)
§ 38.123 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Use Tax
Code.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-4)
§ 38.124 TAX LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing,
using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property
purchased or brought into this city, an excise tax on the storage, use or other
consuming within the city of such property a rate equal to the sales tax rate
currently in effect, or as later revised, of the purchase price of such
property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise
consuming within the city, tangible, personal property purchased or brought
into the city. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of
importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to
only property purchased outside the state; provided, that the tax levied herein
shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use
outside the city, but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the
city which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication,
repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable
for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or
municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that
the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the
taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or
services.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-5) (Ord. 2007-1, passed 4-3-2007)
§ 38.125 EXEMPTIONS TO TAX.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Visitors; personal use. In respect to the use of an subchapter of
tangible personal property brought into the city by a nonresident individual
visiting in this city for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
city;
   (B)   Purchases for resale. In respect to the use of tangible, personal
property purchased for resale before being used;
   (C)   Taxed articles. In respect to the use of any article of tangible,
personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both
the State Use Tax Code and this subchapter, has been paid by the person using
such tangible, personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under
the laws of this state or some other state or municipality of the United
States. If any article of tangible personal property has already been subjected
to a tax by the state or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale
or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the State Use Tax Code
and this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to it
by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the
State Use Tax Code and this subchapter, and the rate by which the previous tax
upon the sale or use was computed; provided, that no credit shall be given for
taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does
not grant like credit for taxes paid in the state and the city;
   (D)   Machinery and equipment. In respect to the use of machinery and
equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or
processing plants in the city and machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons to the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the
city; provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and
equipment is incorporated into and is directly used in the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under the Sales Tax Code of the
city. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those establishments primarily
engaged in manufacturing or processing operations and generally recognized as
such;
   (E)   Specific exemption. In respect to the use of tangible, personal
property now specifically exempted from taxation under the Sales Tax Code of
the city;
   (F)   Individual intending to become resident. In respect to the use of any
article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by an individual
with intent to become a resident of this city where such personal property is
for such individual’s personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   Commercial airlines; railroads. In respect to the use of any article
of tangible personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines and
railroads; and
   (H)   Livestock. In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and
brought into this city for feeding or breeding purposes and which is later
resold.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)
§ 38.126 DUE AND PAYABLE.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the State Use
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-7)
§ 38.127 COLLECTION OF TAXES BY RETAILER OR VENDOR.
   (A)   Required. Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property
from a place of business outside this state for use in this city shall, at the
time of making such sales, collect the use tax levied by this subchapter from
the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and
form prescribed by the Tax Commission, if the Tax Commission shall, by
regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the
Tax Commission the name and address of all his or her agents operating in this
city and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or
other places of business in this city.
   (B)   Place of business not within state or within and without. The Tax
Commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection
of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of
business within this state but who makes sales of tangible, personal property
for use in this city and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer
or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state and
making sales of tangible, personal property at such out-of-state place of
business for use in this city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the Tax Commission in such manner
and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribed. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax
upon all tangible, personal property sold to his or her knowledge for the use
within this city. Such authority and permit may be canceled when at any time
the Tax Commission considers that such tax can be more effectively collected
from the person using such property in this city; provided, however, that in
all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the
purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer’s or
vendor’s vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales
or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable municipal sales tax
at the point to delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under the
taxpayer’s sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-8)
§ 38.128 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Use Tax Code; and
remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as
may be allowed by said Code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-9)
§ 38.129 DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Interest and penalties. 68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a
part of this subchapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the
amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases
of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter;
provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by
this subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such
delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall
forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this subchapter.
   (B)   Waiver. The interest or penalty, or any portion thereof accruing by
reason of a retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied
may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or
remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68
O.S. § 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable
provisions of said 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-10)
§ 38.130 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-11)
§ 38.131 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Tax Commission
pursuant to the State Use Tax Code are for the purpose of this subchapter
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an
additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-12)
§ 38.132 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules or regulations of the Tax
Commission, the Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing above
provided, cancel said corporation’s license to do business in this state and
shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this subchapter, the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules
and regulations of the Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-13)
§ 38.133 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared
and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, of the State Use Tax
Code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made
fully effective and applicable to administration of the city use tax as is
herein set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-14)
§ 38.134 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof, the offending
taxpayer shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day of noncompliance with this
subchapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-15) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.135 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to
any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purpose of
this section, the applicable provisions of said 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-16)
§ 38.136 CUMULATIVE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-17)
911 EMERGENCY SERVICE TAX
§ 38.150 TAX IMPOSED.
   In so far as the presently constituted Mayor and City Council has or may
have authority to so do, there shall be imposed a tax of 5% on the tariff of
charges for exchange telephone service or its equivalent of the local exchange
telephone company providing the service within the city, which tax shall
continue, except as modified as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-1)
§ 38.151 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Such tax shall be collected monthly by such local telephone exchange company
and paid within 30 days after close of each collection month to the City Clerk,
to be deposited in the 911 Cash Fund, and to be spent for engineering,
installation, administration and other recurring or one-time costs necessary to
implement, administer, operate and maintain such emergency 911 telephone
service in the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-2)
§ 38.152 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   The local telephone exchange company providing telephone service in such
exchange area of the city shall be entitled to retain as an administrative fee,
an amount not exceeding 3% of the tax imposed and collected hereto, as provided
by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-3)
§ 38.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any officer, agent or employee who willfully and knowingly violates
the provisions of §§
38.001 through
38.008 shall be guilty of misconduct and shall be subject to removal from his
or her office or position therefor.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-9)
CHAPTER 39: CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCIES
Section
Civil Defense/Emergency Management
   
39.01   Purpose of Civil Defense/Emergency Management Organization
   
39.02   Creation; composition
   
39.03   Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management; duties
   
39.04   Powers of Director in emergencies
   
39.05   Compensation
Succession of Office
   
39.20   Intent
   
39.21   Succession specified
   
39.22   Termination of authority
   
39.23   Alternate seat of government
   
39.24   Emergency powers
   
39.25   Suspension of fiscal limitations
CIVIL DEFENSE/EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 39.01 PURPOSE OF CIVIL DEFENSE/EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   A civil defense/emergency management organization is created for the city to
carry out preparations for and to function in the event of emergencies
endangering the lives and property of the people of the city. The duties of the
civil defense/emergency management organization are the protection of the lives
and health of the citizens and of property and property rights, both private
and public, and performance of all functions necessary and incident thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-1)
§ 39.02 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government, a
Department of Civil Defense/Emergency Management, which shall consist of:
   (A)   Director. A Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, and serve at
the Mayor’s pleasure; and
   (B)   Civil Defense Advisory Committee. A Civil Defense Advisory Committee.
This Committee shall consist of the Mayor as Chairperson and five members
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, and serving at
the Mayor’s pleasure. The Committee shall select from its members a Vice
Chairperson and Secretary. It shall hold such meetings as are directed by the
Mayor and its function shall be set in an advisory capacity as needed or
requested by the Mayor or the Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-2)
§ 39.03 DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE/EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT; DUTIES.
   The Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management shall be the executive
head of the Department of Civil Defense/Emergency Management and shall be
responsible for carrying out the civil defense program of the city. It shall be
the duty of the Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management, as soon as
practicable after appointment, to perfect an organization to carry out the
purposes set forth in this chapter and he or she shall have all necessary power
and authority to form committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate
the chairperson or chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect
such an organization. He or she shall have such further duty and responsibility
to cooperate with all civil defense agencies of other governmental units,
including the state and the federal government. The Director of Civil Defense/
Emergency Management shall also perform the duties of health officer.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-3)
§ 39.04 POWERS OF DIRECTOR IN EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   In the event of an enemy-caused emergency or emergency resulting from
natural causes, the Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management, after due
authorization from the Mayor, shall have the power and authority to enforce all
rules and regulations relating to civil defense and, if necessary, take control
of transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine and
public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian populations. He or
she shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental
agencies or civil defense organizations; and if required by the Mayor, shall
have control over any and all funds allocated from any source for the purpose
of alleviating distress conditions in the city.
   (B)   The Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management and other members
of the Civil Defense/Emergency Management Organization created by him or her
shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city during the period of emergency and shall at such time
have the further power to make arrest for violations of such laws or
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-4)
§ 39.05 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Members. All members of the Civil Defense/Emergency Management
Organization created in this subchapter, except the Director, shall serve
without compensation. The city shall not be liable for any personal or bodily
injury received by any nonsalaried member of such organization while acting in
the line of duty.
   (B)   Director. The salary of the Director of Civil Defense/Emergency
Management shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the City
Council and agreements with the county and state, if any. The City Clerk is
authorized to advance the entire amount on a monthly basis and seek
reimbursement from Mayes County and the state for their proportionate share. In
addition, the Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management may be reimbursed
for expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 4-3A-5) (Ord. 95-2, passed 9-19-1995)
SUCCESSION OF OFFICE
§ 39.20 INTENT.
   It is hereby declared the legislative intent of the Mayor and City Council
that in the event of any attack upon the United States of America of such
degree of destructiveness that the duly elected officials of the city are
unable or unavailable to act, or in the event of a civil disaster affecting
said city to the same extent, then a procedure for interim successors to so act
should be established.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-1)
§ 39.21 SUCCESSION SPECIFIED.
   (A)   Mayor to President. In the event of the absence or disability of the
Mayor to carry out his or her duties, then such duties shall be succeeded to by
the President of the City Council.
   (B)   City Council. In the event of the unavailability and absence of both
the Mayor and the President of the City Council, then the successor shall be
the individual members of the City Council in order of the wards which they
represent, with the Council member currently holding the longer term to take
precedence.
   (C)   Qualified voting citizens. In the event of the unavailability of the
Mayor and all the members of the City Council, then a meeting of at least 20
qualified voting citizens of the city shall take place at the Council Chamber
in the Graham Community Building as soon as possible after the disaster, at
which an interim Mayor and City Council shall be elected from among those
available for service.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-2)
§ 39.22 TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The authority of an emergency interim successor shall cease:
   (A)   Higher designation. When the incumbent of the office or an interim
successor higher in designation becomes available to exercise the powers; or
   (B)   Successor elected or appointed. When a successor to the office has
been duly elected or appointed and has qualified according to law.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-3)
§ 39.23 ALTERNATE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT.
   In the event that the Graham Community Building may be destroyed or unusable
as the seat of government of the city, then the first alternate seat of
government shall be designated by the City Council. In the event of the
destruction or nonhabitability of the primary seat, then the alternates
designated by the City Council shall be the location of all official acts of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-4)
§ 39.24 EMERGENCY POWERS.
   During any disaster as hereinabove defined, the Mayor and City Council shall
have all necessary emergency powers to care for the citizens of this city, and
for the maintenance of any refugees or displaced persons.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-5)
§ 39.25 SUSPENSION OF FISCAL LIMITATIONS.
   During such emergency, the normal fiscal limitations on contracting,
purchasing and obtaining bids shall be suspended and the Mayor and City Council
shall have all necessary authority to purchase such supplies as necessary or to
utilize private property to the extent commensurate with the needs of the
community.
(Prior Code, § 4-3B-6)
CHAPTER 40: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
40.01   Organization; conflicting provisions
   
40.02   Definitions
   
40.03   Jurisdiction
   
40.04   Judges
   
40.05   Chief of Police; writs or processes
   
40.06   Clerk of the Court
   
40.07   Prosecuting Attorney
   
40.08   Rules of Court
   
40.09   Written complaints; ordinance violations
   
40.10   Traffic ordinance violations
   
40.11   Traffic bail bond procedures
   
40.12   Creation of Traffic Violations Bureau
   
40.13   Summons for arrest
   
40.14   Form of arrest warrant
   
40.15   Bail or bond procedures
   
40.16   Arraignment and pleadings by defendant
   
40.17   Trials and judgments
   
40.18   Sentencing
   
40.19   Imprisonment; work by prisoners
   
40.20   Witness fees
   
40.21   Jury trials
   
40.22   Fines and costs
   
40.23   Penalty assessment
   
40.24   Reporting requirement applicable to methamphetamine related cases
§ 40.01 ORGANIZATION; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the Municipal
Criminal Court of the city, as put into operation by resolution duly passed and
filed in accordance with law, as authorized by 11 O.S. §§ 27-101 and 27-102. To
the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinances of this city, the provisions of this chapter
shall control. The Court shall be operative on and after February 12, 1969.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)
§ 40.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
city.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Pryor Creek.
   CLERK. The Clerk of this city, including any deputy or member of the office
staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk’s office.
   COURT. The Municipal Court of the City of Pryor Creek.
   JUDGE. The Judge of the Municipal Court, aforesaid, including any Acting
Judge or Alternate Judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state
and this chapter.
   MUNICIPALITY or THIS MUNICIPALITY. The City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
   THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The District Court judicial district of the State of
Oklahoma, wherein the government of this city is situated.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2)
§ 40.03 JURISDICTION.
   The Court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this city is charged,
including any such prosecutions transferred to the Court in accordance with
applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3)
§ 40.04 JUDGES.
   (A)   Qualifications. There shall be one Judge of the Court. A Judge shall
be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state and a resident of, or
having an office in, this county. A Judge who is a licensed attorney may engage
in the practice of law in other courts, but he or she shall not accept
employment inconsistent with his or her duties as Judge, or arising out of
facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of
the Court, pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings
therein. He or she may serve as Judge of other Municipal Courts, if such
service may be accomplished consistently with his or her duties as Judge of
this Court, with the consent of the Mayor and City Council. If no licensed
attorney residing in the county is willing to accept appointment as Judge, any
suitable person who is a resident of the city or who maintains an office in the
city, of the age of 25 years and of good moral character, may be appointed
Judge of the Municipal Court.
   (B)   Term. The official term of the Judge shall coincide with the term of
the Mayor, which makes the Judge’s appointment. Each Judge, unless sooner
removed for proper cause, shall serve until his or her successor is appointed
and qualified.
   (C)   Appointment. Judges and alternate Judges shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council. A proposed amendment shall be
submitted in writing to the City Council at the next to the last regularly
scheduled meeting prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take
effect, and shall be acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The
City Council may decide upon the proposed appointment by a majority vote of a
quorum present and acting. Failure of decision upon a proposed appointment
shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council, unless the Mayor, in writing, withdraws the proposed appointment.
   (D)   Alternate Judge. There shall be appointed for each Judge of the Court,
an alternate Judge, possessed of the same qualifications required of the Judge
in this chapter. His or her appointment shall be for the same term and made in
the same manner as the Judge. He or she shall sit as acting Judge of the Court
in any case if the Judge is absent from the Court, unable to act as Judge or
disqualified from acting as Judge in the case.
   (E)   Acting Judge. If at any time there is no Judge or alternate Judge duly
appointed and qualified available to sit as Judge, the Mayor shall appoint some
person, possessing the qualifications required by this chapter, for the Judge,
who shall preside as acting Judge over the Court in the disposition of pending
matters until such time as a Judge or alternate Judge shall be available.
   (F)   Compensation.
      (1)   Judge. The compensation of the Judge shall be as established by the
City Council.
      (2)   Alternate or Acting Judge. The compensation of an alternate or
acting Judge shall be as established by the City Council.
   (G)   Removal.
      (1)   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the City Council,
for the causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of this state for the
removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the
filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to
constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and
filed by:
         (a)   The Mayor; or
         (b)   Twenty five or more qualified electors of the city. Verification
of the number of qualifications of electors shall be executed by one or more of
the petitioners.
      (2)   The City Council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the Judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing,
the Judge shall be entitled to:
         (a)   Representation by counsel;
         (b)   Present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him
or her; and
         (c)   Have all evidence against him or her present in open hearing.
      (3)   So far as they can be made applicable, the provisions of the
Oklahoma Administrative Procedure Act governing individual proceedings (75 O.S.
§§ 309 through 317, as amended) shall govern removal proceedings hereunder.
Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority
of all members of the City Council, in favor of such removal.
   (H)   Vacancy.
      (1)   Conditions. A vacancy in the office of Judge shall occur if the
incumbent:
         (a)   Dies;
         (b)   Resigns;
         (c)   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
         (d)   Is removed and the removal proceedings have been affirmed
finally in judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
      (2)   Appointment of successor. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the
office of Judge, the Mayor shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment is made.
   (I)   Disqualification; change of venue. In prosecutions before the Court,
no change of venue shall be allowed; but the Judge before whom the case is
pending may certify his or her disqualifications or he or she may be
disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure provided by
law for courts of record. If a Judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard
by an alternate or acting Judge, appointed as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-4)
§ 40.05 CHIEF OF POLICE; WRITS OR PROCESSES.
   All writs and process of the Court shall be directed, in his or her official
title, to the Chief of Police, who shall be the principal officer of the Court.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-5)
§ 40.06 CLERK OF THE COURT.
   (A)   Designated; duties. The Clerk or a deputy designated by him or her
shall be the Clerk of the Court. He or she shall assist the Judge in recording
the proceedings of the Court and in preparing writs, processes and other
papers. He or she shall administer oaths required in proceedings of the Court.
He or she shall enter all pleadings, processes and proceeding in the docket of
the Court. He or she shall perform such other clerical duties relating to the
proceedings of the Court as the Judge shall direct. He or she shall receive and
receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits and sums of money payable to the Court.
He or she shall pay to the City Treasurer all money so received by him or her,
except such special deposits for fees as shall be received to be disbursed by
him or her for special purposes. All money paid to the City Treasurer shall be
placed in the General Fund of the city or in such other fund as the City
Council may direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the city
government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in
which it is placed.
   (B)   Bond required. The Clerk of the Court shall give bond in the form
provided by 11 O.S. § 27-111. When approved, it shall be filed with the City
Clerk and retained in the city archives. (Refer to Appendix A following this
code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-2-6)
§ 40.07 PROSECUTING ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney or his or her duly designated assistant shall be the
prosecuting officer of the Court.
   (B)   He or she may also prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances
of the city.
   (C)   He or she shall be authorized, in his or her discretion, to prosecute
and resist appeals, proceedings in error and review from this Court to any
other court of the state and to represent the city in all proceedings arising
out of matters in this Court.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-7)
§ 40.08 RULES OF COURT.
   (A)   Authority to prescribe. The Judge may prescribe rules consistent with
the laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city for the proper
conduct of the business of the Court.
   (B)   Enforcement. Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the
Judge or by the Court may be enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison
for contempt committed as to him or her while holding Court, or committed
against process issued by him or her, in the same manner and to the same extent
as the District Courts of this state.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-8)
§ 40.09 WRITTEN COMPLAINTS; ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   All prosecutions for violation of ordinances of the city shall be styled
“The City of Pryor Creek vs. (naming defendant or defendants)”. Except as
provided hereinafter, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing of a
written compliant subscribed and verified by the person making complaint and
setting forth concisely the offense charged and approved for filing by the City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-9)
§ 40.10 TRAFFIC ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Citation; procedure. If a police officer observes facts which he or
she believes constitute a violation of the traffic ordinances of this city, in
lieu of arresting such a person, he or she may take his or her name, address,
operator’s license number and registered license number of the motor vehicle
involved, and any other pertinent and necessary information, and may issue him
or her in writing, in form prescribed by the Mayor or his or her duly
designated delegate, a traffic citation embracing the above information, and
also stating the traffic violation alleged to have occurred, and notifying him
or her to answer to the charge against him or her at a time, not later than the
date specified in the citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise
of the alleged violator, endorsed on the citation, to answer as specified, may
then release the person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is
issued fails to answer as prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be
filed and the case shall be prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Authority of officer. If the alleged traffic violation is committed by
a nonresident or resident of this city, the police officer may:
      (1)   Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set
out in division (A) of this section pending his or her appearance on a day
certain in Court;
      (2)   Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense
charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or
      (3)   Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person
either shall be taken immediately before the Judge for further proceedings
according to law or shall have bail fixed for his or her release in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon
giving his or her written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in
division (A) of this section, the person shall be released from custody.
   (C)   Parking violations. If the alleged offense be a violation of an
ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any
regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator be not present,
the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to
come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that
prescribed in divisions (A) or (B) of this section, with such variation as the
circumstances require. The operator of this vehicle shall be under the same
obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him or her
personally under divisions (A) or (B) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-10)
§ 40.11 TRAFFIC BAIL BOND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Conditions for release on personal recognizance. In addition to other
provisions of law for posting bail, any person, whether a resident of this
state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for
a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law or city traffic ordinance, shall
be released by the arresting officer upon personal recognizance if:
      (1)   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States, or any party jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact;
      (2)   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
      (3)   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation; and
      (4)   The violation does not constitute:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   Negligent homicide;
         (c)   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         (d)   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver’s license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial
or cancellation;
         (f)   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         (g)   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in divisions
(A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(f) of this section;
         (h)   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         (i)   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   (B)   Eligibility; duty of officer.
      (1)   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided for in division (A) of this section, then the
arresting officer shall:
         (a)   Designate the traffic charge;
         (b)   Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license
on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state
and expiration date;
         (c)   Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information;
         (d)   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
         (e)   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear
as provided for in the citation.
      (2)   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person’s drivers license in this state, or in
the nonresident’s home state pursuant to the nonresident violator compact.
   (C)   State law procedures applicable. Procedures for arraignment,
continuances and scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo
contendere, posting bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest
warrants, and requests for suspension of drivers license, shall be required in
state law, 22 O.S. §§ 1115.1 through 1115.5.
   (D)   Plea of guilty or nolo contendere. A defendant released upon personal
recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the
violation charged at any time before he or she is required to appear for
arraignment by indicating such plea on the copy of the citation furnished to
him or her or on a legible copy thereof, together with the date of the plea and
his or her signature. The defendant shall be responsible for assuring full
payment of the fine and costs to the Court Clerk. The defendant shall not use
currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere as provided for in this division (D), such plea shall be
accepted by the Court and the amount of the fine and costs shall be as
prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or as prescribed by the
Court.
   (E)   Failure to plea or appear.
      (1)   If, pursuant to the provisions of division (D) of this section, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the Court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant and the Municipal or District Court Clerk, within
120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting
officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that:
         (a)   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         (b)   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         (c)   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine or made any other
arrangement with the Court to satisfy the citation; and
         (d)   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      (2)   The Court Clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety
to either suspend the defendant’s driver’s license to operate a motor vehicle
in this state, or notify the defendant’s home state and request suspension of
the defendant’s driver’s license in accordance with the provisions of the
nonresident violator compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety. The Court Clerk
shall not process the notification and request provided for in this division
(E)(2) if, with respect to such charges:
         (a)   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed or otherwise settled the case;
         (b)   The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a
signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         (c)   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
         (d)   A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the date
the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   (F)   Records maintenance. The Court Clerk shall maintain a record of each
request for driver’s license suspension submitted to the State Department of
Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of this section. When the Court or
Court Clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles
the citation, makes other arrangements with the defendant or otherwise closes
the case, the Court Clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the
defendant personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at
such other address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the Court or
Court Clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on
the citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of the nonresident violator
compact, and shall in all other cases, notify the State Department of Public
Safety of the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for
notification shall be approved by the State Department of Public Safety;
provided, however, the Court or Court Clerk’s failure to furnish such proof or
notice in the manner provided for in this division (F) shall in no event create
any civil liability upon the Court, the Court Clerk, the state or any political
subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee thereof,
but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon
request.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-11)
§ 40.12 CREATION OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   Established. There may be established a Traffic Violations Bureau for
the city. The Judge may establish rules, consistent with the laws of the state
and with the ordinances of this city, for the Traffic Violations Bureau.
   (B)   Staff. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be staffed by court
personnel and be physically separate and apart from the Police Department.
   (C)   Acceptance of fines. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall accept fines
which may be paid in lieu of a court appearance for such traffic offenses as
may be designated by the Judge under the Court’s rules. The schedule of fines
shall be adopted by the City Council from time to time by motion or resolution.
A copy shall be kept in the Court Clerk’s office.
   (D)   Excluded offenses. In no event shall payment of a fine without court
appearance be accepted in the Traffic Violations Bureau for the following
offenses:
      (1)   A second or subsequent offense of the same violation within a 12-
month period;
      (2)   Driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs or
actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or drugs;
      (3)   A driver’s license offense; or
      (4)   An offense punishable by fine of more than $100.
   (E)   Status of payment to bureau. Payment of any fine to the Traffic
Violations Bureau shall be deemed a final determination of the cause against
the defendant. In no event shall any such payment be introduced as evidence in
any civil cause arising out of the offense charged. (Refer to Appendix A
following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-2-12)
§ 40.13 SUMMONS FOR ARREST.
   (A)   Issuance. Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any
ordinance, the Judge, unless he or she determines to issue a warrant of arrest,
or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been
arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the
person charged, specifying his or her address or place of residence, if known,
stating the offense with which he or she is charged and giving him or her
notice to answer the charge in the Court on a certain day as specified after
the summons is served upon him or her, and including such other pertinent
information as may be necessary.
   (B)   Service; failure to appear. The summons shall be served by delivering
a copy to the defendant personally. If he or she fails to appear and to answer
the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his or
her arrest, as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-13)
§ 40.14 FORM OF ARREST WARRANT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this city, upon the
filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the City Attorney or by
the Judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the
following form:
The City of Pryor Creek to the Police Chief of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the
offense (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been committed
and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor forthwith
to arrest the above named defendant and bring the above named (name of
defendant) before me, at the Municipal courtroom.
Witness my hand this __________ day of ______________, 19________.
Judge of the Municipal Court Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
   (B)   Execution of warrant. It is the duty of the Police Chief, personally,
or through a duly constituted member of the police force of this city, or
through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as
promptly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-14)
§ 40.15 BAIL OR BOND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Established. Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in
response to citation or summons, or at any time before trial, before or after
arraignment, the defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail
for his or her appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this
chapter or the Judge, who shall prescribe appropriate rules of Court for the
receipt of bail. In case of arrests made at night or under other conditions or
emergency, or when the Judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the
Chief of Police, or his or her designated representative, to accept a temporary
cash bond of not less than $10 nor more than the maximum monetary penalty
provided by ordinance for the offense charged.
   (B)   Schedule. A bail bond schedule may be adopted by the Judge or City
Council and be amended from time to time. (Refer to Appendix A following this
code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-2-15)
§ 40.16 ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEADINGS BY DEFENDANT.
   Upon making his or her appearance before the Court, the defendant shall be
arraigned. The Judge or City Attorney shall read the complaint to the
defendant, inform him or her of his or her legal rights, including the right of
trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him
or her whether he or she pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads
guilty, the Court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the
matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is
not for jury trial, the Court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for
hearing at a later date.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-16)
§ 40.17 TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Postponement. Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause
shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
   (B)   Presence of defendant. The defendant must be present in person at the
trial, or be represented by counsel if permitted by the Judge.
   (C)   District Court procedures applicable. In all trials, as to matters not
covered in this chapter, or by the statutes relating to Municipal Criminal
Courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the Supreme Court of the state, the
procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the District Courts shall
apply to the extent that they can be made effective.
   (D)   Judgment rendered. If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted
after the trial, the Court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty
within the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence
accordingly.
   (E)   Judgment entered. At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered
immediately by the Judge who shall cause it to be entered in his or her docket.
   (F)   Discharge for acquittal. If judgment is of acquittal, and the
defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he or she must be
discharged at once.
   (G)   Imprisonment until satisfaction of fine. A judgment that the defendant
pay a fine may also direct that he or she be imprisoned until the fine is
satisfied at the rate of one day imprisonment for each $5 of fine or as set out
in division (H) of this section for defendants who are without means to make
such payment.
   (H)   Inability to pay fine. If the defendant is without means to pay the
fine or costs, the Municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to be
entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the District Court of the
county wherein the status of government is situated, where it shall be entered
upon the District Court judgment docket and shall have the full force and
effect of a District Court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be
available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other
judgment creditor.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-17)
§ 40.18 SENTENCING.
   (A)   Authority of Judge. The Judge may suspend, modify, defer or reduce a
sentence in accordance with 11 O.S. §§ 27-123 and 27-124.
   (B)   Judge licensed to practice law. A Judge who is licensed to practice
law in this state in imposing judgment and sentence, at his or her discretion,
is empowered to modify, reduce, or suspend or defer the imposition of such
sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for a period not to
exceed six months from the date of sentence, under such terms or conditions as
the Judge may specify. Procedures relating to suspension of the judgment or
costs or both shall be as provided in 11 O.S. § 27-123. Upon completion of the
probation term, the defendant shall be discharged without a court judgment of
guilt, and the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged
from the record and the charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action.
Upon a finding of the Court that the conditions of the probation have been
violated, the Municipal Judge may enter a judgment of guilty. The Judge may
continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period of time not to
exceed six months from the date of sentence. At the expiration of such period
of time, the Judge may allow the City Attorney to amend the charge to a lesser
offense. If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee of not less
than $150 and not to exceed $500 shall be imposed as costs in the case. The
cost will be collected by the City Court Clerk with one-half being deposited in
city’s General Fund and balance training for City Clerk’s office. (See Appendix
A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-2-18) (Ord. 2010-11, passed 5-4-2010)
§ 40.19 IMPRISONMENT; WORK BY PRISONERS.
   (A)   Execution; authority. All sentences of imprisonment shall be executed
by the Chief of Police, and any person convicted of a violation of any
ordinance of the city and sentenced to imprisonment shall be confined in the
city jail, in the discretion of the Court, for the time specified in the
sentence; provided, however, the Court may, in lieu of imprisonment, order the
defendant to engage in a term of community service without compensation.
   (B)   Copy certificated. If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is
entered, a copy thereof, certified by the Court Clerk, shall be delivered to
the Chief of Police, the Sheriff of the county or other appropriate police
officer. Such copy shall be sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
   (C)   Work on public property; credit. All prisoners confined to jail on
conviction or on plea of guilty may be compelled, if their health permits, to
work on the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings or other public
premises or property. For each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited
for serving one day of imprisonment under his or her sentence.
   (D)   Supervision. The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the City
Council, shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the
department in charge of the place where the work is to be performed, himself,
herself or some person designated by him or her, shall oversee the work. If a
guard is necessary, the Chief of Police shall make provision therefor.
   (E)   Payment of jail costs by inmate.
      (1)   The Court shall require a person who is actually received into
custody at a jail facility or who is confined in a city or county jail or
holding facility, for any offense, to pay the jail facility or holding facility
the costs of incarceration, both before and after conviction, upon conviction
or receiving a deferred sentence. The costs of incarceration shall be collected
by the Clerk of the Court as provided for collection of costs and fines, which
shall be subject to review under procedures set forth in Rule 8.1 et seq., of
the Rules of Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals and Appendix A of this code of
ordinances. Costs of incarceration shall include booking, receiving and
processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care, and
psychiatric services. The costs for incarceration shall be an amount equal to
the actual cost of the services and shall be determined by the Chief of Police
for city jails and holding facilities, by the county sheriff for county jails
or by contract amount, if applicable. In the event a person requires emergency
medical treatment for an injury or condition that threatens life or threatens
the loss of use of a limb prior to being actually received into the custody of
any jail facility, the provisions of 21 O.S. § 533 shall apply to taking
custody, medical care and cost responsibility. The cost of incarceration shall
be paid by the Court Clerk, when collected, to the municipality, holding
facility, county or other public entity responsible for the operation of such
facility where the person was held at any time. Except for medical costs, 10%
of any amount collected by the Court Clerk shall be paid to the Municipal
Attorney’s or District Attorney’s office, and the remaining amount shall be
paid to municipality, the remaining amount shall be deposited with the public
entity responsible for the operation of the jail facility where the person was
held at any time. The Court shall order the defendant to reimburse all actual
costs of incarceration, upon conviction or upon entry of a deferred judgment
and sentence unless the defendant is a mentally ill person as defined by 43A
O.S. § 1-103. The Chief of Police shall give notice to the defendant of the
actual costs owed before any court ordered costs are collected. The defendant
shall have an opportunity to object to the amount of costs solely on the
grounds that the number of days served are incorrect. If no objection is made,
the costs may be collected in the amount stated in the notice to the defendant.
The municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of the
jail may collect costs of incarceration ordered by the Court from the jail
account of the inmate. If the funds are insufficient to satisfy the actual
incarceration costs ordered by the Court, the municipality or other public
entity responsible for the operation of the jail is authorized to collect the
remaining balance of the incarceration costs by civil action. When the
municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of the jail
collects any court ordered incarceration costs from the jail account of the
inmate or by criminal or civil action, the Court Clerk shall be notified of the
amount collected. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
      (2)   Except as may otherwise be provided in 21 O.S. § 533, any offender
receiving routine or emergency medical services or medications or injured
during the commission of a felony or misdemeanor offense and administered any
medical care shall be required to reimburse the municipality or other public
entity responsible for the operation of the jail, the full amount paid by the
municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of the jail
for any medical care or treatment administered to such offender during any
period of incarceration or when the person was actually received into custody
for any reason in that jail facility. The municipality or other public entity
responsible for the operation of the jail may deduct the costs of medical care
and treatment as authorized by 19 O.S. § 531. If the funds collected from the
jail account of the inmate are insufficient to satisfy the actual medical costs
paid, the municipality or other public entity responsible for the operation of
the jail shall be authorized to collect the remaining balance of the medical
care and treatment by civil actions.
      (3)   Costs of incarceration shall be a debt of the inmate owed to the
municipality, county or other public entity responsible for the operation of
the jail and may be collected as provided by law for collection of any other
civil debt or criminal penalty.
      (4)   The Court shall not waive the costs of incarceration in their
entirety. However, if the Court determines that a reduction in the fine, costs
and costs of incarceration is warranted, the Court shall equally apply the same
percentage reduction to the fine, costs, and costs of incarceration owed by the
defendant.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-19) (Ord. 2010-15, passed 6-1-2010)
§ 40.20 WITNESS FEES.
   (A)   Authorized; conditions. Witnesses in any proceeding in the Court,
other than the police officers or peace officers, shall be entitled to a sum
per each day of attendance, plus mileage for each mile actually and necessarily
traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance. However, no
witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period
of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must
deposit with the Court Clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one
day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, and such deposit shall be
returned to the defendant if the defendant is found not guilty, but such
deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit
setting out:
      (1)   The names of no more than three witnesses;
      (2)   That the defendant, by reason of his or her poverty, is unable to
provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
      (3)   That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and
      (4)   That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his or her
proper defense.
   (B)   Paid by city. The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city.
(See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-2-20)
§ 40.21 JURY TRIALS.
   (A)   When available. In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances
punishable by fine of more than $500, excluding costs, or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days or by both fine and imprisonment, trial is by jury unless
waived by the defendant. If trial by jury is waived, trial shall be to the
Court.
   (B)   Composition of jury. A jury in the Municipal Court shall consist of
six jurors, men or women, citizens 18 years of age or older of the city,
possessing the qualifications of jurors in the District Court in the state.
   (C)   Compensation. Jurors shall receive for their services the sum of $15
per day. The claims for such compensation must be verified as other claims
against the city are verified. Jurors shall be paid out of the City Court Fund.
(See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-2-21) (Ord. 2007-5, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 40.22 FINES AND COSTS.
   (A)   Fees. If judgment of conviction is entered, the Clerk of the Court
shall tax the cost to the defendant, which shall be in the amount of $30 for
each case filed, plus all statutory fees required to be collected, plus the
fees and mileage of witnesses and jurors, and a $10 fee of which will be
deposited in an account for the use of police training and capital outlay less
all remittances required by law but the total amount of the fine may not exceed
the amount set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances and up to 30 days in jail. (See Appendix A of
this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Debt collection. The Clerk of the Court seeking to collect a debt,
unpaid fines and costs of final judgment of at least $50 from an individual who
has filed a state income tax return may file a claim with the State Tax
Commission requesting that the amount owed to the agency (City Municipal Court)
be deducted from any state income tax refund due to that individual, pursuant
to 68 O.S. § 205.1, as amended by § 1, Chapter 135, OSL 2007.
   (C)   Payment of jail cost by inmate. Pursuant to 22 O.S. § 979A any person
confined to the city jail for any offense shall be required to pay the city $22
per day. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.) The cost of incarceration
shall be collected by the City Court Clerk in addition to the fines and costs,
with one-half to be deposited in the Training and Capital Improvement Fund for
city’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-22) (Ord. 2009-7, passed 10-20-2009)
§ 40.23 PENALTY ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Order to pay. Any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine
of $10 or more, or by incarceration or any person forfeiting bond when charged
for such an offense, shall be ordered by the Court to pay $10 as a separate
penalty assessment and $150 as a laboratory analysis fee, if applicable
pursuant to 20 O.S. § 1313.2C, and $150 as a DNA fee if applicable pursuant to
20 O.S. § 1313.2G, which assessment and fee shall be in addition to and not in
substitution for any and all fines and penalties otherwise provided for by law
for such offense. The Court shall provide for separate bail for the penalty
assessment. A defendant admitted to bail on an undertaking by a surety may
include the amount of the assessment in the undertaking.
   (B)   Collection; administrative fee. Upon conviction or bond forfeiture,
the Court shall collect the penalty assessment deposited in an account created
for that purpose. As an administrative fee for handling funds collected as a
penalty assessment, the Court is authorized to retain $0.14 of such monies and
may also retain all interest accrued thereon prior to the due date provided in
accordance with 20 O.S. § 1313.2(E). The remainder of such monies shall be
forwarded quarterly by the Court Clerk to the State Treasurer. Deposits shall
be due July 15 for the preceding quarter ending June 30, October 15 for the
preceding quarter ending September 30, January 15 for the preceding quarter
ending December 31, and April 15 for the preceding quarter ending March 31.
There shall be a penalty for failure to make timely deposits, pursuant to 20
O.S. § 1313.2(D).
   (C)   Convicted defined. As used in this section, CONVICTED means any final
adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment. (See Appendix
A of this code of ordinances.)
   (D)   Collection services. The governing body of a municipality may enter
into a contract with a collection agency for the provision of collection
services for one or more of the following items:
      (1)   Debts and accounts receivable including, but not limited to, unpaid
fees, penalties, interest, and other sums due the municipality, as applicable;
or
      (2)   Court penalties, costs, fines, and fees in cases in Municipal Court
in which the accused has failed to appear or otherwise failed to satisfy a
monetary obligation ordered by the Court.
   (E)   Collection fee. A governing body of a municipality that enters into a
contract with a collection agency pursuant to this section may authorize the
addition of a collection fee in an amount not to exceed 35% on each item
described in division (D) of this section that has been referred by the
municipality to the collection agency for collection. If a municipality enters
into such contract with a collection agency and authorizes the collection fee,
the Court shall order defendants to reimburse the fee arising pursuant to
division (D)(2) of this section and such court ordered fee shall be collected
as provided by law for the collection of any other civil debt or criminal
action.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-23) (Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-6-2001; Ord. 2009-8, passed 10-
20-2009)
§ 40.24 REPORTING REQUIREMENT APPLICABLE TO METHAMPHETAMINE RELATED CASES.
   (A)   In the instance of any person being convicted by trial in the City
Municipal Court, or upon conviction by reason of the entry of a plea of guilty,
or upon the entry of a plea of nolo contendere to a charge under §
133.21 of this code of ordinances involving a precursor or methamphetamine as
contemplated and described by 63 O.S. § 2-701(A), the City Court Clerk shall be
charged with the responsibility of making the report to the State Bureau of
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Control set forth in 63 O.S. § 2-701.
   (B)   The report of the Municipal Court Clerk required by this section shall
be made in the form and manner as may be from time to time required by the
State Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Control.
   (C)   Prior to submitting the report required by this section the Municipal
Court Clerk shall present the report for review to, and obtain approval of the
form and content of the report to be submitted by the City Prosecutor, the City
Judge, and the Chief of Police or the Assistant Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-24) (Ord. 2018-12, passed 3-6-2018)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES SYSTEMS GENERALLY
      
51.   REFUSE AND GARBAGE SERVICES
Charter reference:
   Municipal Utility Board, see Charter Article V, §§
40 through
52
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES SYSTEMS GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Operation of utilities
   
50.02   Access to premises
   
50.03   Obstructing utility easements, rights-of-way
   
50.04   Rules and regulations adopted by reference
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 OPERATION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   Management of systems. The Municipal Utility Board shall have the
care, custody and management of the existing electric system, water system, gas
distribution system, street lighting system and sewage disposal system, and may
enlarge and extend them as the necessity therefor arises, except as otherwise
provided herein. It shall have under its control the complete operation of
these utilities and such others as the people of the city may acquire. All of
these utilities shall be collectively known as the Municipal Utility
Department.
   (B)   Employment. The Municipal Utility Board shall employ all persons
necessary in the operation of the utilities and fix their salaries, conditions
of servitude and terms of office.
   (C)   Adoption of rules and regulations. The Municipal Utility Board shall
adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 8-1-1)
§ 50.02 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to give the personnel of the
Municipal Utility Department free access, at reasonable hours of the day or in
case of emergency at other times, to all parts of buildings and premises served
by the water system, the gas system, the electric system or any other city
owned utility or enterprise, for the purpose of performing their official
duties in connection with such utilities and enterprises. Such personnel shall
have such right of access; provided always, that such personnel are properly
identified.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 OBSTRUCTING UTILITY EASEMENTS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Permanent improvements. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or
intentionally construct or allow to be constructed any permanent improvements
upon real property owned or occupied by them which is burdened by a permanent
utility easement or right-of-way of record in favor of the city or its
Municipal Utility Board.
   (B)   Activities. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or
intentionally conduct or allow to be conducted any activity upon real property
owned or occupied by them which interferes with or obstructs the operation,
maintenance or repairs of the facilities placed upon, in, under or above the
real property by virtue of a permanent utility easement or right of way of
record in favor of the city or its Municipal Utility Board.
   (C)   Knowingly or intentionally committed defined. For the purposes hereof,
a person shall be deemed to have knowingly or intentionally committed the
conduct prohibited herein if after notice of a violation hereunder, the person
fails to remedy the situation within a reasonable period of time depending upon
the particular obstruction.
   (D)   Penalty. Any violation hereof shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Rules and regulations adopted by the Municipal Utility Board are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference, applicable as fully as if set out
at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-4)
Cross-reference:
   Sewage Disposal Code, see §§
150.165 through
150.178
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of rules and regulations of the Municipal Utility Board or of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-5)
CHAPTER 51: REFUSE AND GARBAGE SERVICES
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Administration
   
51.03   Accumulation prohibited
   
51.04   Duty to request services
   
51.05   Containers
   
51.06   Wrapping of garbage
   
51.07   Collection
   
51.08   Charges for collection and disposal
   
51.09   Reduced rates
   
51.10   Restriction on collection and transportation
   
51.11   Ownership of refuse materials
   
51.12   Burying
   
51.13   Unauthorized disposal
   
51.14   Hazardous materials
   
51.15   Deposit upon public ways
   
51.16   Prohibited practices
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. A person with whom the Pryor Public Works Authority has a
contract to collect and dispose of refuse.
   GARBAGE. The solid or semisolid animal and vegetable waste resulting from
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods, including cans, bottles
and cartons in which it was received and wrapping in which it may be placed for
disposal.
   PERSON. A person, individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust, other legal entity having proprietary interests in a
premises or other legal entity having responsibility for an act.
   PRYOR PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY. A statutory trust created under the laws of
the state and by the Mayor and City Council.
   REFUSE. All solid waste from residential, commercial or industrial premises.
It shall include semi- liquid or wet wastes with insufficient moisture or other
liquid content to be free flowing. It shall not include, except for minor
amounts incidental to other wastes, any refuse resulting from building,
excavating, demolition or remodeling work, or any construction work, nor shall
it include stumps, tree trunks, tree trimmings and limbs resulting from
operations of professional tree trimmers, or the tree trimmings resulting from
the cutting down or the topping of any tree, regardless of who performs the
work, nor shall it include refuse resulting from tornado, cyclone, extreme
windstorms, ice storms, flood or other acts of God, or the burning of any
building.
   SANITATION OFFICER. The Mayor and City Council of the city or such other
employee of the city as they shall authorize to act in enforcement of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-1)
§ 51.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Collection authority. All refuse and garbage accumulated within the
city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the authority or by the
employees of the authority, or by contractors specifically authorized to
collect or dispose of refuse and garbage or by persons authorized to dispose of
their own refuse and garbage.
   (B)   Contract for services. The authority shall have the right to enter
into a contract with any responsible person for collection and disposal of
refuse and garbage; providing, that said contractor shall collect and dispose
of all refuse within the city, the terms of said contract to be awarded to a
responsible person after proper negotiation or after receiving bids, whichever,
in the judgment of the authority, shall be deemed proper; provided, that the
contract for the collection and disposal of “refuse”, as herein defined, shall
in no way conflict with the terms and conditions of this chapter. Contracts
entered into by the authority for collection and disposal of trash, garbage or
refuse prior to the effective date hereof or now in force are hereby confirmed,
ratified and validated.
   (C)   Adopt regulations. The sanitation officer is hereby authorized to
formulate reasonable rules and regulations, including point of collection,
subject to approval by the City Council, necessary to carry out the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Authority to enter private premises. Solid waste collectors, employed
by the authority or operating under contract with the authority, are hereby
authorized to enter in and upon private property for the purpose of collecting
solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter.
   (E)   Permit required; annual permit fee. No person, firm, corporation or
other commercial entity, other than the contracted service, shall collect,
transport, or dispose of solid waste within the city limits without a permit
issued by the city, City Clerk’s department. The permit shall be issued only
upon the payment of an annual permit fee as established (see
Appendix A of this code of ordinances) per person, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity and only after the City Clerk certifies that for which a
permit is sought complies with the requirements of this chapter and other
applicable rules and regulations and that each vehicle is readily cleanable and
so constructed as to prevent the spillage or scattering of solid waste. The
permit may be suspended or revoked if deemed necessary to the public welfare by
the Mayor or designee. Operating without the required permits as set forth by
this section shall be an offense punishable by a $500 fine.
   (F)   Insurance requirement. Prior to permit being issued the following
proof of insurance requirements must be provided: bodily injury liability,
property damage liability, automobile bodily injury liability and automobile
property damage minimum $500,000 each occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-2) (Ord. 2010-13, passed 5-18-2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Offensive. No person shall store, collect, maintain or display on
private property refuse or garbage that is offensive or hazardous to the health
and safety of the public or which creates offensive odors or a condition of
unsightliness. Storage, collection, maintenance or display of wastes or solid
wastes in violation of this section shall be considered to be a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Hazardous. No person shall permit to accumulate quantities of refuse,
papers, trash, ashes or other waste material, within or close to any building
in the city, unless the same is stored in containers in such a manner as to not
create a health or fire hazard.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-3) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 DUTY TO REQUEST SERVICES.
   (A)   To assist in maintaining the general sanitation of the city, it shall
be the duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any
premises located on a regularly established garbage and refuse route to notify
the City Clerk at the beginning of such occupancy or on the effective date
hereof and request, accept and use garbage and refuse pick up and collection
service.
   (B)   The failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to
make such request shall not prevent nor in any way impair or impede the city
from adding the address of such premises to the proper garbage and refuse
collection route records and providing such service and otherwise enforcing by
appropriate action the regulatory measures herein prescribed and causing the
fees or charges therefor to be paid.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-4)
§ 51.05 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Required. It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing,
operating, leasing or renting any premises or any place where garbage or refuse
accumulates to provide and at all times to maintain in good order and repair on
any said premises a portable container or containers for refuse storage of
sufficient capacity and of sufficient numbers to accommodate and securely hold
all of the garbage and refuse that may accumulate between the regularly
scheduled collection. All solid waste containers shall be stored upon private
property unless the owners shall have been granted written permission from the
city to use public property for such purpose.
   (B)   Capacity, construction and design. Refuse containers and garbage
containers shall not be more than 32 gallons, nor less than ten gallons in
nominal capacity; except where only one container is used, in which case this
container may be less than ten gallons in capacity. Containers shall be water-
proof, rat-proof and fitted with a tight lid. The containers shall have
handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices or features. The containers
shall be of a type originally manufactured for garbage or refuse, with tapered
sides for easy emptying. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy construction.
The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed 80 pounds.
Galvanized iron and similar metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers,
and plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather, may be
used. Disposable bags manufactured for garbage and refuse disposal, in suitable
frames or containers, shall be acceptable. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and
similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. On premises where
excessive amounts of refuse accumulates or individual storage methods of such
cans or bags are impractical, the occupant or the contractor may provide and
maintain suitable bulk containers for the on premises storage of refuse. The
container shall have the capacity and shall be equipped with appurtenances for
attaching mechanical lifting devices which are compatible with the equipment.
Containers shall be constructed of durable rust and corrosion resistant
material which is easy to clean. All containers shall be equipped with tight-
fitting lids or doors to prevent entrance of insects or rodents. The doors and
lids shall be constructed and maintained so that they can be easily opened and
closed. The containers shall be of water-tight, leak-proof and weather-proof
construction and design. Covers, lids and doors on containers used for storage
of refuse and garbage shall be kept closed at all times, except when depositing
material in the container or removing the contents therefrom.
   (C)   Placement required; exception, bundles. All refuse and garbage shall
be placed in suitable containers; except, it shall not be necessary to place
books, boxes, magazines or newspapers in containers; provided, that they are
secured tightly in bundles or completely contained in disposal boxes or bags
not larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. Also, tree limbs and brush may be
securely tied in bundles not larger than 48 inches long and 18 inches in
diameter.
   (D)   Noncomplying refuse or garbage cans. Baskets, boxes and noncomplying
refuse or garbage cans or containers shall be considered disposal refuse and
may be removed by the contractor if they are the proper size and otherwise
acceptable for collection; or shall be left uncollected if they are larger than
the allowable size or unacceptable for collection.
   (E)   Large bulky items. Larger bulky items such as furniture, large tree
limbs and appliances that cannot be reduced to fit in approved containers will
not be collected, except by separate agreement with the Authority or
contractor.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-5)
§ 51.06 WRAPPING OF GARBAGE.
   Within the corporate limits of the city, all garbage or refuse consisting of
waste and animal and vegetable matter which may attract flies, dogs or rodents
shall be placed in water-proof bags or otherwise wrapped in such a way as to
prevent leakage of liquids, and placed or stored until collection in suitable
containers as described in §
51.05 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-6)
§ 51.07 COLLECTION.
   (A)   Duty to place for collection; frequency. The Authority or its
authorized contractor shall collect from the residential areas of the city not
less than weekly and from designated business routes food bags and refuse;
provided, that it shall be the duty of any person in possession or control of
any premises to place the storage containers required in §
51.05 of this chapter in a convenient location for collection as designated by
the city and the contractor; whereby collectors can obtain the same without
going into buildings, garages, locked gates or fenced yards with dogs. All
containers and grounds immediately around the same shall be kept in a safe and
sanitary condition at all times.
   (B)   Rubble; excessive accumulations. The places having rubble and
excessive accumulations of garbage and refuse shall be included for minimum or
nominal service, but may be excluded from additional service provided by the
Authority, the option resting with the Authority and such accumulations shall
then be removed and disposed of at the expense of the owner or person having
same in charge; provided however, that the owner or person having such
accumulations in charge shall secure from the City Clerk a written permit for
the scheduled removal and disposal of the same, unless the removals are
performed by arrangement with the contractor.
   (C)   Bulky, heavy materials. Heavy accumulation such as brush, broken
concrete, ashes, sand or gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky,
heavy materials shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person
controlling the same under the direction of the Sanitation Officer.
   (D)   Water closets, stables and pens. It shall be the duty of any person,
owner, lessee, agent of the owner or lessee, or person having the charge and
control of any premises in the city on which there is located a water closet,
privy, stable, cow shed or stock pen or lot, or other place where refuse shall
accumulate, to clean the same and to remove any excrement, filth, manure,
decayed foul or offensive matter therefrom and to place the same not less than
one mile outside the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-7)
§ 51.08 CHARGES FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Authorized. The Authority, in providing the service of collecting and
disposing of all refuse accumulated within the city for the purpose of
preventing unsanitary, unsightly, hazardous, unhealthful and dangerous
conditions caused by the accumulation of garbage and refuse, shall establish
and collect a service charge or fee to defray the cost of maintenance of
service and to pay any person contracting with the Authority for collection and
disposal of garbage and refuse, the fees and charges provided by the contract
for the collection and disposal thereof. Such service charges and fees shall be
computed based on charges to owners or occupants of dwelling units or
commercial establishments as nearly as practicable upon the basis of volume or
time expended in collection and disposal thereof.
   (B)   Billing and collection; delinquency. The charges fixed and imposed by
and pursuant to this section shall be added to the charges made for utility
services under the care, custody and management of the Municipal Utility Board
and shall be billed and collected at the same time and in the same manner as
charges for such utility service, all such charges for utility services. In the
event of a failure to pay the same as they might become due, the city shall
have remedies to collect the same as are or may be authorized by law or equity,
including the right of motion or resolution to be adopted by the Mayor and City
Council, or other proper authority, to discontinue any other services furnished
to such debtor by the city or any subdivision or agency thereof, after
reasonable notice for nonpayment of such indebtedness to the city. The charges
heretofore fixed and imposed for the removal of garbage and refuse from stores,
offices, business houses, restaurants, hotels and other establishments
accumulating garbage and refuse shall remain in full force and effect until
such time as the Mayor and City Council by motion or resolution duly adopted
change such charges. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to furnish the
Municipal Utility Board with true and correct copies of any and all motions or
resolutions fixing or changing the charges made and imposed by or pursuant to
this section immediately following their adoption by the Mayor and City
Council. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 8-2-8)
§ 51.09 REDUCED RATES.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a special rate for city
refuse services for qualified low income/elderly/disabled persons. The rate
applicable will be that rate charged under the contract between the city and/or
the Authority and the contractor who provides said refuse service.
   (B)   Services provided. The services provided hereunder shall consist of
the following:
      (1)   One collection per week;
      (2)   A maximum of 60 gallons or one-third cubic yard collection per
week. The refuse may include household and/or yard trash combined. No
additional refuse or trash will be allowed each collection; and
      (3)   Containers will be picked up where they are located, provided they
are within 100 feet of the curb or traveled portion of the roadway or
accessible alley.
   (C)   Eligibility; determination. Determination as to whether or not an
applicant shall be eligible for the services shall be made by the City Council
and the qualifications for said services and rates to be considered are as
follows:
      (1)   All persons residing at the dwelling, unit, apartment unit, duplex
or triplex unit, or mobile home must be disabled by reason of age (65 or older)
or have a physical disability; and
      (2)   Gross annual income from all sources at the dwelling unit,
apartment unit, duplex or triplex unit, or mobile home shall not exceed the
following:
Number of Persons Living at Address Combined Total Annual Income
Number of Persons Living at Address Combined Total Annual Income
1                                   $5,672
2                                   $7,156
3                                   $9,431
4                                   $12,019
5                                   $14,305
6                                   $16,151
7                                   $18,379
8                                   $20,322
9                                   $24,061
 
   (D)   Procedure; application. Any and all persons desiring to receive said
services and rates must apply in writing, to be approved for such services by
the city. An application shall be filed, which shall include a completed and
notarized refuse certificate, the unexecuted form of which may be requested
from the City Clerk’s office. All application certificates will be checked for
eligibility by the city, with the assistance from the director of the Pryor
Senior Citizens Center. Approval of service and rate eligibility will come by
action of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-9)
§ 51.10 RESTRICTION ON COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION.
   Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to
use the public streets, alleys and ways in this city for transportation of
garbage, trash or other noxious substances. At the times and under the
regulations prescribed by the Sanitation Officer, persons may transport over
the public streets of this city and deposit in an approved landfill or
demolition site, tree limbs, trees, rock, building construction trash and fill
material; provided, that the Sanitation Officer may authorize persons or firms
to utilize the public streets and highways to dispose of their own trash and
refuse between the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) on Saturdays and 12:00 a.m.
(midnight) on Sundays, and on holidays, such authorization to be in writing,
but to be subject to revocation by the Sanitation Officer without notice.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-10) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 OWNERSHIP OF REFUSE MATERIALS.
   Ownership of refuse materials, when placed in the containers by the
occupants or owners of premises upon which refuse accumulates, shall be vested
in the Authority or contractor in the event the Authority delegates its refuse
collection operation to a contractor as herein provided, and shall thereafter
be subject to the exclusive control of the Authority, its employees or
contractors and no person shall meddle with refuse containers or in any way
pilfer or scatter contents thereof, or junk, in any alley or street within the
city limits.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-11) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.12 BURYING.
   No person shall bury refuse at any place within the city or keep, place or
deposit refuse on any public or private grounds or premises whatsoever, except
in containers or receptacles for collection upon premises owned, occupied or
under possession and control of such a person; provided, however, that lawn and
garden trimmings may be composted.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-12) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.13 UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL.
   No person shall haul or cause to be hauled any garbage, refuse or other
waste material without the corporate limits of the city unless such place or
site is operated by the contractor, the Authority or is a sanitary landfill
site, transfer point or disposal facility approved by the State Department of
Health having jurisdiction over the site. In addition, the site or facility
must comply with all applicable health and zoning ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-13) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.14 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   No person shall deposit in any garbage or refuse container or otherwise
offer for collection any hazardous garbage, refuse or waste. Hazardous material
shall be transported by the owner, responsible person or his or her agent to a
place of safe deposit or disposal as prescribed by the Sanitation Officer or
his or her authorized representative. Hazardous materials shall include:
explosive materials; rags or other waste soaked in volatile and inflammable
materials; drugs; poisons, the radioactive materials; highly combustible
materials; soiled dressings, clothing, bedding and/or other wastes contaminated
by infection or contagious disease; and other materials which may present a
special hazard to collection or disposal personnel or equipment or to the
public.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-14) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.15 DEPOSIT UPON PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall throw, rake, deposit, dump, drop or spill litter, waste
material or foreign material upon the streets, sidewalks or other public
rights-of-way within the city. The Mayor may at his or her discretion proclaim
a period when leaves may be placed in the street rights-of-way for collection.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any person under a permit from the city
from encumbering the streets or alleys with building materials or earth as may
be necessary for the purpose of construction, erection, adding to, remodeling
or repairing any building or structure or resulting from demolition operations;
provided, however, that in the event of such encumbering of the streets or
alleys, the contractor, owner or occupant shall remove any and all materials
remaining within ten days of the completion of the work, and shall leave the
said streets or alleys in the same condition that they were in prior to such
use thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-15) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.16 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Deposit on public or private way. Throw, place or deposit any rubbish,
slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse
or waste water in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or watercourse, or
upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in this city;
   (B)   Unauthorized container. Deposit solid waste in any container other
than that owned or leased by him or her under his or her control without
written consent of such owner and or with the intent of avoiding payment of the
refuse service charge;
   (C)   Interference. Interfere with, in any manner, the employees of the
Authority or its contractor in the collection of solid waste; and
   (D)   Unapproved site. Dispose of solid waste in an unapproved site.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-16) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Specified. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by
doing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to be
a nuisance or an offense thereby, or who fails to do any act required by any
such provision, or fails to do any act when such provision declares such
failure to be unlawful or to be an offense, or who violates or fails or refuses
to carry out any lawful order, rule or regulation of any officer of the city or
any lawfully constituted board, body or agency of the city made pursuant to
provisions of this chapter, is guilty of an offense and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   (B)   Injunction or other action. No penalty imposed by and pursuant to
division (A) of this section shall interfere with the right of the city also to
apply to the proper courts of the state for an injunction, writ of mandamus or
other appropriate action against such person.
(Prior Code, § 8-2-17)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, INSPECTION
      
72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
74.   LOADING
      
75.   PEDESTRIANS
      
76.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
77.   RAILROADS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Citation
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Adoption of State Traffic Code
   
70.04   Traffic code controlling; applicability
   
70.05   Boundary line streets
   
70.06   Carts, riding animals, animal drawn vehicles
   
70.07   Coasters, roller skates, similar devices restricted
   
70.08   Emergency vehicles
   
70.09   Crossing fire hose
Enforcement
   
70.20   Enforcement; Traffic Control Division
   
70.21   Directing traffic
   
70.22   Obedience to police and fire officials
   
70.23   Emergency and experimental regulations
   
70.24   Public officers, employees to obey
   
70.25   Persons working on streets, exceptions
   
70.26   Maintenance and construction zones
   
70.27   Driver’s license requirements
   
70.28   Permitting unauthorized driver
   
70.29   Accidents
   
70.30   Citations
   
70.31   Court records; abstract sent to state
   
70.32   Insurance certificate required
   
70.33   Eluding police officer prohibited
Impoundment of Vehicles
   
70.45   Purpose
   
70.46   Place of impoundment
   
70.47   Duration
   
70.48   Authority to impound vehicles
   
70.49   Disabled vehicles
   
70.50   Vehicles on bridge
   
70.51   Arrest and detention of driver
   
70.52   Vehicle constituting traffic hazard
   
70.53   Illegal trespass by vehicle
   
70.54   Overtime parking
   
70.55   Blocking fire exits or hydrants
   
70.56   Intersection parking
   
70.57   Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
   
70.58   Outstanding traffic citations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 CITATION.
   This title and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
“Traffic Code, City of Pryor Creek”, and may so appear upon all official
documents, records or instruments.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of
platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear
of stores, dwellings or buildings.
   AMBULANCE. A motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed or arranged for the
purpose of transporting ill, sick or injured persons.
   BICYCLE. A device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to, and including a highway if
there are buildings within 600 feet of the highway in use for business or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   CENTER LANE. Any clearly marked center lane. If the CENTER LANE is not
marked and no cars are parked on the roadway, then the CENTER LANE is equally
distanced between the curbs or travelled portion of the roadway. In the event a
vehicle is parked on one side of the roadway only, then the CENTER LANE is
equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle toward the street and
curb on the opposite roadway. If vehicles be parked on each side of the
roadway, then the CENTER LANE is equally distanced from the edges of the parked
vehicles.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily
for the transportation of property.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street or roadway.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs; or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway. CROSSWALK also means any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   DOUBLE PARK. Parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another
vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. A person who drives or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or
resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation or stoppage of
traffic movement, or creation of conditions hazardous to normal traffic
movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot or spontaneous assembly of
large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles and
ambulances.
   HIGHWAY. See STREET.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway
of two streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join at any
other angle, may come in conflict; or
      (2)   Where a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting
street, shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event such
intersecting street also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of such streets shall be regarded as separate
INTERSECTIONS.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMIT LINES. Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones and nontraffic areas
and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are required.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. See CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. A freight
curb loading zone is a LOADING ZONE for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of freight; a passenger curb loading zone is a LOADING
ZONE for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR SCOOTER and MOTOR BICYCLE. A motor vehicle, other than a
tractor, having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to
travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding
a tractor.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean
Central Standard Time, or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in current use in
the city.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, providing such loading and
unloading is in an authorized place.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the City Police Department, or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for violation of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY. A way or place in private ownership or leading to
property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner.
   PUBLIC PARKING LOT. Any parking lot on right-of-way dedicated to public use
or owned by the state, or a political subdivision thereof, or any way or place,
although privately owned, which has been provided for the purpose of vehicular
travel and parking by the public in connection with a commercial, business or
professional establishment in the city.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed and ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event a street includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to
any such roadway, separately, but not to all such roadways, collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SCHOOL ZONE. All streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a
school, or school ground, or designated by sign, where the same is adjacent and
for a distance of 300 feet in each direction.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines or at lateral
lines of the roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
   STAND or STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
   STOP. When required, shall mean the complete cessation from movement.
   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or
traffic signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH STREET or HIGHWAY. A street, or boulevard or highway, or portion
thereof, at the entrances to which:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required
by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and
      (2)   Stop signs are erected as provided in this title.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singularly or together, while using any highway or street
for purpose of travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR SIGNALS. Any device legally authorized and used
for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   U-TURN. A turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same
street.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter mile or
more.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or
may be, transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)
§ 70.03 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE.
   The following provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code are hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city within
the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein:
   (A)   47 O.S. Chapter 10 Accidents and Reports Relating to Accidents;
   (B)   47 O.S. Chapter 11 Rules of the Road;
   (C)   47 O.S. Chapter 12 Equipment of Vehicles;
   (D)   47 O.S. Chapter 13 Vehicle Inspection; and
   (E)   47 O.S. Chapter 14 Weight and Load.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-3) (Ord. 2017-5, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 70.04 TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING; APPLICABILITY.
   Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this title, the
traffic code shall be controlling and apply to the use of city streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, parks, parkways, public parking lots, school driveways, streets,
parking lots or any other public right-of-way or city-owned land, including
streets and other ways that form the boundary line of the city, by pedestrians
and by vehicles of every kind, whether self-propelled or otherwise, and whether
moving or at rest.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-4)
§ 70.05 BOUNDARY LINE STREETS.
   All ordinances of the city governing and regulating the operation of motor
vehicles and other traffic upon roads, streets and highways that now exist or
that may hereafter become effective shall be in effect on any road, street and
highway that may now or hereafter form the boundary of the city as though the
road, street or highway were within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-5)
§ 70.06 CARTS, RIDING ANIMALS, ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES.
   Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be subject to
all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Authorized vehicles.
      (1)   Exercise of privileges. The driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an
actual or suspected violator of the law or ordinance, or when responding to but
not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in
this division (A), but subject to the conditions stated in this division (A).
      (2)   Authorized actions. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
may do any of the following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law or ordinance, or when responding to but not upon returning from a
fire alarm:
         (a)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
         (b)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         (c)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is
not endangered; or
         (d)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specific directions.
      (3)   Signals required. The exemptions granted in this division (A) to an
authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such
vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals as required by law, except
that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be
equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
      (4)   Due regard of safety. The provisions of this division (A) shall not
relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive
with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions
protect the driver from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for
the safety of others.
   (B)   Operation of vehicles upon approach of emergency vehicle.
      (1)   Specified. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency
vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of
the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use
of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
      (2)   Due regard of safety. This division (B) shall not operate to
relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive
with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
   (C)   Following emergency vehicles prohibited. The driver of any vehicle
other than one on official business shall not follow any police vehicle,
ambulance, civil defense vehicle, fire apparatus or other emergency vehicle
traveling in response to an emergency call or request closer than 500 feet, or
drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the emergency vehicle
has stopped in answer to an emergency call.
   (D)   Notification of runs. It is unlawful for any person to drive on the
streets of the city any emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to,
police patrol cars, fire trucks, ambulances, sheriff’s cars, highway patrol
cars and police motorcycles, while sounding a siren, horn, bell or other noise-
making device designed to forewarn the populace of the approach of such
vehicle, without first advising the Police Department by contacting the police
dispatcher on duty of his or her intention to make an emergency run and giving
the name of the person making the run, the destination, the route which they
intend to travel and the nature of the emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.20 ENFORCEMENT; TRAFFIC CONTROL DIVISION.
   It is the duty of the officers of the Police Department or any officers that
are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic laws of this
city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
Officers of the Police Department shall make arrests for traffic violations,
investigate accidents and cooperate with other officers in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the Police
Department by this title and any other traffic ordinances of this city.
Officers may issue written notice to appear to any driver of a vehicle involved
in an accident when, based on personal investigation, the officer has
reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed an
offense under the provisions of the traffic code in connection with the
accident.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1)
§ 70.21 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Hand or voice.
      (1)   Officers of the Police Department or any officers designated by the
Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire
or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances.
      (2)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire or
other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the
immediate vicinity.
   (B)   Unauthorized persons. No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt
to direct traffic, except in case of emergency where no officer is present.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)
§ 70.22 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Authority of Mayor. The Mayor, subject to any directions which the
City Council may give by motion or resolution, is empowered to adopt
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic
ordinances of this city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental
regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
   (B)   Traffic-control devices. The Mayor may have traffic-control devices
tested under actual conditions of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4)
§ 70.24 PUBLIC OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES TO OBEY.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States government, any state, county,
city or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is
unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this title,
except as otherwise permitted in this title by state statute. This title shall
not apply to the military forces of the United States and organizations of the
National Guard when performing any military duty.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS, EXCEPTIONS.
   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title, except
those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall not
apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles,
and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or
repair of public utilities. All street or highway and public utility operations
shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flag persons.
The provisions of this title shall apply to any of the persons and vehicles
exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)
§ 70.26 MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES.
   (A)   Street closures. City personnel or contractors, while repairing or
improving the streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies,
when installing, improving or repairing lines or other utility facilities in
the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the
Mayor, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair,
maintenance or construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate
personnel, contractor or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected
proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the
street has been closed to traffic.
   (B)   Entering closed area prohibited. When any street has been closed to
traffic under the provisions of division (A) of this section and traffic-
control devices or barricades have been erected, it is unlawful for any person
to drive any vehicle through, under, over or around such traffic-control
devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The provisions of
this division (B) shall not apply to persons entering the closed area or zone
for the protection of lives or property. Persons having their places of
residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when
possible to do so, through the area at their own risk.
   (C)   Protection devices required. Whenever construction, repair or
maintenance of any street or utility line or facility is being performed under
traffic, the city personnel, contractor or utility company concerned shall
erect, or cause to be erected, traffic-control devices to warn and guide the
public. Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals, markings,
flag persons or other traffic-control devices which are placed to regulate,
control and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-9)
§ 70.27 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Possession required; restricted license.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways without
having in his or her possession at all times, when operating such motor
vehicle, an unrevoked or unsuspended operator’s or chauffeur’s license as
required by the laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted
from such laws by the provisions thereof. No person charged with violating this
division (A) shall be convicted if he or she produces in court an operator’s or
chauffeur’s license issued to him or her and valid at the time of his or her
arrest.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation
of any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him or
her with respect to the type of or special mechanical-control devices required
on a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the
state may determine.
   (B)   Invalid license. No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his or
her privilege to do so is cancelled, suspended, revoked or denied. The
provisions of the Driver License Compact Act are hereby incorporated in this
title. Any person convicted of violating this division (B) shall be punished by
a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each act of driving on the streets or
highways as prohibited by this division (B) shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   State vehicle license. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind
upon a street of the city without a state vehicle license as may be required by
law or to fail to display the state vehicle license as may be required by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.28 PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED DRIVER.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or
her or under his or her control to be driven upon any highway by any person who
is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-13)
§ 70.29 ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   Duty to stop; leaving scene of accident.
      (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injury to, or death of, any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the
scene of the accident, or as close thereto as possible and shall then forthwith
return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he
or she has fulfilled the requirements of division (A)(3) of this section. Every
such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
      (2)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to a vehicle, which is driven or attended by any person, shall
immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, or as close thereto
as possible, and shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at
the scene of the accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of
division (A)(3) of this section. Every such stop shall be made without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
      (3)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident shall give his or
her correct name and address and the registration number of the vehicle he or
she is driving; and shall exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license
to the person struck, or the driver, or occupant of, or person attending any
vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in the accident
reasonable assistance. If the driver does not have an operator’s or chauffeur’s
license in his or her possession, he or she shall exhibit other valid evidence
of identification to the occupants of a vehicle, or to the person collided
with.
      (4)   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the
requirements of this division (A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinance.
   (B)   Striking unattended vehicles; fixtures.
      (1)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop, and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of the vehicle, of the correct name and address of
the driver and the owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or
shall leave in a conspicuous place in or on the vehicle struck a written notice
giving the correct name and address of the driver and of the owner of the
vehicle doing the striking, and shall provide the same information to an
officer having jurisdiction.
      (2)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take reasonable
steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of
the fact, and of his or her name and address, and of the registration number of
the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall exhibit his or her operator’s or
chauffeur’s license, if the operator’s or chauffeur’s license is not in his or
her possession at that time, the driver shall make report of such accident when
and as required by law.
   (C)   Reporting accidents to police. The driver of a vehicle which is in any
manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or in which it is apparent that damage to one vehicle or to the property
is in excess of $300 shall, as soon as practicable, report such accident to a
police officer or to the Police Department unless settlement of the collision
has been made within six months after the date of the accident. If a driver
makes out a written report of the accident in the office of the Police
Department as soon as practicable after the accident, which report is to be
forwarded to the State Department of Public Safety in accordance with state
law, the driver shall be deemed to be in compliance with this division (C).
(Prior Code, § 6-2-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.30 CITATIONS.
   (A)   Issuance.
      (1)   Authority. Police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to
persons violating provisions of this title by delivering citation tags to
violators or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in
violation of this title, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by means of
which the violation occurred. Such citation tags, among other things, shall
bear briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and
shall direct the violator to present the tag at the police station or other
designated place within the time as may be specified thereon.
      (2)   Arrest; custody. Nothing in this division (A) shall be construed to
abridge the power of a police officer to arrest any violator and take him or
her into custody.
      (3)   Furnishing citations; numbering. The Chief of Police may require
that the police officers use citation tags furnished by the city and that such
tags are serially numbered, and may regulate the use and handling of the
citation tags.
   (B)   Copy deemed lawful compliant. In the event the form of citation
provided herein includes information and is sworn to, then such citation, when
filed with the Municipal Court, shall be deemed to be lawful complaint for the
purpose of prosecution under this title.
   (C)   Attached to parked vehicle; failure to comply. If a violator of the
restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or
ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such
motor vehicle within a period of days as specified on the citation, the Clerk
of the Municipal Court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him or her of the violation and
warning him or her that in the event such letter is disregarded for the
specified period of days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion
where two or more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor
vehicle and the traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest
may be issued without sending the letter provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
      (1)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
      (2)   The presumption in division (D)(1) of this section shall apply only
when the procedure as prescribed in this title has been followed.
   (E)   Illegal cancellation. It is unlawful for any person to cancel or
solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as
may be authorized by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 COURT RECORDS; ABSTRACT SENT TO STATE.
   (A)   Records required. The Municipal Judge shall keep a record of every
traffic citation deposited with or presented to the Court and shall keep a
record of every official action by the Court or its Traffic Violations Bureau
in reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every
conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine
or forfeiture.
   (B)   Abstract to state. Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture
of bail of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this title or
other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the Municipal Judge
or Clerk of the Court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited
shall prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of Public Safety
a certified abstract of the Court’s record of the case. An abstract need not be
made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   (C)   Information required. The abstract must be made upon a form furnished
by the State Department of Public Safety and shall include the name and address
of the party charged, the number of his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s
license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the
offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was
forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-16)
§ 70.32 INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW. The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in 47
O.S. Article VI, Chapter 7 and 47 O.S. § 7-606.
      OPERATOR’S POLICY. An operator’s policy of liability insurance which
shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him
or her by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him or her of
any motor vehicle not owned by him or her, subject to the same limits of
liability required in an owner’s policy.
      OWNER’S POLICY. An owner’s policy of liability insurance which:
         (a)   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate
reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
         (b)   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other
person, except as provided in division (C) of this section, using an insured
vehicle with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against
loss from the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, operation or use of such vehicle;
         (c)   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with
existing laws; and
         (d)   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204.
      SECURITY.
         (a)   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204;
         (b)   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or
         (c)   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503,
having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond.
      SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM. A form, approved by the State Board for
Property and Casualty Rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the compulsory insurance law of the state.
   (B)   Required; produce upon request. The owner of a motor vehicle
registered in this state and operating the vehicle within the city’s
boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current owner’s security
verification form listing the vehicle, which shall be produced by any driver
thereof upon request for inspection by any law enforcement officer and, in case
of a collision, the form shall be shown upon request to any person affected by
the collision.
   (C)   Exceptions. The following shall not be required to carry an owner’s or
operator’s security verification form during operation of the vehicle and shall
not be required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the Department of Public
Safety and which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the Interstate Commerce Commission, or the State Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   (D)   Verification form. Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in
this state shall, while operating or using such vehicle within the city’s
boundaries, carry either an operator’s or an owner’s security verification form
issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage
thereon, reflecting liability coverage.
   (E)   Failure to provide. An owner or operator who fails to produce for
inspection a valid and current security verification form upon request of any
peace officer of the Police Department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (F)   Proof provided in court. Any person producing proof in court that a
current security verification form reflecting this liability coverage for such
person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to
dismissal of such charge. Court costs may be assessed by the city.
   (G)   Abstract to state. Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the Court Clerk
shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety within ten
days reflecting the action taken by the Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 ELUDING POLICE OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a
visual and audible signal, a red light and a siren from a peace officer driving
a motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police vehicle directing the
operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, to willfully increase his or
her speed or extinguish his or her lights in an attempt to elude such peace
officer or to willfully attempt in any other manner to elude the peace officer,
or to elude such peace officer.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 70.45 PURPOSE.
   The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from
obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-1)
§ 70.46 PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by
the Police Department and to no other place.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-2)
§ 70.47 DURATION.
   (A)   Order for release. Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded
under the authority of this subchapter shall be stored and held safely until an
order for its release is received from an officer of the Traffic Violations
Bureau or other proper police officer.
   (B)   Payment of costs and charges. The order of release of an impounded
vehicle shall be conditioned upon the payment by the person to whom the release
is issued of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges assessed against
the vehicle. (Refer to Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 6-12-3)
§ 70.48 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this subchapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order
of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures
required in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-4)
§ 70.49 DISABLED VEHICLES.
   A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   Hazardous condition. If left unattended and improperly parked on
street or highway and constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic; or
   (B)   Incapacitated person. If the person in charge of the vehicle is
physically incapacitated to such extent as to be unable to provide for its
custody or removal and the vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-5)
§ 70.50 VEHICLES ON BRIDGE.
   An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any
tube or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or
hazard, may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-6)
§ 70.51 ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER.
   Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under
arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which
leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle
may be impounded, unless the driver or person in charge can provide immediately
for the vehicle’s custody or removal.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-7)
§ 70.52 VEHICLE CONSTITUTING TRAFFIC HAZARD.
   A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-8)
§ 70.53 ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Complaint required. An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of
this code may be impounded when the required complaint has been properly made
and filed as provided in this section.
   (B)   Information on complaint. If a violation of the provisions of this
code occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint
against the person parking the vehicle on the owner’s or legal occupant’s
property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then
the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The
complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the
owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or
standing.
   (C)   Impoundment. Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or
legal occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the
provisions of this code have been violated, the Police Department shall cause
the vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-9)
§ 70.54 OVERTIME PARKING.
   Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in
excess of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of this code, regarding more than 48 hours, shall
be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-10)
§ 70.55 BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS.
   Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device or exit, or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant, shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-11)
§ 70.56 INTERSECTION PARKING.
   (A)   Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection
shall be impounded.
   (B)   A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of the
vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-12)
§ 70.57 STOLEN VEHICLES; RECOVERY BY POLICE.
   (A)   Ownership identification. Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by
police and the registered owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not
exceeding one hour, or cannot be determined from the registration papers or
other identifying media in the vehicle or from records or information available
from reports of stolen cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest
authorized place to impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle shall
be notified of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by
the Police Department.
   (B)   Removal by owner. If the registered owner is identified, located and
notified of the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the
right to make his or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within
the period of one hour from the time he or she is actually notified of its
recovery, and if the owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within
the time specified, the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-13)
§ 70.58 OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   Any vehicle for which two or more citations have been issued for violation
of an ordinance and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if
parked in violation of any provision of this title.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-14)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Obedience to traffic code.
      (1)   It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this title.
      (2)   It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or
for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this title.
      (3)   It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit
any vehicle registered in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to be
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-1)
   (B)   Penalty. Except as otherwise provided in this title, any person
violating any of the provisions of this title containing the traffic laws of
the city, or who performs any unlawful act as defined in this title, or who
fails to perform any act required by this title, shall be guilty of an offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined or punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-2)
CHAPTER 71: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, INSPECTION
Section
   
71.01   Injury-causing vehicles prohibited
   
71.02   Obstructive, dangerous vehicles
   
71.03   Equipment required by law
   
71.04   Mufflers, cut-outs
   
71.05   Width, height, length and load
   
71.06   Inspection of vehicles
§ 71.01 INJURY-CAUSING VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street shall be driven or moved on any street.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 OBSTRUCTIVE, DANGEROUS VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition so constructed or so
loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
Chief of Police and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED BY LAW.
   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped as
required by law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city
which is not equipped as required by law. It is unlawful to fail to use such
equipment in the manner required by law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by
law. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by law
upon a street of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 MUFFLERS, CUT-OUTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at
all times be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. No
muffler cut-out, bypass or similar muffler elimination device, exhaust or
vacuum whistle shall be used on any motor vehicle while operating within the
city; however exhaust whistles may be used on authorized emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH AND LOAD.
   No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
height, length, weight or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Required. No person shall drive or move on any road, street or highway
of this city any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semi-trailers
or pole trailers, which are licensed by the Oklahoma Tax Commission and
operated on the streets or highways, of this city, or any combination thereof,
unless the vehicle is in good working order and adjustment and is in such safe
mechanical condition as not to endanger the driver or other occupants, or the
traveling public.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-6)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Speed Regulations
   
72.001   Speed limits generally; exceptions
   
72.002   School zones
   
72.003   Reasonable speed; specific limits
   
72.004   Minimum speed requirements; exception
   
72.005   Obedience to limits
Rules of the Road
   
72.020   Changing lanes
   
72.021   Driving on right side of roadway
   
72.022   Overtaking vehicles
   
72.023   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite direction
   
72.024   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.025   Following too closely
   
72.026   No passing zones
   
72.027   Processions
   
72.028   School zones, buses
   
72.029   Driving on sidewalk
   
72.030   Backing vehicles
   
72.031   Motorcycles and similar vehicles
   
72.032   Clinging to vehicles
   
72.033   Controlled access highways; entering, leaving
   
72.034   Reckless driving
   
72.035   Careless or negligent driving, stopping or parking
   
72.036   Time and attention required
   
72.037   Operate in careful and prudent manner
   
72.038   Driving under influence
   
72.039   Speed contests
   
72.040   Driving through safety zone
   
72.041   Starting parked vehicle
   
72.042   Opening, closing vehicle doors
   
72.043   Obstructions to view, driving mechanism
   
72.044   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
72.045   Unlawful riding
   
72.046   Private service drives
   
72.047   Truck driving and routes
   
72.048   Loads on vehicles
   
72.049   Vehicle movements; rights-of-way
   
72.050   Through streets
   
72.051   Mill Street designated four lane highway
   
72.052   Intersections designated where stop, yield required
   
72.053   Stop or yield sign construction; placement
   
72.054   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
72.055   Trains, crossings
   
72.056   Seat belts, child passenger restraints
Traffic-Control Devices
   
72.070   Authority to install
   
72.071   Devices; uniform requirements
   
72.072   Obedience required
   
72.073   When device required for enforcement
   
72.074   Signal legend
   
72.075   Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations
   
72.076   Flashing signals
   
72.077   Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals
   
72.078   Unauthorized devices
   
72.079   Defacement of devices
   
72.080   Designation of crosswalks, safety zones
   
72.081   Traffic lanes
Turning Movements
   
72.095   Turning markers or indicators
   
72.096   Designation of restricted turns
   
72.097   Obedience to no-turn signs
   
72.098   U-turns
   
72.099   Position and method of turning
   
72.100   Turning movements and required signals
   
72.101   Means of giving turn signals
   
72.102   Method of giving hand and arm signals
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 72.001 SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Twenty-five mph. No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 25
mph in the city except:
      (1)   On designated and numbered state and federal highways, the maximum
is as posted;
      (2)   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this code;
      (3)   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
      (4)   When a different speed limit is established in this code.
   (B)   Reduction, increase; signs posted. City personnel, subject to such
direction as the Mayor and City Council may give by motion or resolution, may
reduce or increase the speed limits provided in this code, and when he or she
does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets
indicating the lower or higher speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.002 SCHOOL ZONES.
   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted speed per
hour between the hours posted on any street adjacent to any school in a
designated school zone on days when school is in session, unless a different
speed limit or time is otherwise designated and posted.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.003 REASONABLE SPEED; SPECIFIC LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is
reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into
consideration among other things, the condition of the vehicle, the traffic,
roadway surface or width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of
pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of views.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than will permit
him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.004 MINIMUM SPEED REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION.
   No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to
the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere
with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is
unavoidable.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.005 OBEDIENCE TO LIMITS.
   Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum
speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in
excess of the maximum nor slower than the minimum, except as required by an
authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
RULES OF THE ROAD
§ 72.020 CHANGING LANES.
   (A)   Marked traffic lanes. Whenever any roadway has been divided into two
or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules
consistent with this section, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane
until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety and has signaled for a change of course.
   (B)   Unmarked traffic lanes. Where streets or roadways do not have marked
traffic lanes, vehicles shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight
course as nearly as practicable and shall not weave in and out or turn from
side to side unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as
necessary in slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving
vehicles or making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled
for a change of course.
   (C)   Three lanes. Upon a roadway which has been divided into three lanes, a
vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and
passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center
lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left
turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic
moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted to give
notice of such allocation.
   (D)   Signage. Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic
to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic
moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway.
Drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.021 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   Required; exceptions. Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle
shall be driven to the right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and sign-posted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   Two roadways. All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all
streets or highways which are divided into two roadways.
   (C)   Less than normal speed. Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at
less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.022 OVERTAKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   Right.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
         (a)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left
turn;
         (b)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied
by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles
in each direction; or
         (c)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled
portion of the roadway.
   (B)   Left.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear
of the overtaken vehicle.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (C)   Limitations on left.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of the
overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every instance, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of
the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
      (2)   No vehicle at any time shall be driven to the left side of the
roadway under the following conditions:
         (a)   When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the
street or highway where the driver’s view along the street or highway is
obstructed; or
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or
tunnel or when approaching within 50 feet of or traversing any intersection or
railroad grade crossing.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.023 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
   (A)   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each
other to the right.
   (B)   Upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of traffic in
each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half the main
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.024 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   City personnel, subject to any directions given by the City Council by
motion or resolution, may designate any road, street, alley or highway, or any
separate roadway under their jurisdiction, for one-way traffic and shall cause
appropriate signs giving notice thereof, to be erected.
   (B)   Whenever the city designates any street or alley or part thereof as a
one-way street or alley, city personnel shall have placed and maintained signs
giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   (C)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts
of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
   (D)   Upon roadways designated and sign-posted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (E)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.025 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.026 NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and federal
highways, and the Mayor as regards all other streets, are hereby authorized to
determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and passing to the
left would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings
on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs
or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person,
every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone as
set forth in division (A) of this section, no driver shall at any time drive to
the left side of the roadway within the no passing zone or on the left side of
any pavement striping designed to mark the no passing zone throughout its
length.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.027 PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Driving through prohibited; exceptions. No driver of a vehicle shall
drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as
required in this section. This provision shall not apply at intersections where
traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
   (B)   Driving rules. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall
drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
   (C)   Identification. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall
be identified by headlights or as may be determined and designated by the
Police Department.
   (D)   When permits required; parades. No funeral, procession or parade
containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles, except the military
forces of the United States and the military forces of this state, shall
occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit
issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations as are set forth
herein which may apply.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.028 SCHOOL ZONES, BUSES.
   (A)   Overtaking, passing.
      (1)   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in
motion and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the
hours posted on all days when schools are in session.
      (2)   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which
is divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the
right half of the roadway has been divided into two or more lanes, or on one-
way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being
driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane
movement.
   (B)   Overtaking, passing school bus.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is
stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading
signals are in operation, shall stop his or her vehicle before it reaches the
school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then
proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due
caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants.
      (2)   The driver of any vehicle when passing a school bus shall use due
caution for the safety of school children and other occupants of the school
bus.
      (3)   Occupants of the school bus shall have the right-of-way when
crossing the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus.
   (C)   Bus equipment requirements.
      (1)   The provisions of division (B) of this section shall be applicable
only if the school bus is painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear
thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words “SCHOOL BUS” in letters not
less than eight inches in height which can be removed or covered when the
vehicle is not in use as a school bus.
      (2)   The school bus shall be equipped with four red alternately flashing
warning signal lights, two of which shall be located high on the front and two
high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four inches
in diameter and shall be widely separated.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.029 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK.
   No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.030 BACKING VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any other traffic.
No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.031 MOTORCYCLES AND SIMILAR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Carrying persons. No driver of a two wheel or three wheel motor
vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on
any street or highway, except as provided in this section:
      (1)   If any two wheel or three wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter
of 12 inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double-seating
device with double foot rests or a sidecar attachment providing a separate seat
space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that
such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the sidecar, then it
shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 or older to
carry a passenger; and
      (2)   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his or her employee is
permissible.
   (B)   Sidewalks. No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any
sidewalk of the city.
   (C)   Propelled by vehicle. No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle or motor
scooter shall hold onto any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled.
   (D)   Riding on seat required. A person operating a motor scooter,
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or motor bicycle, shall ride only on the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (E)   Passing vehicles. No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall
pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same
direction. Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted from the provisions of
this division (E).
   (F)   Underage persons; time limits. No person under the age of 16 shall
operate any motorcycle, motor bicycle or motor scooter within the city between
and during the hours of 9:00 p.m. of one day and 4:30 a.m. of the next day. Any
person 14 years of age or older and possessing a proper restricted license from
the state to drive only motor-driven cycles with piston displacement not to
exceed 125 cubic centimeters shall be accompanied by a parent, legal guardian
or person 21 years of age or older who has visual contact with the operator.
   (G)   Equipment required.
      (1)   In addition to all other requirements, motorcycles and motor
scooters shall be equipped with the following:
         (a)   Handlebars which do not exceed 12 inches in height, measured
from the crown or point of attachment;
         (b)   Two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than
three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and
positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of 200 feet to the rear of his or her vehicle;
         (c)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop
and hold the vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One
means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the
front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the rear
wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the
vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between
red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in
normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon application of the service
brake;
         (d)   A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least
the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided;
         (e)   A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type
provided by the manufacturer;
         (f)   One lighted head lamp capable of showing a white light visible
at least 300 feet in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding, and one
tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light
plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear. The lights required by this
division (G)(1)(f) shall be burning whenever the vehicle is in motion during
the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and
at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at
a distance of at least 500 feet ahead; and
         (g)   A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to
protect the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the
operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect
him or her from foreign objects.
      (2)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any
vehicle covered under this section unless the person is equipped with and
wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use
by the operators of such vehicles. All such helmets shall consist of lining,
padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the
driver. Such headgear shall comply with the regulations issued by the State
Department of Public Safety as provided in 47 O.S. § 40-105G.
   (H)   Exhaust system. No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter
with the exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than
that of the original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.032 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon
a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.033 CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; ENTERING, LEAVING.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.034 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any vehicle in a wanton manner without regard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.035 CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING, STOPPING OR PARKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be
parked or stop any vehicle:
   (A)   In a careless manner;
   (B)   In a negligent manner;
   (C)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person or property; or
   (D)   In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful movement
of traffic or use of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.036 TIME AND ATTENTION REQUIRED.
   The operator of every vehicle while driving upon the streets and highways of
the city shall devote full time and attention to such driving.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-17)
§ 72.037 OPERATE IN CAREFUL AND PRUDENT MANNER.
   Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in
a careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater
than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic,
surface and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-18)
§ 72.038 DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE.
   (A)   Drugs.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall drive, operate or be in actual physical
control of any motor vehicle upon any highway who is under the influence of an
substance included in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act.
         (b)   The fact that any person charged with a violation of this
provision is or has been lawfully entitled to use such controlled substance
shall not constitute a defense.
      (2)   Any person who violates this division (A) shall be guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Alcohol.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating drugs or liquor to drive, operate or be in actual physical control
of any motor vehicle in the city.
      (2)   Any person who operates a motor vehicle while his or her ability to
operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   (a)   Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising
out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol
or intoxicating liquor, or operating a motor vehicle while his or her ability
is impaired by the consumption of alcohol, evidence of the amount of alcohol in
the person’s blood as shown by a chemical analysis of his or her blood or
breath is admissible, administered within two hours after the arrest of such
person. For the purpose of this division (B):
            1.   Evidence that there was 0.05% or less by weight of alcohol in
his or her blood is prima facie evidence that the person was not under the
influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor;
            2.   Evidence that there was more than 0.05% by weight of alcohol
in the person’s blood is relevant evidence of operating a motor vehicle while
his or her ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption
of alcohol or intoxicating liquor; however, no person shall be convicted while
his or her ability to operate such vehicle is impaired by consumption of
alcohol or intoxicating liquor solely because there was more than 0.05% by
weight of alcohol in the person’s blood in the absence of additional evidence
that such persons’ driving was affected by the consumption of alcohol to the
extent that the public health and safety was threatened or that the person had
violated a state statute or local ordinance in the operation of a motor
vehicle; and
            3.   Evidence that there was 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol in
his or her blood shall be admitted as prima facie evidence that the person was
under the influence of alcohol or intoxicating liquor.
         (b)   The percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based
upon grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood. The provisions of this
division (B)(3)(b) do not limit the introduction of any other competent
evidence bearing on the question of whether the person was under the influence
of alcohol or intoxicating liquor.
      (4)   The officer making an arrest for violation of this or division (A)
of this section, shall have the choice of which test which shall be given and
after taking the test, the person arrested may have an additional test of his
or her choice at the cost of the arrested person and that the city has a right
to a sample of any additional tests.
   (C)   Filing charges; jurisdiction of Court. In any case in which a
defendant is charged with a first offense of driving under the influence of
alcohol or other intoxicating substance offense, the charge may be filed in
either the City Municipal Court or the County District Court, upon the
recommendation of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In any case in
which a defendant is charged with a second or subsequent driving under the
influence of alcohol or other intoxicating substance offense within the city,
the charge shall be filed with the County District Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.039 SPEED CONTESTS.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle
speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway.
   (B)   Barricades, obstructions. No person shall for the purpose of
facilitating or aiding or as an incident to any motor vehicle speed contest
upon any street or highway, in any manner, obstruct or place any barricade or
obstruction upon any street or highway.
   (C)   Unlawful assembly. When three or more persons assemble to witness or
participate in an unlawful speed contest, such assembly is unlawful assembly,
and any person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.040 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.041 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start to move a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.042 OPENING, CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so; nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.043 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VIEW, DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.044 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-25) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.045 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply
to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons
riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-26) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.046 PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES.
   No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-27) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.047 TRUCK DRIVING AND ROUTES.
   (A)   Authority to prescribe routes. The City Council may prescribe routes
through the city for the use of trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds
or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing
through the city. Appropriate and adequate signs shall be placed along such
routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs
are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a
route has been prescribed, as provided above, while passing through the city,
shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of
emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as
practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city.
   (B)   Routes designated. U.S. Highway 69 and State Highway 20 are designated
and prescribed as the routes through the city for use of trucks, including
combinations of tractors and trailers having ten or more wheels or having a
gross weight in excess of ten tons being driven into or through the city. It is
unlawful for the driver of any truck, including any combination of tractor with
trailer attached having ten or more wheels or having a gross weight in excess
of ten tons, to deviate from the above designated truck routes or to drive such
trucks upon any other streets or alleys of the city except to the extent
necessary to unload and deliver freight or other cargo shipped to a point of
destination within the city off the truck routes hereinabove designated, or the
extent necessary to pick up and load freight or other cargo to be shipped from
a point of origin within the city off the designated truck routes, or except in
cases of emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-28) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Responsibility for damage to streets, see §
151.10
§ 72.048 LOADS ON VEHICLES.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-29) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.049 VEHICLE MOVEMENTS; RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Approaching intersection.
      (1)   When two vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection
from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the
vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right as
otherwise stated in this chapter; however, the driver of a vehicle on a street
which is not a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a
state or federal highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle
which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
      (2)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter.
   (B)   Turning left at intersection. The driver of a vehicle within an
intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. After so
yielding and having given signal when and as required by this code, the driver
may make the left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle making the left turn.
   (C)   Approaching yield right-of-way sign. The driver of a vehicle
approaching a “yield right-of-way” sign shall slow to a reasonable speed for
existing conditions of traffic and visibility, yielding the right-of- way to
all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway which have entered the
intersection or which are so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (D)   Entering through highway. Except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or a traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as
required by this code at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from the
through highway, or which are approaching so closely on the through highway as
to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (E)   Facing stop, slow, warning or caution signal. If two or more vehicles
face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals at an intersection and are
approaching as to enter the intersection at the same time, the following rules
shall apply: if each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right-of-way. If each vehicle is required to slow, the
vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. If each vehicle is
required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the
right-of-way. If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution,
the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. In any event, a
vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the right-of-way
over one which has not entered the intersection.
   (F)   Entering stop intersection. Except when directed by a police officer
or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection, indicated by a stop sign, shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. In the event there is no
crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line before entering
the intersection. If there is no marked stop line, then the driver shall stop
at the point nearest the intersecting road where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on an intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. A driver after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or road, or
which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard; but the driver
having so yielded may then proceed and the driver of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so
proceeding.
   (G)   Entering yield intersection. The driver of a vehicle approaching a
yield sign shall, in observance to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable
for the existing condition or shall stop if necessary and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he or she
is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
road so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver having so
yielded may then proceed and drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding. A driver who enters a
yield intersection without stopping and has or causes a collision with a
pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be
considered not to have yielded as required herein. The provisions of this
division (G) shall not release the drivers of other vehicles approaching the
intersection at such a distance as not to constitute immediate hazard from the
duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. The driver of a vehicle
approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection before entering the
intersection; if there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, or if there is no stop line, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.
   (H)   Entering highway from private road, driveway. The driver of a vehicle
about to enter, leave or cross a highway from or into a private road or
driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
highway.
   (I)   Entering traffic from parking. Any vehicle attempting to reenter
traffic while parked at the curb shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming
traffic in the street approaching from the rear. The parked vehicle shall
proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver has given the
appropriate signal which indicates his or her intention of turning from the
curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no event enter the line
of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard exists.
   (J)   Emerging from alley, driveway or building. The driver of a vehicle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of- way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-30) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.050 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   Authority to designate. City personnel, subject to such direction as
the City Council may give, may designate any street or part of a street a
through street.
   (B)   Signage. Whenever the city designates and describes a through street,
the stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and
maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that
portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times
by traffic-control signals.
   (C)   Stop signs. At the intersection of two such through streets or at the
intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated,
stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may
be determined by the city if deemed desirable.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-31)
§ 72.051 MILL STREET DESIGNATED FOUR LANE HIGHWAY.
   It is hereby declared that Mill Street in the city from a point five-tenths
mile north of its intersection with Graham Avenue to a point seven-tenths mile
south of such intersection for the purposes of traffic control and all other
purposes shall be marked, designated, considered and treated as a four lane
highway or roadway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-32)
§ 72.052 INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED WHERE STOP, YIELD REQUIRED.
   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or
resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon
other than through streets where particular hazards exist and to determine
whether:
   (A)   Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, in which event he or she shall cause to be erected a stop sign at
every such place a stop is required; or
   (B)   Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different
street as provided in this chapter in which event he or she shall cause to be
erected a yield sign at every place where yield is required.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-33)
§ 72.053 STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION; PLACEMENT.
   Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the
word “Stop” or “Yield” in letters not less than eight inches in height for a
stop sign and not less than seven inches in height for a yield sign. Every stop
or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign,
or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or
yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk,
then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-34)
§ 72.054 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.055 TRAINS, CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Obedience to signal.
      (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flag person gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
         (d)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
      (2)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   (B)   Stop at all crossings; exception.
      (1)   (a)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire,
or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying
explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before
crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such
railroad, and while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along
such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of
a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he or she
can do so safely.
         (b)   After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is
safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of
the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing
such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or
tracks.
      (2)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.056 SEAT BELTS, CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS.
   (A)   Safety belt system required. Every operator and front seat passenger
of a passenger car operated in this city shall wear a properly adjusted and
fastened safety seat belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle
when manufactured pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 571.208. For the purposes of this
division (A), PASSENGER CAR shall mean “vehicle” as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102,
except that passenger car shall not include trucks, truck tractors,
recreational vehicles, vans, motorcycles or motorized bicycles.
   (B)   Medical exception; postal carrier. Division (A) of this section shall
not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger car in which the operator
or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in this
state that he or she is unable to wear a safety belt system for medical
reasons. The issuance of such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall
not give rise to, nor shall such physician thereby incur, any liability
whatsoever in damages or otherwise, to any person injured by reason of such
failure to wear a safety seat belt system. Division (A) of this section shall
not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S.
Postal Service.
   (C)   Child passenger restraint system required. Every driver when
transporting a child under six years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the
roadways, streets or highways of this city shall provide for the protection of
the child by properly using a child passenger restraint system. Children at
least six years of age but younger than 13 years of age shall be protected by
use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt. For purposes of this
division (C), CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM means an infant or child
passenger restraint system that meets the federal standards as set by 49 C.F.R.
§ 571.213. The provisions of this division (C) shall not apply to:
      (1)   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle or other
motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state
or federal laws;
      (2)   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
      (3)   A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are
in use;
      (4)   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable
to be placed in such devices; and
      (5)   The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and
who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap
safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination
lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety
belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40
pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this division (C)(5), back seat
shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by
a licensed childcare facility or church. Provided further, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this
division (C)(5) if at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed
childcare facility or church provides the officer with a written statement
verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more than 40
pounds.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Any person convicted of violating division (A) of this section
shall be punished by a maximum fine and court costs not to exceed $20.
      (2)   Any person convicted of violating division (C) of this section
shall be punished by a maximum fine of $50 plus court costs. However, the fine
for a violation of division (C) of this section shall be suspended and court
costs shall be assessed in the amount of $15 upon proof of purchase or
acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-37) (Ord. 2005-7, passed 9-20-2005, eff. 11-1-2005)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 72.070 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   City personnel, subject to any directions given by the City Council by
motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic-control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this
city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may have placed
and maintained such additional traffic-control signs, signals and devices as
they may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of
this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1)
§ 72.071 DEVICES; UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
Manual of Uniform Traffic- Control Devices approved by the State Department of
Public Safety.
   (B)   (1)   All signs, signals and devices required hereunder for a
particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and
relative location throughout the city.
      (2)   All traffic-control devices erected and not inconsistent with the
provisions of state law or this title shall be official traffic-control
devices.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-2)
§ 72.072 OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the
provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this title.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-3)
§ 72.073 WHEN DEVICE REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   No provision of this title for which official traffic-control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place
of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a
particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-4)
§ 72.074 SIGNAL LEGEND.
   The display of signal lights, arrows and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
   (A)   Green alone, “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic; and
      (2)   Pedestrian traffic facing a green signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a “walk” signal
indicator is operating.
   (B)   Steady yellow or amber alone, “caution”.
      (1)   The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the “red” or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter; and
      (2)   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the “caution” signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the “red” signal flashes.
   (C)   Red alone, “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or “go” is shown alone. Except
where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns, vehicles in the right
traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may enter the intersection
cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles shall yield the right-of-
way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the intersection and the turn shall
be made so as not to interfere in any way with traffic proceeding on a green
signal indication on the cross street; and
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
“go” is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian “walk” signal.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic
lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated
by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. If the movement
indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the left turn shall be made only
on the red with green arrow signal; and
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “go” is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian “walk”
signal.
   (E)   Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular traffic movements are
controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by
the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-5)
§ 72.075 PEDESTRIANS; SIGNAL INDICATORS; REGULATIONS.
   Special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk”, “wait” or
“don’t walk” shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows:
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles; and
   (B)   Wait or don’t walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his or her crossing on the “walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
zone while the “wait” signal is showing.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-6)
§ 72.076 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Obedience. Whenever a flashing red or yellow signal is illuminated, it
shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      (1)   Flashing red. When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign; and
      (2)   Flashing yellow. When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   (B)   Railroad grade crossing. This section shall not apply at railroad
grade crossings.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-7)
§ 72.077 PEDESTRIAN-ACTIVATED SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS.
   Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it
requires obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Flashing yellow.
      (1)   When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes,
drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass
such signal only with caution; and
      (2)   Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may
activate the signal-control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is
shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular
traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the signal when
the red or “stop” signal is exhibited; and
      (2)   No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the
signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown.
   (C)   Steady red.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and shall remain standing until
flashing yellow is shown alone; and
      (2)   Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal,
and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (D)   Steady red and steady yellow combined.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone; and
      (2)   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is
about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing
shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-8)
§ 72.078 UNAUTHORIZED DEVICES.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view
of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   Commercial advertising. No person shall place or maintain nor shall
any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal or device
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
   (C)   Private property exception. This section shall not prohibit the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information which are of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.
   (D)   Removal. Every prohibited sign, signal, marking or device may be
removed without notice.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.079 DEFACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in
fact alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down,
remove or have in his or her possession any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal or an inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
part thereof.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any of the following
persons when acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      (1)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any governmental agency; or
      (2)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility or railroad company.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.080 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES.
   Authorized city personnel, subject to any directions given by the City
Council, may:
   (A)   Crosswalks. Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his
or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway,
and at such other places as deemed necessary; and
   (B)   Safety zones. Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and
character and at such places as deemed necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-11)
§ 72.081 TRAFFIC LANES.
   (A)   Authorized. City personnel, subject to any directions given by the
City Council, may be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway
of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   (B)   Failure to remain unlawful. Where such traffic lanes have been marked,
it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise
authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 72.095 TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS.
   (A)   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the City Council by
motion or resolution, is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within
or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may
conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-1)
§ 72.096 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS.
   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or
resolution, is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent
to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at
such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to
or be other than as prescribed by law and is hereby authorized to determine
those street intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right,
left or other turns, and shall have proper signs placed at the intersections.
The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours. Where turns are restricted during certain hours
pursuant to this section, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or
they may be removed when turns are permitted.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-2)
§ 72.097 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-
turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of
any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.098 U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction (commonly known as a U-turn) upon any street in the
city.
   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn his or her vehicle more than
90 degrees for the purpose of parking on the opposite side of the street upon
any street in the city.
   (C)   The driver of any vehicle shall not back the vehicle from a parking
space on any street in the city in such a manner so as to proceed in the
opposite direction.
   (D)   The driver of any automobile or other vehicle traveling upon any
designated state or federal highway within the limits of the city shall not
turn such vehicle around so as to proceed in the opposite direction by driving
such automobile or vehicle off such highway onto public or private property or
driveways and driving back onto the highway, and proceeding in the opposite
direction. This division (D) shall not apply to the drivers of automobiles or
vehicles stopping at private property under their ownership or in their
possession or stopping at their business or employment or stopping to do
business at a place of business along the highway.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.099 POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows.
   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the centerline
where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
   (C)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearby as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.100 TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §
72.099 of this chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway,
or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a
roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No
person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow or stop when
required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
the signal.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.101 MEANS OF GIVING TURN SIGNALS.
   (A)   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by
means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a
type approved by the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety, except as provided
in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by,
signal lamps or devices when:
      (1)   The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects 24
inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel;
      (2)   Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be
visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle
projects 14 feet or more beyond the center top of the steering post.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-7)
§ 72.102 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn; hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn; hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed; hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-8)
CHAPTER 73: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
73.01   Illegal parking declared public nuisance
   
73.02   Application of standing or parking regulations
   
73.03   Time limited parking
   
73.04   Brakes; motor not to be left running
   
73.05   Angle parking
   
73.06   Parking in spaces marked off
   
73.07   Permits for loading, unloading at angle to curb
   
73.08   Hazardous or congested places
   
73.09   Specified places prohibited
   
73.10   Blocking of intersection or crosswalk
   
73.11   Standing, parking on one-way roadway
   
73.12   Standing, parking on left side of one-way streets
   
73.13   Parking adjacent to schools
   
73.14   Parking prohibited at intersections
   
73.15   Parking in alleys, blocking driveways
   
73.16   Entry on private property
   
73.17   Parking on main traveled portion
   
73.18   Double parking
   
73.19   Truck parking
   
73.20   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
73.21   Method of parking, standing or parking close to curb
   
73.22   Negligent parking
   
73.23   Right-of-way to parallel parking space
   
73.24   Handicapped parking
   
73.25   Parking in designated fire lane prohibited
§ 73.01 ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter
governing, limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any
street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for
such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or
operator of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary
for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or official traffic- control device.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-2)
§ 73.03 TIME LIMITED PARKING.
   (A)   Established; signs. City personnel, subject to any directions given by
the City Council by motion or resolution, may establish parking time limits or
prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have appropriate
signs placed on the streets. When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for
any person to park a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such time limits
shall be effective unless a sign is erected and in place at the time of the
alleged violation.
   (B)   More than 24 hours. No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a
period of time longer than 24 hours. The parking of a vehicle for more than 48
hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 BRAKES; MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING.
   Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   Signs, markings. The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the
City Council by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and
parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have such streets
marked or signed.
   (B)   Obedience required. On those streets which have been so signed or
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at
the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or
markings.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 PARKING IN SPACES MARKED OFF.
   In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 PERMITS FOR LOADING, UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB.
   (A)   Authority to issue; revocation. The Mayor is authorized to issue
special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose
of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and
conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or
lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such
person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The Mayor may
revoke such permits at any time.
   (B)   Violation prohibited. It is unlawful for any permittee or other person
to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.
   (A)   Authority to regulate. City personnel, subject to any directions given
by the City Council by motion or resolution, may determine and regulate by
proper signs the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles when such stopping,
standing or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
   (B)   Violation prohibited. When official signs are erected at hazardous or
congested places, as authorized in division (A) of this section, no person
shall violate such signs.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.09 SPECIFIED PLACES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except in emergencies
or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area or between the sidewalk and the
street;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except in a parking space
officially marked;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length has been indicated by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station; and
on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet
of the entrance when properly sign posted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; or
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb.
   (C)   It is a violation for anyone to park a vehicle more than two hours
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and Sundays excepted, in
the following areas:
      (1)   Graham Avenue from Mill Street to Rowe Street;
      (2)   Adair Street from northeast 1st Street to southeast 1st Street;
      (3)   Mill Street from Graham Avenue to southeast 1st Street;
      (4)   Vann Street from Court Place to the alley between Graham Avenue and
southeast 1st Street and less and except the parking area that abuts the
courthouse on the north, east and south.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.10 BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.11 STANDING, PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY.
   (A)   If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
   (B)   The City Council may determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.12 STANDING, PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
   City personnel may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way
street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in
place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.13 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   (A)   City personnel may have signs erected indicating no parking upon
either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.14 PARKING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be
prohibited 15 feet in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.15 PARKING IN ALLEYS, BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position as to block a
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.16 ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real
property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner’s or occupant’s
consent except where such private property is provided as public parking and
the general use of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings.
   (B)   Burden of proof. Where entry is made upon real property owned or
legally occupied by another without the owner’s or occupant’s consent, except
on unrestricted public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal
occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to
show that permission for such entry was given.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.17 PARKING ON MAIN TRAVELED PORTION.
   (A)   Prohibited. Upon any street, no person shall stop, park or leave
standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main
traveled part of the street when it is practical to stop, park or leave the
vehicle off such parts of the street.
   (B)   Exception. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle
which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a street in
such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.18 DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   Prohibited; exception. No vehicle shall be double parked on any street
within the city limits, except in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, or except when necessary to avoid conflict
with another vehicle.
   (B)   Delivery vehicles. Delivery vehicles, either loading or unloading, may
double park in the right- hand lane while in the process of loading or
unloading and making delivery to local business establishments; provided, that
the driver of the delivery vehicle shall keep a lookout for cars and vehicles
needing or attempting to move away from the curb and shall move his or her
delivery vehicle as soon as possible to permit the parked vehicles to be moved;
and further providing, that the double parking shall be permitted only so long
as both traffic lanes are not blocked.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-18)
§ 73.19 TRUCK PARKING.
   (A)   Residential areas. It is unlawful for any person to park a truck of
over one ton capacity for more than three consecutive hours on any street or
alley in a residential area of the city.
   (B)   Transporting hazardous materials. It is unlawful to park, store or
otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle which is used for the purpose of
transporting or delivering flammable and combustible liquids as defined by the
Fire Prevention Code and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the
transportation and delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the
city. However, the trucks and vehicles restricted in this section may be
temporarily parked at locations otherwise zoned for the purpose of loading and
unloading flammable and combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gases for a
period not to exceed one and one-half hours during any 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.20 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or right-of-way within the
maintenance jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things; or
   (C)   Washing, cleaning or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-20) (Ord. 2005-5, passed 7-19-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.21 METHOD OF PARKING, STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb. Any vehicle stopped or parked upon the left-hand
side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or
stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the left-
hand curb.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.22 NEGLIGENT PARKING.
   No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any
vehicle as follows:
   (A)   In a careless or negligent manner;
   (B)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, persons or property; or
   (C)   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or
use of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.23 RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PARALLEL PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his or her vehicle to the rear of the parking space until
the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He or she then
shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other
vehicle attempting to park therein.
   (B)   The first of two or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy, shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-23)
§ 73.24 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   Unlawful without insignia. It is unlawful for any person to place or
park a motor vehicle in any parking space on private property accessible to the
public and where the public is invited or public property that is designated
and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically
disabled person unless such person has a physical disability insignia as
provided under the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112, and such insignias are
displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112 or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-24) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.25 PARKING IN DESIGNATED FIRE LANE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, other than
an on duty fire protection, police, or other emergency vehicle, to park in a
designated fire lane.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an offense and a conviction for such shall be punishable by
a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-25) (Ord. 2004-11, passed 4-6-2004) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: LOADING
Section
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Curb loading zones, designation
   
74.03   Loading zones used only for designated purpose
   
74.04   Stopping, standing or parking in loading zone
   
74.05   Designation of public carrier stops and stands
   
74.06   Buses and taxicabs
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner
or his or her business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used
during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or
freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag; and
      (2)   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during
normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight.
   FREIGHT LOADING ZONES. All curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade,
shipment or resale.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONES. All loading zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers, except bus stops,
taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-1)
§ 74.02 CURB LOADING ZONES, DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Authority. The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the City
Council by motion or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and
freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate
signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of
this section are applicable.
   (B)   Violation prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in
violation of signs erected in accordance with this section.
   (C)   Request of person; reimbursement of costs. If any loading zone is
established on request of any person, the signs shall not be placed until the
applicant pays to the city an amount of money estimated by the City Council to
be adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the
same.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 LOADING ZONES USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE.
   No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be
used as a passenger loading zone, except as may be specifically provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN LOADING ZONE.
   (A)   Passenger zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a
passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or period of time other than for
the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three minutes.
   (B)   Commercial zone.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a commercial
curb loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during
hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
         (b)   Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to
the licensing requirements and regulations provided by this title.
      (2)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.05 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.
   The Mayor, subject to any directions given by the City Council by motion or
resolution, may establish loading zones for common carriers, including, but not
limited to, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places
and in such number as he or she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit
and convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by
appropriate signs.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-5)
§ 74.06 BUSES AND TAXICABS.
   (A)   Use of stands restricted. No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab
stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and the
appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
   (B)   Stopping, standing or parking.
      (1)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
      (2)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street
at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided
herein, except in case of an emergency.
      (3)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or
passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with
the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb
and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic.
      (4)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
75.01   Subject to traffic-control signals
   
75.02   Right-of-way at crosswalks
   
75.03   Use right half of crosswalk
   
75.04   Crossing at right angles
   
75.05   When pedestrians shall yield
   
75.06   Walking along roadways
   
75.07   Soliciting from vehicle occupants
   
75.08   Drivers to exercise due care
   
75.09   Crossing prohibited
   
75.10   Obedience to railroad signals
§ 75.01 SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided for in
this title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights
and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-1)
§ 75.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Vehicle to yield; exceptions.
      (1)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping,
if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when:
         (a)   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
         (b)   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge
of the roadway as to be in danger.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (A) are not applicable under
conditions where pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Suddenly leaving curb. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or
other place of safety or walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so
close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (C)   Approaching vehicles. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked
crosswalk, or any unmarked crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross a roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
the rear shall not overtake to pass such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.03 USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.04 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-4)
§ 75.05 WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD.
   (A)   Outside of crosswalk. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point
other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Pedestrian tunnel. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where
a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Exception. The provisions of this section are not applicable where
pedestrian crossings are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.06 WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Sidewalks provided. Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for
any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Sidewalks not provided. Where sidewalks are not provided, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practical, walk only on
the left side of the roadway, or its shoulder, facing traffic which may
approach from the opposite direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.07 SOLICITING FROM VEHICLE OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride,
donations, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop
and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
contributions or the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about
to be parked on a street;
      (2)   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
      (3)   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample,
souvenir or gift; or
      (4)   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway,
attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar
purpose.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.08 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Not withstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-8)
§ 75.09 CROSSING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic-control signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the
center thereof, except in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.10 OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or
barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is
being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 6-10-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 76: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
76.01   Golf carts and utility vehicles
Bicycles
   
76.15   Applicability
   
76.16   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
76.17   Riding rules and regulations
   
76.18   Lamps and equipment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 76.01 GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Operation. Golf carts and utility vehicles shall not be operated upon
the city streets excepting only:
      (1)   Where such operation of a golf cart or utility vehicle is in
compliance with the applicable provisions of 47 O.S.; or
      (2)   Where the operation of a golf cart or utility vehicle is conducted
in relationship to public or private events or gatherings and has been
authorized by the city pursuant to the issuance of a permit, which shall be
valid for one year from date of issuance, which permit shall have been approved
by the Chief of Police of the city and the Mayor, subject to such conditions
and restrictions to be noted upon the permit as may be determined in the
discretion of the Chief of Police and Mayor to be in the best interest of the
public safety under the circumstances for which said permit is issued; and
      (3)   In the case of operation under division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section it is required that the owner of the golf cart have at all times of
operation, a current general public liability policy of insurance which
insurance shall insure against losses to persons and property related to the
operation of said golf cart or utility vehicle and which policy shall be
subject to the satisfaction of the city; and evidence of the existence of which
shall be required for issuance of the permit required under division (A)(2) of
this section.
   (B)   Fees for golf cart or utility vehicle operated on city streets. The
City Council, by motion or resolution, shall determine the fees to be charged
for permitted use of golf carts or utility vehicles operated on city streets.
See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-19) (Ord. 2012-8, passed 12-4-2012; Ord. 2012-9, passed 12-
4-2012) Penalty, see §
70.99
BICYCLES
§ 76.15 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Subchapter. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public way; or upon any path
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
in this chapter.
   (B)   Traffic laws. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be
granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state and the traffic provisions of
this code applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special
regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of laws and
ordinances which by their nature are inapplicable to such persons.
(Prior Code, § 6-11-1)
§ 76.16 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Required. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions
of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable
to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Unauthorized turning. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating
no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the directions of such sign, except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey
the regulations applicable to the pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 6-11-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.17 RIDING RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Seat. No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   Number of persons. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at
one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (C)   Roadways and bicycle paths.
      (1)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near
to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
      (2)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
      (3)   If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
   (D)   Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
   (E)   Emerging from alley or driveway. The operator of a bicycle emerging
from an alley or driveway shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area
extending across the alley or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area. Upon entering the
roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadways.
   (F)   Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one
hand on the handle bars.
   (G)   Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon
the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
   (H)   Riding on sidewalks.
      (1)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
      (2)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have
erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall
disobey the same.
      (3)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right- of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 6-11-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.18 LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Night use. Bicycles in use at night shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition
to the red reflector.
   (B)   Bell. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least 100 feet.
   (C)   Siren, whistle. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any
person use, any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Brake. Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 6-11-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 77: RAILROADS
Section
   
77.01   Streets, alleys and sidewalks
   
77.02   Climbing on trains
   
77.03   Speed limit for trains
   
77.04   Blocking streets
§ 77.01 STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Improvements to streets and alleys. When a railway occupies any
portion of a street with its tracks running in a general direction of such
street, either on or adjacent thereto, the railway company shall improve the
space between its tracks and two feet on either side thereof in the same manner
that the remainder of the street is to be, or has been, improved, or with such
other satisfactory material as the City Council by motion or resolution may
approve. In case any railway company shall occupy an alley with its tracks,
such company shall improve, gutter, drain and grade such alley, and shall
surface or pave it with the same material which is to be, or has been, used on
the alley, or with such other satisfactory material as the City Council by
motion or resolution may approve. When the tracks of any railroad company cross
any street that is being or has been paved, the company shall pave as much of
the street as is occupied by its tracks and two feet on each side, using the
same material as is to be, or has been, used on the street, or such other
satisfactory material as the City Council by motion or resolution may approve.
When more than one track crosses a street within a distance of 100 feet,
measuring from inside rail to inside rail, the railroad company shall grade,
gutter, drain and curb the street area between its tracks, and surface or pave
it with the same material which the city is to use or has used, on the street.
Railroad companies shall keep all such improvements made by them in a good
state of repair at all times.
   (B)   Sidewalk construction.
      (1)   Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their rights-
of-way, using the same material as is used in adjacent sidewalks insofar as
this is practicable under the circumstances. They shall construct sidewalks on
both sides of the streets when both sides are used by pedestrians.
      (2)   The company shall keep such sidewalks in a good state of repair at
all times.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-1)
§ 77.02 CLIMBING ON TRAINS.
   It is unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to, or in any manner
attach himself or herself to, any railway train, locomotive or railway car,
while such is in motion within the city, unless such person is acting in line
of duty; or to board any train or railroad car, including a passenger, freight
or other car, except with a proper ticket or the permission of the person in
charge of the train or car or in line of duty.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 77.03 SPEED LIMIT FOR TRAINS.
   It is unlawful to drive, pull, move or operate a locomotive, train or other
rolling stock of a railroad at a speed of more than that set by state and
federal agencies governing railway speeds within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 77.04 BLOCKING STREETS.
   It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to
emergency breakdowns.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-4)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   JUNKED, WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
95.   SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES
      
96.   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
      
97.   FAIR HOUSING POLICY
      
98.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
99.   LIBRARY
      
100.   CEMETERIES
CHAPTER 90: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
90.01   Obstructing health officer
   
90.02   Quarantine; violations
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any
health officer or officer charged with the enforcement of the health laws of
this city or county.
(Prior Code, § 4-8-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 QUARANTINE; VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully violate or refuse or omit to
comply with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the
Board of Health or any officer charged with enforcement of such order,
direction, prohibition, rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 4-8-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this title, or any law or code
adopted by reference in this title is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. In addition thereto, such person may be
enjoined from continuing such violations.
(Prior Code, § 4-8-3)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
91.01   Adoption of Fire Code
   
91.02   Additions, insertions and changes
   
91.03   Modifications
   
91.04   Definition
   
91.05   Enforcement
   
91.06   Storage regulations and requirements
   
91.07   New materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits
   
91.08   Appeals
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector, and public library
of the City of Pryor Creek, being marked and designated as the International
Fire Code, 2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters D, E, F, G, H, I and J
(see International Fire Code § 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the
International Code Council (ICC), as amended and revised by the Oklahoma
Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), be and is hereby adopted as the Fire
Code of the City of Pryor Creek, in the state for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire explosion hazards arising from the
storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and
from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the offices of the
city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in §
91.02 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) (Ord. 2015-21, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 91.02 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1.: City of Pryor Creek.
Table 109.3.: See § 10.99, General Penalty, of the city code.
Section 111.4.: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the city code.
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015 International
Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
Section 3404.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of class I and
class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited):
Contact building inspector.
Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of class I and class
II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): Contact building inspector.
Section 3506.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): Contact building inspector.
Section 3804.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas):
Contact building inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-2) (Ord. 2015-21, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 91.03 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief or Fire Marshal of the Fire Department shall have power to modify
any of the provisions of the Code hereby adopted in his or her own discretion
or upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the letter of the Code; provided, that the spirit of the Code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief or
Fire Marshal of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records
of the department and for applications requesting change, a signed copy shall
be furnished the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-3)
§ 91.04 DEFINITION.
   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Fire Code hereby adopted, it
shall be held to mean the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-4)
§ 91.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chief or Fire Marshal of
the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-5)
§ 91.06 STORAGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases. The limits referred to
in the Fire Code, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks is prohibited and in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are
prohibited, shall be as provided in the zoning title. The limits referred to in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited shall be the city
limits. It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct or enlarge
a plant or place of business where liquefied petroleum gas or gases are to be
manufactured, distributed or handled within the city.
   (B)   Gasoline, volatile substances.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to store gasoline or any other
volatile substance for retail sale purposes above the ground, or below the
ground at any one retail service station in any quantity in excess of 18,000
gallons.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to install, erect or construct a tank
or tanks for the storage of gasoline or other volatile substances for retail
sale without meeting the requirements of the Fire Code and the tank or tanks
first being inspected by the Chief or Assistant Chief, or Fire Marshal, of the
Fire Department and obtaining a permit to install, erect or construct such tank
or tanks from the building official. No tank or tanks shall be installed
aboveground for the retail sale of gasoline or other volatile substances.
      (3)   No gasoline or other volatile substance shall be delivered by any
wholesale company, agent, jobber, person, firm or corporation to any service
station engaged in the retail sale of such product within the city in a truck,
tank wagon or transport with a total capacity of more than 8,500 gallons.
However, if prior to the effective date of Ordinance 57-1, a service station
had been especially equipped for the delivery and storage of such products in
larger quantities, the minimum capacity of such trucks, tank wagons or
transports and storage facilities shall not be increased.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-6) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES REQUIRING PERMITS.
   (A)   The Mayor and the Chief of the Fire Department shall act as a
committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his or her office, and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 4-2-7)
§ 91.08 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief or Fire Marshal of the Fire Department shall disapprove
an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to
the City Council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-8)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-9)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Registration; fee; tag
   
92.03   Vaccinations; rabies control
   
92.04   Buildings for animals; housing requirements
   
92.05   Leashing requirements
   
92.06   Running at large
   
92.07   Impounding; shelter
   
92.08   Specific animal types prohibited; number of dogs and cats limited
   
92.09   Unlawful acts and activities
   
92.10   Nuisance animals
   
92.11   Dangerous or vicious animals
   
92.12   Wild, exotic or dangerous animals
   
92.13   Zoning regulations prevail
   
92.14   Spay or neuter required
   
92.15   Prohibition of sale of animals in public places
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, sheep, goat, hog, dog, cat,
rabbit, chicken, goose, duck, turkey or other animal, including fowl.
   AT LARGE. Not securely confined by a fence or other enclosure or means on
premises under the control of, or occupied by, the owner of the animal, of
sufficient strength and construction to restrain and keep the animal within the
fence or other enclosure, nor securely restrained and controlled by the owner
or a member of his or her family at least 12 years of age or older, or an agent
of the owner by a leash or harness with handhold.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The director of the County Health Department or his or her
authorized agent and shall also include the city animal control officer.
   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping an
animal. The occupant of any premises on which a domesticated or tamed animal
remains, or to which it customarily returns, for a period of ten days or more,
shall be deemed to be harboring or keeping the animal. Any person who has been
harboring or keeping an animal for a period of ten days or longer despite any
claim by said person that said animal is a stray shall be deemed to be the
OWNER of said animal.
   PERMIT. Includes, but is not limited to, the failure to take adequate
precautions to prevent an animal from being at large.
   STRAY. Any animal, domesticated or tamed, that is found wandering and has
had no obvious home for a period of more than ten days.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person
or animal without undue provocation, or which attacks or barks or growls at and
acts as if it intends to attack or bite, or bites a person or animal, when not
unduly provoked.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-1) (Ord. 2008-3, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 92.02 REGISTRATION; FEE; TAG.
   (A)   Fee levied; exception.
      (1)   A fee in such sum as set by the City Council by motion or
resolution for every dog and cat more than three months of age is hereby levied
upon the owner of any such dog or cat kept or harbored within the city.
      (2)   The regulatory fee levied in this section shall not apply to a dog
or cat only temporarily brought and kept within the city, nor to a dog or cat
brought within the city to participate in a show, nor to a seeing eye dog when
such dog is actually being used by a blind person to aid him or her in going
from place to place, nor to dogs or cats being kept in kennels or pet shops for
sale. (See Appendix A of this code.)
   (B)   Term/renewal. The owner shall pay the fee levied to the city for every
year within 30 days after acquiring or bringing the dog or cat into the city.
The licenses shall expire one year from the purchase date and must be renewed
annually. Proof of a current rabies vaccination must be provided with renewal.
   (C)   Rabies vaccination. The person offering the fee shall present to the
city the certificate of a veterinarian or other person legally authorized to
immunize dogs and cats, showing that the dog or cat has been immunized against
rabies during the preceding six months prior to issuance of the license.
   (D)   Information required. The owner of the dog or cat shall, at the time
of paying the fee, register the dog or cat by giving the name and address of
the owner, the name, breed, color and sex of the dog or cat, and such other
reasonable information as the city may request.
   (E)   Receipt; tag. The city thereupon shall deliver an original receipt to
the owner and also an appropriate tag to him or her for the dog or cat. The tag
shall constitute a license for the dog or cat. Tags may be purchased at City
Hall, Pryor Police Department or Rockin G Animal Shelter.
   (F)   Tag affixed to collar. The owner shall cause the tag received from the
city to be affixed to the collar of the dog or cat so that the tag can easily
be seen by officers of the city. The owner shall see that the tag is so worn by
the dog or cat at all times.
   (G)   Lost tag. In case the tag is lost before the end of the year for which
it was issued, the owner may secure another for the dog or cat by applying to
the City Treasurer, presenting to him or her the original receipt and paying to
him or her a fee as set by the City Council. (See Appendix A of this code of
ordinances.)
   (H)   Sterilization. The person applying for registration and offering the
fee for registration shall present to the city proof of compliance with the
sterilization, exemption or intact permit provisions as set forth in §
92.14 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-2) (Ord. 2010-5, passed 3-2-2010; Ord. 2020-05, passed 3-3-
2020)
§ 92.03 VACCINATIONS; RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Vaccination required. The owner of a dog or cat shall at all times
keep the dog or cat effectively vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian, and in the case of a pup or kitten, before it is four months old.
The person vaccinating the dog or cat shall furnish a certificate or statement
of vaccination which shall include the expiration date of said vaccination and
a metal tag to attach to the collar indicating the vaccination.
   (B)   Confinement order.
      (1)   When the health officer or Chief of Police determines and certifies
that a dog, cat or other animal in the city, or within five miles of the city,
is or was infected with rabies and that an epidemic of rabies threatens the
city, the City Council, by resolution, may order all dogs to be confined, and
if deemed desirable, all cats to be confined, during a period of time to be
determined by the City Council. Such resolution or an adequate notice of its
passage shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
city and shall go into effect on the day following such publication unless the
resolution prescribes a later time.
      (2)   While such resolution is in effect, it is unlawful for any owner to
permit a dog or cat to be at large in violation of such resolution, or for any
dog or cat to be at large in violation thereof.
   (C)   Quarantine of animals for observation.
      (1)   The identity and address of the owner of any animal that bites a
person shall be promptly furnished to the animal control officer and the County
Health Department. The animal, regardless of its immunization status, shall be
securely quarantined at a veterinary hospital of the owner’s choice at the
owner’s expense. The animal shall be observed by a licensed veterinarian for a
period of ten days, and may not be released until such reasonable determination
has been made that the animal is not infected with rabies, unless the bite was
a severe bite by an unimmunized animal. In circumstances of a severe bite (bite
on the head, face, neck or upper extremities; or deep laceration; or multiple
bite wounds) by an unimmunized animal, the biting animal should be humanely
killed immediately, without damaging the head, and the head removed and
shipped, under refrigeration, for examination at the State Department of
Health. If the animal is not immediately available for testing, the individuals
exposed should consult with their physician concerning the need for immediate
initiation of rabies prophylaxis. In case of animals whose ownership is
unknown, such quarantine shall be at the city animal shelter. If an owner
becomes known, the animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of
rabies, and such owner shall then pay any related charges for confinement.
Signs of rabies in wild animals cannot be interpreted reliably; therefore, any
wild animal that exposes a person should be killed at once (without unnecessary
damage to the head) and the head submitted for examination for evidence of
rabies.
      (2)   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian or other
practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of
persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other
information as will be helpful in rabies control.
      (3)   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the
animal control officer his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or
her to be a rabid suspect. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (D)   State examination; notification requirement. When an animal under
quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or is suspected of having rabies
by a licensed veterinarian and dies while under such observation, the animal
control officer, veterinarian, the health officer or other designated emissary
shall immediately send the necessary part of such animal to the State Health
Department for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public
health officer of any reports of human contact.
   (E)   Rabies crisis.
      (1)   Declaration. When a report gives a suspected or a positive
diagnosis of rabies, or when the city, county or state health officials feel
that a rabies crisis may be imminent, the health officials may recommend to the
Mayor and City Council a citywide quarantine, and upon the invoking of such
quarantine by the City Council, by resolution, no animal shall be taken into
the streets or permitted to be in the streets, except for short periods of
exercise under leash and control of a competent adult. During the quarantine,
no animal may be taken or removed from the city without written permission of
the animal control officer. This declaration must be made by notice in a
general circulated newspaper of the community and will last as long as health
officials determine the situation requires such action.
      (2)   Destruction.
         (a)   During the period of rabies quarantine as mentioned, every
animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed,
or at the owner’s expense and option, shall be treated for a rabies infection
by a licensed veterinarian, or held under six-month quarantine by the owner in
the same manner as a female in season. The period of quarantine may be extended
from time to time.
         (b)   In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies
occurring during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be
extended for an additional six months.
         (c)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting or
scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor to remove the same from the
city limits without written permission from the health officer or the animal
control officer.
         (d)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon
demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer.
         (e)   The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any
animal found to be infected with rabies. (See Appendix A of this code of
ordinances.)
   (F)   Surrender of animals under suspect. No person shall remove from the
city any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal which
has bitten a human, except as herein provided. The carcass of any dead animal
exposed to rabies shall be surrendered to the animal control officer, upon
demand, and the animal control officer shall direct disposition of the animal.
No person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction
when such demand is lawfully made by the animal control officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-3) (Ord. 2008-3, passed 9-16-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 BUILDINGS FOR ANIMALS; HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Materials. Every building or structure wherein any animal is kept
within the city shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that
it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
   (B)   Receptacle for manure. Every such building or structure, if located
within 200 feet of any apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house,
retail food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital
purposes, or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which such animal is kept, shall be provided with a water-tight
and fly-tight receptacle for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulations
of manure. The receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such
manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept
covered at all times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure
or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in
the receptacle.
   (C)   Location. No building, structure or kennel wherein animals are kept
shall be maintained closer than 40 feet to any apartment house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used for educational,
religious or hospital purposes or residence other than that occupied by the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animal is kept.
   (D)   Premises kept clean. Every structure or building, stable, pen, coop or
place wherein an animal is kept or permitted to be kept shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from
objectionable odors.
   (E)   Inspections. The animal control officer, health officer or any police
officer, upon complaint of any person, shall inspect any structure or place
where an animal is kept, and may do so on his or her own initiative. He or she
may issue any such reasonable order as he or she may deem necessary to the
owner of the animal to cause the animal to be kept as provided in this chapter
or in a manner so as not to constitute a nuisance. He or she may make a
complaint before the Municipal Judge against any person for violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any such reasonable order, but this procedure
shall not abridge the right of others to make such complaint.
   (F)   Buildings for animals; housing requirements. The owner of any animal
shall provide adequate housing for said animal by which the animal is confined
in an adequate fenced area with shelter from the elements and an adequate food
and water supply available. It shall be unlawful to permanently confine and/or
retain any animal by a chain, rope or other means.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-4) (Ord. 2008-3, passed 9-16-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 LEASHING REQUIREMENTS.
   When requested by any proper official, meter reader, police officer,
sanitation worker or other person whose duty is to enter onto private property,
an owner shall leash or otherwise confine any and all dogs or cats to prevent
harm to the person making a lawful entry on owner’s private property.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-5) (Ord. 2010-6, passed 3-2-2010)
§ 92.06 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Prohibited. The owner or keeper of any animal shall keep the animal
under restraint at all times and shall not permit such animal to be at large.
   (B)   Turning animals at large. It is unlawful for any person to open any
enclosure in which any animal is confined as required by ordinance so as to
turn the animal at large, or in any manner to turn the animal at large.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-6) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 IMPOUNDING; SHELTER.
   (A)   Shelter established; care of animals. A city animal control shelter is
hereby established under the jurisdiction of the animal control officer or of
such other person as may be officially designated. The person in charge of the
animal control shelter shall provide proper sustenance for all animals
impounded and shall treat them in a humane manner.
   (B)   Impounding animals.
      (1)   Authority. The animal control officer, or any other city officer or
employee, shall catch or take up and impound in the city animal control shelter
any animal which is at large within the city or in violation of this code. When
an animal is so impounded, it shall be humanely kept and treated, and may be
redeemed and disposed of, as other impounded animals are kept, treated and
redeemed or disposed of. A description of the animal shall be kept in the
animal control office and if the owner is known, the city shall attempt to
notify the owner of the impoundment orally or in writing.
      (2)   Presumption of at large. In any prosecution charging a violation of
any part of this chapter, proof that the animal described in the complaint was
“at large”, as defined herein, and that the defendant named in the complaint
was the owner of the animal, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the owner permitted his or her animal to be at large in
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Authority of officials; persons.
      (1)   The animal control officer, a police officer, or such other officer
or employee of the city as may be authorized:
         (a)   Shall take into custody and impound any animal running at large
in violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city; and
         (b)   May enter upon the premises of the owner or other private
premises to take such animal into custody.
      (2)   Any other person may take such animal into custody and present it
to the authority in charge of the animal control shelter for impounding.
   (D)   Breaking shelter; releasing animals; interference. No unauthorized
person shall:
      (1)   Break or attempt to break open the animal control shelter, or take
or let out any animal therefrom;
      (2)   Take or attempt to take from any officer or employee of the city
any animal taken into custody as provided by this chapter; or
      (3)   In any manner interfere with or hinder an officer or employee in
the discharge of his or her duties relating to the taking into custody and
impounding of animals as provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Fees for impounded/surrendered animals.
      (1)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall determine the fees
to be charged for impounded animals, surrendered animals and the keeping/
boarding of said animals; said fees to be those as set forth in Appendix A of
this code of ordinances. In computing the fee, a fraction of a day during which
an animal has been fed shall be deemed a full day.
      (2)   Any animal impounded may be redeemed within five days or 120 hours
from the time of impoundment upon the payment of the applicable impoundment and
keeping/boarding fee. Animals redeemed within 24 hours of impoundment shall not
be subject to the keeping/boarding fee.
      (3)   Any person redeeming a dog or cat not licensed as required by this
chapter shall pay the required license tax to the city and secure a tag and
present the receipt therefor and the tag to the person in charge of the animal
control shelter before the latter releases the dog or cat. If a dog or cat has
been licensed but is not wearing the tag, the person in charge of the animal
control shelter shall require adequate evidence of proper licensing of the dog
or cat before releasing it. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
      (4)   Five dollars from the fees collected from each impoundment of an
animal shall be placed in a designated fund set up to provide assistance to
animal owners redeeming their animal from impoundment where such redeeming
owner is a resident of the city and is a member of a low income household
receiving government low income assistance. Provided funds are available in the
fund designated herein, such owner shall be eligible to receive a $10 voucher
upon redemption of the animal to be used to defray the cost of the spaying or
neutering of the animal required by this section. Such voucher may, contingent
upon availability of funds, be provided by the city upon presentation to the
city of proof satisfactory to the city to establish qualification for same
under this division (E)(4).
   (F)   Redemption by owner/failure to timely redeem. An owner of an impounded
animal or his or her agent may redeem the animal, prior to its sale or
destruction as provided herein, by paying the required fees against the animal
and meeting any other requirements which may be prescribed in this chapter.
However, when in the judgment of the animal control officer, an animal should
be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed. Any animal
that has not been so redeemed within five days/120 hours of its impoundment
shall be deemed a stray which has been abandoned by its owner. As a result, it
shall be eligible for adoption. If the owner wishes to redeem the animal
thereafter, it shall be considered an adoption with all applicable fees being
due.
   (G)   Sale or destruction.
      (1)   As soon as practicable after any animal has been impounded, the
animal control officer or other employee or officer impounding the animal,
shall post a notice thereof at the police office or animal control shelter of
the city. The notice shall describe the animal and notify the owner to pay the
charges thereon and remove the same prior to a designated time. The notice
shall also state that unless the animal is redeemed the animal will be sold or
destroyed as provided in this chapter. The notice shall also state that any
animal that has not been redeemed within five days/120 hours of its impoundment
shall be deemed a stray which has been abandoned by its owner. As a result, it
shall be eligible for adoption or subject to possible destruction.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded animal
shall be held for 120 hours during which time it may be redeemed pursuant to
this chapter. No animal may be destroyed or sold until after this period unless
same has been deemed vicious or knowingly aggressive by the animal control
officer, or otherwise severely injured, old or infirm.
   (H)   Spaying or neutering.
      (1)   Required. No dog or cat may be released from the animal control
shelter for adoption unless the animal has been spayed or neutered, unless the
adopting party signs an agreement to have the animal spayed or neutered and
deposits with the city a deposit ensuring the spaying or neutering of the
animal in an amount of money as set forth in Appendix A of this code of
ordinances determined from time to time by the City Council.
      (2)   Certificate of proof. When an animal is released to an adopting
party upon posting of a spay or neuter deposit and signing of an agreement to
spay or neuter, the adopting party shall provide a certificate of proof to the
City Clerk within 30 days of the release of such animal to the adopting party,
signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that the animal has been spayed or
neutered with proof of current rabies vaccination and appropriate license.
      (3)   Extension granted. If the spaying or neutering of the animal within
the 30-day period would jeopardize the life or health of the animal, the
adopting party shall return to the City Clerk a certificate signed by a
licensed veterinarian stating that such spaying or neutering would jeopardize
the life or health of the animal. In such cases the adopting party shall be
granted an additional 30-day period in which to have the animal spayed or
neutered. Further extensions may be granted upon additional veterinary
certificates stating their necessity.
      (4)   Forfeiture of funds. If the adopting party does not return the
certificate of spaying or neutering within the 30-day period or periods of
extension, the funds deposited shall be forfeited to the city.
      (5)   Funds allocated. Funds forfeited under these provisions shall be
placed in a separate account which shall be an interest bearing account. The
funds of the account shall be allocated to programs which directly promote,
subsidize or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering animals held by
the city.
      (6)   Refund upon furnishing proof. Upon the return of a certificate
signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that the animal has been spayed or
neutered and furnishing proof that the animal has a current rabies vaccination
and license, the funds deposited with the city shall be refunded to the
adopting party.
   (I)   Form of sterilization agreement. The sterilization agreement to be
used by the city shall be the following:
   STERILIZATION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this           day of       , 2   , by
and between the City of Pryor Creek, Mayes County, State of Oklahoma and
                                  (name of adopting party),
                            (address and telephone number of the adopting
party).
In consideration of the releasing of said animal, and in further consideration
of the mutual obligations herein, the City of Pryor Creek releases the
following animal to the adopting party:                                        
(describe animal).
1.   The City of Pryor Creek agrees to release the above listed animal into the
care of the adopting party and refund the adopting party’s spaying/neutering
deposit; provided, that:
A.   The animal is sterilized by a licensed veterinarian by         day of
    , 2   .
B.   A written statement signed by the veterinarian performing the
sterilization, that the animal has been sterilized by the stated date, is given
to the Clerk of the City of Pryor Creek.
2.   The adopting party accepts the above listed animal and agrees:
A.   To have the animal sterilized by a licensed veterinarian by         day of
      , 2   (30 days from acceptance of the animal).
B.   To provide written evidence to the Clerk of the City of Pryor Creek from
the veterinarian performing the sterilization that the animal has been
sterilized and has a current rabies vaccination and license by the listed date.
This agreement shall be binding upon the assigns, heirs, executors and
administrators of the respective parties.
The parties hereto have hereunto set their hands the day and year first above
written.
            ___________________________
         Clerk of the City of Pryor Creek
            __________________________
         Adopting Party
(Prior Code, § 5-3-7) (Ord. 2005-5(A), passed 8-16-2005; Ord. 2008-3, passed 9-
16-2008; Ord. 2010-4, passed 3-2-2010; Ord. 2020-4, passed 3-3-2020)
§ 92.08 SPECIFIC ANIMAL TYPES PROHIBITED; NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED.
   (A)   Swine prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to keep swine in the
city limits except temporarily in a stockyard awaiting transportation.
   (B)   Number. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or permit to
be kept or maintained any cow, horse, donkey, mule, pig, goat, sheep, goose,
chicken, duck, turkey, guinea, or more than one rabbit upon any property or
premises within the corporate limits of the city, except that one cow, horse,
sheep, goat, donkey or not more than 12 domestic fowl may be kept in any pen or
enclosure for each multiple of 7,000 square feet in area of a pen or enclosure
which is detached from any dwelling house. Such pen or enclosure where such
animal or fowl are kept is to be maintained in a sanitary condition and not
offensive or dangerous to the public health.
   (C)   Limitation on number of dogs or cats.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to allow more than a total
of two dogs and two cats to be present outside of the primary dwelling unit at
any given time within the city limits. Any person or entity maintaining certain
dogs or cats at a premises exceeding the limits of this section on the date of
effectiveness of this section may continue to maintain the same dogs or cats at
the same premises provided that the person or entity provide proof of the
existence of the dogs and cats at the premises prior to the effective date of
this section by way of rabies certificates or other documentary evidence as
deemed in the sole discretion of the city to be sufficient. Properly licensed
pet stores, kennels, boarding facilities and animal shelters located within the
city shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The city shall not regulate the number or type of animals that are
maintained within a primary dwelling unit; provided, that all such animals
shall have a current rabies vaccination as required in this chapter and be
maintained in compliance with this Chapter 92. Provided further, it is unlawful
to maintain any number of animals within a dwelling unit in such a way that the
conditions of the dwelling constitute a nuisance or health hazard and threat to
the occupants or welfare of the animals maintained.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-8) (Ord. 2020-7, passed 3-3-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 UNLAWFUL ACTS AND ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Pasturing public areas. It is unlawful for any person to stake,
confine or pasture any animal on any public school ground or other public
property, federal, state, city or other, on any railroad right-of- way or on
any other property, without the consent of the person owning or controlling
such property.
   (B)   Cruelty to animals.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to pour on
or apply to an animal, any drug or other thing which inflicts pain on the
animal; or knowingly to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or
knowingly to neglect an animal belonging to him or her or in his or her custody
in a cruel or inhumane manner.
      (2)   The premises on or in which any animals are kept shall be subject
to inspection by the health officer or any of his or her representatives at any
reasonable hour of the day for the purpose of enforcing this section, in a
manner authorized by law.
      (3)   Any police officer or animal control officer may enter the premises
where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to
examine such animal and take possession of such animal when in his or her
opinion it requires humane treatment, as authorized by law.
   (C)   Poisoning. It is unlawful for a person willfully to poison any dog or
other animal, except a noxious, nondomesticated animal or knowingly to expose
poison so that the same may be taken by such an animal.
   (D)   Encouraging animals to fight. It is unlawful for any person to
instigate or encourage a fight between animals; or to encourage one animal to
attack, pursue or annoy another animal, except a noxious nondomesticated
animal; or to keep a house, pit or other place used for fights between animals.
   (E)   Abandoning. It is unlawful for any person to deposit along the public
highways or public streets in this city, or in any public place, any live dog,
cat or other domestic animal with the intention of abandoning such domestic
animal.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-9) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   Conditions constituting a nuisance. The following conditions are
hereby declared to be a nuisance:
      (1)   Barking. Any dog or other animal which, by barking, howling or
otherwise, disturbs the peace and quiet of any person;
      (2)   Scavenging. Any dog or other animal which goes into any garbage can
or other waste vessel, or turns the same over or scatters the contents of the
same on the ground;
      (3)   Chasing. Any dog or other animal which chases cars, motorcycles,
bicycles or any other motor vehicle or intimidates joggers, pedestrians or
children; and
      (4)   Animal feces. Any dog or other animal which defecates on public or
private property not owned by the animal’s owner or keeper of the animal. The
nuisance may be abated by the owner or person in charge of said animal by
removing the feces and placing same in a proper waste container.
   (B)   Complaint. Any dog or other animal alleged to be a nuisance, as
defined in this section, may be proceeded against in the Municipal Court after
a complaint has been duly filed therein by any person having knowledge thereof,
and if the Court shall find that such dog or other animal is a nuisance, then
the Court may order the owner or person in possession to prevent and abate such
nuisance, or the Court may order such dog or animal impounded and the owner or
person in possession may have the dog or other animal returned upon paying all
costs of impounding and giving good and sufficient bond, in the sum as set by
the city, conditioned that he or she will prevent and abate such nuisance.
Thirty days thereafter, such owner or person in possession may present to the
Court evidence that the nuisance has been abated and prevented and the Court
may, upon such hearing, order the bond returned.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-10) (Ord. 2000-5, passed 10-3-2000) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Vicious dogs.
      (1)   Harboring unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain
and harbor within the corporate limits of the city any vicious animal of the
canine family, including dogs, coyotes, wolves or any other animal belonging to
the canine family.
      (2)   Defined. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         VICIOUS DOG. A dog which has bitten, or attempted to bite, any person
or animal without undue provocation, or which attacks or barks or growls at and
acts as if it intends to attack or bite, or bites a person or animal, when not
unduly provoked.
      (3)   Self-defense. A person may kill a dog in self-defense or in defense
of another person or animal when the dog, without undue provocation, bites him
or her or the other person or animal, or attacks or attempts to bite or attack
him or her or the other person or animal in such a manner that an ordinarily
prudent person would be led to believe that the person or animal toward whom
the efforts of the dog are directed is about to be bitten or otherwise
physically harmed.
      (4)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this division (A),
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day a vicious dog, as herein defined, is
kept, maintained or allowed by any person within the corporate limits of the
city shall constitute a separate offense.
      (5)   Euthanization. Any breed of animal that is known to be aggressive
and has been surrendered by its owner or found stray will be subject to
immediate euthanization.
   (B)   Complaint; proceedings. Any dog or other animal alleged to be vicious
or dangerous may be proceeded against in the Municipal Court, after a complaint
has been duly filed therein by any person having knowledge thereof. If the
Court shall find that, at such time:
      (1)   The dog or other animal has attacked a person or other animal; and
         (a)   The person or other animal so attacked was not at the time
trespassing upon the property of the owner or person having control of such dog
or other animal; or
         (b)   The person or other animal so attacked was not provoking or
teasing such dog or other animal; or
      (2)   The dog or other animal is of such vicious and fierce disposition
as to attack human beings or other animals without provocation, then the Court
shall have the authority to order such dog or other animal kept muzzled or that
such dog or other animal be kept within a sufficient enclosure. If such dog or
other animal has bitten or attacked a human being or other animal on other
occasions, the Court may order that it be delivered to the animal control
officer for disposal or destruction.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-11) (Ord. 2008-3, passed 9-16-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Defined. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal of the larger variety which
is usually not a domestic animal and which can normally be found in the wild
state, with or without mean or vicious propensities, including, but not limited
to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles,
apes, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, and all forms of poisonous or large
snakes, including those considered dangerous such as boas and pythons, lynxes,
raccoons, skunks, monkeys and other like animals.
   (B)   Harboring unlawful. It is unlawful to keep or harbor any wild, exotic
or dangerous animal within the city limits as a pet or for display, or for
exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee, except as provided in
this section.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological
parks or zoos, performing animal exhibitions or circuses licensed by the city.
   (D)   Permit requirements. If the owner of a wild, exotic or dangerous
animal can establish to the Police Department’s satisfaction that an animal
ordinarily considered as wild, dangerous or exotic is not dangerous to people
or other animals and that the animal is healthy, safe and tame as a pet, then
the City Clerk may issue a permit to the owner to keep such animal in the city
limits. The permit shall be renewed annually. The fee shall be set by the City
Council. For any animal so permitted as provided in this division (D), the
owner agrees to accept full responsibility for the actions and behavior of such
animal. The establishment of whether such animal is healthy, safe and tame as a
pet shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal by submitting
written evidence to the Police Department. No permit shall be granted by the
City Clerk unless written approval by the Police Department to the evidence
submitted by the owner is submitted to the City Clerk in advance.
   (E)   Temporary permits. The city may issue temporary permits for keeping,
care and protection of an infant animal native to this area which has been
deemed to be homeless. The city shall have the power to release or order the
release of any infant wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed
capable of survival. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 5-3-12) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.13 ZONING REGULATIONS PREVAIL.
   In case of conflict between this chapter and the present or any future
zoning ordinance, the provision of the zoning ordinance shall prevail and
supersede the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-14)
§ 92.14 SPAY OR NEUTER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Spay or neuter required.
      (1)   On or after July 1, 2020, it is unlawful for any person to own,
possess, keep or harbor within the city any dog or cat over the age of six
months that has not been spayed or neutered, except as provided in division (B)
of this section.
      (2)   The owner of any dog or cat shall furnish upon request of an animal
control officer written evidence showing the sterilization status of the
animal. A valid rabies vaccination certificate listing the subject animal as
being spayed or neutered shall constitute sufficient proof of sterilization.
      (3)   The failure or refusal of any person to comply with the
requirements of this section, unless excepted, shall be an offense separate and
direct from all other offenses prescribed in this chapter and shall not for
purposes of enforcement, be considered as lesser included to any other offense
herein.
   (B)   Exceptions from spay or neuter. The owner of a dog or cat shall not be
required to spay or neuter the animal upon demonstrating to the satisfaction of
the animal control officer compliance with any of the following exceptions.
      (1)   The animal is medically unsuited to undergo the sterilization
procedure, and a veterinarian signs a written statement specifying the medical
grounds for the exemption.
      (2)   The animal suffers from a temporary medical condition so that
sterilization is unsafe or imprudent, and a veterinarian signs a written
statement as to the prognosis of when sterilization may be performed. The date
given on that prognosis shall become the expiration date of the temporary
medical exemption. Upon expiration, sterilization shall be required unless a
veterinarian provides another temporary medical exemption and prognosis in the
same manner.
      (3)   The animal is owned, possessed, kept or harbored within the city
for no more than 60 days in any consecutive 12-month period.
      (4)   The owner obtains or has made application for an annual intact
permit, for any reason on deemed valuable to the owner, and is otherwise in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   The animal is properly, legally classified as a “service animal”
under the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The classification of
an animal as a “service animal” under the ADA can be generally stated as being
an animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with
disabilities. Animals qualifying under this exception shall be only those
classified as a “service animal” under the ADA.
   (C)   Intact permit.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person who owns, possesses, keeps or harbors
within the city any un-spayed or non-neutered dog or cat over the age of six
months, and for which the exceptions enumerated in division (B) of this section
do not apply, to fail to obtain an intact permit in his or her name.
      (2)   The City Clerk or duly authorized agents of the city shall issue
intact permits upon payment of an initial fee as established by the City
Council and set forth in Appendix A of this code of ordinances set by ordinance
or resolution and approval of an application made for such purpose. The
application shall state the name, address and telephone number of the owner and
the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog or cat for which the intact
permit is obtained, and such other information as the City Clerk may require.
Neither the City Clerk nor any authorized agent shall issue an intact permit
until the owner presents a certificate showing the dog or cat has a current
city’s registration at the time application is made.
      (3)   Upon approval of the application, the City Clerk or any authorized
agent shall issue the intact permit in an appropriate form. An intact permit
shall expire one year from the date of issuance and shall be subject to
revocation and nonrenewal as provided in division (D) of this section. The
annual renewal fee shall be that fee as set forth in Appendix A of this code of
ordinances set by ordinance or resolution after the initial fee has been paid.
      (4)   A current intact permit may be transferred to the new owner of the
dog or cat for which the permit was issued upon application of the new owner.
      (5)   It is unlawful to use or transfer an intact permit or tag, or
attempt to use or transfer the same, for or to a dog or cat other than the
animal for which the permit was issued.
   (D)   Revocation or nonrenewal of intact permit.
      (1)   The city may revoke the intact permit for a dog or cat when, during
the current permit year, the owner or keeper of the animal for which the permit
is issued has failed on two separate occasions to abide by the requirements of
§
92.06 as hereinafter provided:
         (a)   The city shall provide written 30 days written notice to the
permit holder of the city’s determination that the permit shall be revoked
effective 30 days from the date notice is given. Notice shall be deemed given
and effective when mailed to the last known address of the permit holder or
hand delivered to the permit holder.
         (b)   The notice shall specify that the permit holder has the right to
appeal the decision of the city to revoke the permit and that such an appeal
may be perfected and prosecuted in the manner provided in Chapter 34 of this
code of ordinances. The notice shall further specify that in the event the
permit holder does not appeal the decision as provided by Chapter 34 for
administrative appeals of this code of ordinances, that such permit will be
deemed revoked on the date specified in the notice.
      (2)   No intact permit shall be issued or renewed to a permit holder of
whom a previous permit has been revoked. The commencement of revocation
proceedings shall temporarily stay the issuance or renewal of an intact permit
pending the outcome of such proceedings.
   (E)   Permit records. The City Clerk shall keep a register of all intact
permits issued. Such records shall include the name, address and telephone
number of the owner, a description and other identifying information of the dog
or cat so permitted, and the date of issuance of the permit and expiration date
of same.
   (F)   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. The penalties provided for herein shall be in
addition to other remedies of the city and aggrieved persons and shall not be
construed as exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-16) (Ord. 2020-3, passed 3-3-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.15 PROHIBITION OF SALE OF ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to display, give away, or offer to give
away, sell, barter, trade, lease or otherwise trade any animal on any public
right-of-way, commercial parking lot or at any flea market or festival;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any nonprofit
organization founded for the purpose of providing humane sanctuary or shelter
for abandoned unwanted animals.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-17) (Ord. 2020-6, passed 3-3-2020) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any ordinance or provision of this chapter, or who
violates or refuses or neglects to carry out any reasonable order made by the
health officer pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. The penalties provided for herein shall be in
addition to other remedies of the city and aggrieved persons and shall not be
construed as exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 5-3-15)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Maintenance unlawful
   
93.03   Authority of city
   
93.04   Liability for nuisance
   
93.05   Time does not legalize
   
93.06   Health nuisances
   
93.07   Remedies
   
93.08   Abatement
   
93.09   Procedures cumulative
Weeds, Trash, Dead Animals and Grass
   
93.20   Definitions
   
93.21   Violations concerning weeds, grass, trash and dead animals
   
93.22   Reporting and records of violations
   
93.23   Notice of violations
   
93.24   Designation of officers by the Council for enforcement and appeals and
setting compensation for same
   
93.25   City’s right of entry upon property
   
93.26   Immediate notice of lien
   
93.27   Abatement by city or contractor
   
93.28   Billing for costs; perfection of lien
   
93.29   Foreclosure of lien
   
93.30   Notice and procedure for subsequent violations within six months
   
93.31   Special application to agricultural land and railroads
   
93.32   Open burning
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Unlawfully doing an act or omitting to perform a duty or is any
thing or condition which either:
      (1)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or
basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   PRIVATE NUISANCE. Every nuisance not included in the definition of public
nuisance, as defined herein, is a PRIVATE NUISANCE.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE.
      (1)   One which affects at the same time an entire community or
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal.
      (2)   (a)   In addition to other PUBLIC NUISANCES declared by other
sections of this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be PUBLIC
NUISANCES:
            1.   The sale or offering for sale of unwholesome food or drink; or
the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made;
            2.   The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating
liquor in violation of state law or ordinances of the city; or keeping of a
place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or furnished in
violation of state law or ordinance of the city;
            3.   The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene
pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the
keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed;
            4.   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards,
slot machines, punchboards or otherwise;
            5.   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced;
            6.   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state
law or ordinance are practiced or carried on;
            7.   The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the
ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held;
            8.   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
            9.   The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy
persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such
noises;
            10.   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine
which materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by
others;
            11.   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto
which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such
street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may
be authorized by law or ordinance;
            12.   Any unattended motor vehicle (whether in operating condition
or not) trailer, or boat that is not properly secured while on jacks whether
temporary or permanent;
            13.   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed,
formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety;
            14.   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure,
refuse or other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for
flies, mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs; and the premises on which such
exist;
            15.   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public
health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition;
            16.   Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed,
conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety;
            17.   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public
safety;
            18.   Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace,
health, morals, safety or welfare;
            19.   Any unattended motor vehicle (whether in operating condition
or not) trailer, or boat without a current vehicle plate as required by law for
vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence
district;
            20.   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may
become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of the city, by reason of any
noise or noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation,
is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
            21.   The keeping of any dog kennels within this city for the
breeding and raising of dogs that shall become offensive or annoying to the
public by reason of the barking and noise made by the animals therein
contained;
            22.   Any vault, cesspool or sink used to receive human excrement,
slops, garbage, refuse or other filthy substance;
            23.   Any pond, slop, trash, refuse, cobs, manure, decayed or
decaying vegetable matter, left, kept or maintained in such condition as to
endanger the public health;
            24.   The keeping of any hogpen in the city limits;
            25.   Every privy or water closet which shall be in an overflowing,
leaking or filthy condition, or in a condition dangerous, injurious or annoying
to the comfort, health and welfare of any resident of this city;
            26.   Any green or unsalted hides of any animal kept in any exposed
or open place within the limits of this city;
            27.   Any unclean, foul, leaking or broken or defective ditch,
drain, gutter, slop, garbage or manure barrel, box or other receptacle;
            28.   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe
and dangerous from fire, decay and other cause, or shall become hazardous from
fire, by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or
shall be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of this city or its
inhabitants from any cause; and
            29.   Any water or putrid substances, whether animal or vegetable,
to accumulate so as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom, or to
become in a condition injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood.
         (b)   The above enumeration of certain PUBLIC NUISANCES shall be
cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public
or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-1) (Ord. 2011-2, passed 4-19-2011)
§ 93.02 MAINTENANCE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner,
lessee or other person, to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his or her control within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-2) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 AUTHORITY OF CITY.
   As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city has power to determine what is and
what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the
protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply,
outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city
has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner
and an opportunity for him or her to be heard, if this can be done.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-3)
§ 93.04 LIABILITY FOR NUISANCE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is
liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-4)
§ 93.05 TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-5)
§ 93.06 HEALTH NUISANCES.
   (A)   Removal. Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the health
officer shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private
premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his or her own expense,
any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of
insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any
other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or
within such other time as may be in writing, and may be served personally on
the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the
health officer or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the
last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant or agent, if known and within
the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner,
occupant or agent is unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served
by posting a copy thereof on the premises or by publication in at least one
issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city.
   (B)   Noncompliance. If the order is not complied with, the health officer
may cause the order to be executed and complied with and the cost thereof shall
be certified to the City Clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such
nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the
owner or occupant if he or she is a user of water from the city water system or
such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility
bill to which it is added and shall become due and payable, and subject to the
same regulations relating to delinquency in payment as the utility bill itself.
If such owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost,
after certification to the City Clerk, may be collected in an manner in which
any other debt due the city may be collected. (See Appendix A of this code of
ordinances.)
   (C)   Enforcement official. The duties of health officer shall be performed
by the Director of Civil Defense/Emergency Management.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-6)
§ 93.07 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Public nuisances, The remedies against a public nuisance are:
      (1)   Prosecution on complaint before the Municipal Court;
      (2)   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
      (3)   Civil action; or
      (4)   Abatement:
         (a)   By person injured as provided in 50 O.S. § 12; or
         (b)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
   (B)   Private nuisances. The remedies against a private nuisance are:
      (1)   Civil action; or
      (2)   Abatement:
         (a)   By person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and 15; or
         (b)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-7)
§ 93.08 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Summary.
      (1)   Authority. Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a
grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of
one or more persons, or of the public generally. It is recognized that
circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require the Mayor or other
appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and
proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the
danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
      (2)   Submission of statement, recommendation. The Chief of the Fire
Department, the Chief of Police, the City Attorney, the building official, the
electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector or any other officer subordinate
to the Mayor may submit through or with the consent of the Mayor to the City
Council, a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by the
ordinances of the city or law, and a request or recommendation that it be
abated. The Mayor himself or herself, the health officer and City Council or
any resident of the city may submit such a statement and request a
recommendation to the City Council.
      (3)   Hearing; notice. The City Council shall determine whether or not
the alleged nuisance is a nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering
evidence on the subject, the City Council shall have power to subpoena and
examine witnesses, books, papers and other effects. Before proceeding to abate
the nuisance or have it abated, the City Council shall give notice of a hearing
on the proposed abatement to the owner of any property concerned and an
adequate opportunity to be heard, if such notice and opportunity for a hearing
can be given. Such notice to the owner and other persons concerned shall be
given in writing by mail or by service by a police officer if their names and
addresses are known; but, if the names or addresses are not known, and the
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the person or public adversely
affected would not be unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of
the hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation within the
city.
      (4)   Abatement. If the City Council finds that a nuisance does in fact
exist, it shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing
the nuisance to abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety,
morals or welfare of the person or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons
responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate it within the specified
time, the City Council shall direct the Mayor to abate the nuisance or to have
it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 16.
The City Clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such summary abatement to
the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be
just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until
paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city, collectible as other debts
to the city may be collected. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
      (5)   Designation of administrative officer; appeal. The City Council may
designate an administrative officer to carry out the duties of the City Council
in this section. The property owner shall have a right of appeal to the City
Council from any order of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days
after the administrative hearing from which the appeal is taken.
   (B)   Suit in District Court. In cases where it is deemed impractical
summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the District Court of
the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in 50 O.S. § 17.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-8) (Ord. 2014-3, passed 11-18-2014)
§ 93.09 PROCEDURES CUMULATIVE.
   The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and
by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative as to any other
penalties or procedures authorized.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-9)
WEEDS, TRASH, DEAD ANIMALS AND GRASS
§ 93.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL OPEN BURN. The open burning of material, including the burning
of pastures, conducted on land zoned “agricultural” within the city limits
where the land upon which the open burn is to be had is five acres or more in
size. Agriculturally zoned properties less than five acres in size upon which
there is located a residence shall be deemed properties subject to RESIDENTIAL
OPEN BURN requirements under this chapter regardless of their zoning as
agricultural. Agriculturally zoned properties less than five acres in size upon
which there is no residence shall be deemed properties subject to COMMERCIAL
OPEN BURN requirements under this chapter regardless of their zoning as
agricultural.
   COMMERCIAL OPEN BURN. The open burning of material conducted in relationship
to any business property or commercial property conducted in the performance of
construction, maintenance or upkeep of the property.
   OPEN BURN. The burning of any material outdoors.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   PERSON. Natural people and entities recognized by applicable law as a legal
entity capable of owning property in the state.
   PROPERTY. One parcel of property, title to which is held by one person or
persons or entity.
   RECREATIONAL/CEREMONIAL OPEN BURN. The open burning of material by civic
organizations and other not for profit organizations or for community events.
   RESIDENTIAL OPEN BURN. The open burning of material conducted on residential
property for personal household purposes and unrelated to any business,
commercial or for profit purpose.
   TRASH. Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible
materials, rubbish, refuse, dead animals, waste or matter of any kind or form
which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned.
   WEED.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to trees, bushes, poison ivy, poison
oak or poison sumac and all vegetation of all kinds at any state of maturity
which:
         (a)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or
produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless
such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to
the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to
traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the
mowing of said weeds;
         (b)   Regardless of height:
            1.   Harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of
refuse or trash;
            2.   Harbors rodents or vermin;
            3.   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
            4.   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
            5.   Is dead or diseased.
      (2)   The term WEED shall not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for
other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-1) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.21 VIOLATIONS CONCERNING WEEDS, GRASS, TRASH AND DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person that
owns property, or is in possession or control of property located wholly or in
part within the city limits to allow weeds, as the term “weed” is defined
herein, to grow upon any property owned by them or property which is under
their possession or control.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any manager,
officer or owner of an entity which owns property or which is in possession or
control of property located wholly or in part within the city limits to allow
weeds, as the term “weed” is defined herein, to grow upon any property owned by
said entity or property which is under the entity’s possession or control.
   (C)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person that
owns property, or is in possession or control of property located wholly or in
part within the city limits to allow the accumulation of trash, as the term
“trash” is defined herein, upon any property owned by them or property which is
under their possession or control.
   (D)   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any manager,
officer or owner of an entity which owns property or which is in possession or
control of property located wholly or in part within the city limits to allow
the accumulation of trash, as the term “trash” is defined herein, upon any
property owned by said entity or property which is under the entity’s
possession or control.
   (E)   The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city
shall, within 24 hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass from
the city limits or otherwise dispose of the carcass in a lawful manner, and
failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-2) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.22 REPORTING AND RECORDS OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall develop a prescribed form for the reporting of
alleged violations of this chapter. The form, at a minimum, shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The property address of the property alleged to be in a state of
violation of this chapter;
      (2)   The date that the report was made to the city;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the reporting person; and
      (4)   A concise but full explanation of the condition upon the property
alleged to constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Reports of alleged violations of this chapter shall be made to the
office of the City Clerk on the form prescribed by division (A) of this section
to be submitted to the City Clerk either in person at the office of the City
Clerk, by mail to the office of the City Clerk, or by electronic delivery to
the office of the City Clerk.
   (C)   Upon receipt by the City Clerk of a report of an alleged violation of
this chapter the City Clerk shall:
      (1)   Provide a copy of the report to the Police Department for purposes
of investigation of the matter by the Police Department and possible issuance
of a citation for violation of under this chapter;
      (2)   The City Clerk shall create a file on the report of the alleged
violation to be maintained by the Clerk until the matter is closed; and
      (3)   The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the report to the city
official charged with enforcement of this chapter (enforcement official) as
designated by the Mayor with approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-4) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.23 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   Upon confirmation by the enforcement official that a violation of this
chapter has occurred the enforcement official shall cause notice to be given to
the owner of the property as follows.
   (A)   Notice by mail. Notice shall be given by mail and the notice shall
conform to the following requirements.
      (1)   The notice required herein shall be given by mail to the owner of
the property and at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the
County Treasurer’s office.
      (2)   If the property is in the possession or control of a person other
than the owner of the property, of whom the city has knowledge, the notice
prescribed herein shall be given to such person but however the failure to do
so shall not affect the validity of any actions taken by the city in pursuit of
resolution of the matter.
      (3)   The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of
trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate. The
notice shall contain a reasonable description of the condition of the property
alleged to constitute a violation under this chapter.
      (4)   The notice shall state that if the cleaning of trash or cutting or
mowing of weeds or grass is not performed within ten days of the date that the
notice was mailed that the work shall be done by the city and that a notice of
lien will be filed with the County Clerk against the property for the costs due
and owing the city for the cleaning of the property and costs of the notice.
      (5)   The notice shall state that: “Any accumulations of trash or the
existence of weeds upon the owner’s property occurring within six months from
and after the date of this notice may be summarily abated by the city and the
costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and that a lien
may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further
prior notice to the property owner.”
      (6)   The notice shall state that: “The owner of the property may give
written consent to the city authorizing the city to remove trash or mow weeds
in which case the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner;
and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment in the
event that the owner refuses or fails to pay the city within 30 days following
the performance of abatement by the city.”
      (7)   The notice shall further state that: “The owner of the property may
appeal the city’s determination of the property as being in violation of §
93.21 of the Pryor Creek code of ordinances; and, that the appeal must be filed
in writing conforming to the requirements of the city’s ordinances for
administrative appeals found in Chapter 34 of the city’s code of ordinances
within ten days of the date of mailing by the city of the notice herein
required. Further, that failure to file the appeal within the ten- day time
period shall result in the waiver of the right to appeal the city’s decision.”
      (8)   The notice shall be given by the manner of mail documenting receipt
from the postal carrier of the date of mailing, and the name and address of the
person to whom the mailing was made. Certified mailing is not required by this
division (A)(8).
      (9)   Notice by mail shall be deemed legally given upon mailing of the
notice herein prescribed and time period as set forth in this chapter for
abatement by the owner shall begin to run on the day following the date of
mailing.
      (10)   The notice herein described and given by mail shall be deemed a
final written administrative decision finding that the condition of the
property constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property would be
benefitted by the removal of such conditions for reasons of appeal under
Chapter 34 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Notice by posting and publication. At the sole discretion of the city
additional notice may be given by posting and/or publication as prescribed by
law. Failure to give additional notice by posting and/or publication shall not
invalidate the notice given by mailing which notice by mailing shall be deemed
sufficient legal notice in the matter for all purposes.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-5) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.24 DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS BY THE COUNCIL FOR ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS AND
SETTING COMPENSATION FOR SAME.
   The Mayor, with approval of the Council, may appoint enforcement official(s)
to serve as administrative official(s) for purposes of administrative decisions
for purposes of application and enforcement of this chapter; and hearing
officer(s) for purposes of hearing appeals of decisions of the enforcement
official(s). No administrative official shall serve as both an enforcement
official and a hearing officer. In the absence of the appointment of a hearing
officer, appeals shall be heard by the City Council. The compensation to be
paid to any such appointed officer or official for the services to the city
provided by such officer or official under this section shall be in such
amount, if any, and upon such terms as shall be from time to time determined
and set by the City Council by resolution or ordinance. In the absence of an
ordinance or resolution setting forth terms of compensation for any such
officer or official appointed it shall be deemed that the person so appointed
shall serve without compensation until such time as an ordinance or resolution
establishing terms of compensation, if any, be passed and approved by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-6) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017; Ord. 2020-8, passed 3-3-
2020)
§ 93.25 CITY’S RIGHT OF ENTRY UPON PROPERTY.
   The agents of the city are granted the right of entry upon the property for
purposes of performing the tasks of removal of trash, or mowing or cutting of
weeds and performance of duties incidental to abatement of the condition upon
the fulfillment of the following conditions:
   (A)   Notice has been given the owner as required in this chapter and the
condition of the property has not been abated by the owner and no appeal of the
notice has been filed within the ten-day notice period for abatement;
   (B)   Notice has been given the owner as required in this chapter and the
owner has given written consent to the city’s entry to perform the abatement at
the cost to the owner for the city’s abatement; or
   (C)   Ten days has elapsed from the date of the city’s decision calling for
abatement in an owner’s appeal and no stay has been issued by the District
Court in an appeal of the matter.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-7) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.26 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF LIEN.
   (A)   Immediately following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the City
Clerk shall file a notice of lien with the County Clerk containing the
following information:
      (1)   The legal description of the property;
      (2)   A general description of the work which was performed to abate the
condition; and
      (3)   A statement that: “The city claims a lien on the property for the
cleaning or mowing costs incurred by the city for abatement in an amount to be
finally determined by the City Council and billed to the owner following this
notice of lien claimed.”
   (B)   The lien filed under this section shall not have an amount of the lien
stated in same.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-8) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.27 ABATEMENT BY CITY OR CONTRACTOR.
   (A)   Abatement of the property condition, following notice and procedure as
set forth herein, may be performed by personnel of the city or by a private
contractor at the sole discretion of the city.
   (B)   In the event the city shall determine to utilize a private contractor
for the performance of the abatement the work shall be bid in conformance with
the city’s purchasing policy and awarded to the lowest and best responsible
bidder.
   (C)   In the event the city shall determine to utilize city personnel for
performance of the abatement the billing by the city to the owner for the work
shall be the actual cost of labor, other reasonable and necessary expenses, and
equipment required to complete the project.
   (D)   Costs billed to the owner shall include the cost of notice incurred in
the process by the city.
   (E)   The total cost determination for the abatement shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Council prior to billing being made to the owner.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-9) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.28 BILLING FOR COSTS; PERFECTION OF LIEN.
   (A)   Following determination and approval of the amount of costs of
abatement the City Clerk shall forward by regular mail to the owner of the
property and at the address shown by the current year’s tax rolls in the County
Treasurer’s office a statement for the actual costs and demanding payment
within 30 days of the date of mailing of the billing. The statement shall
include a statement that: “If the owner fails to pay within the 30-day time
period then a lien will be perfected in favor of the city against the property
in the amount of the billing with further cost as provided by law.”
   (B)   If payment for the costs is made to the city, the city shall cause a
release of lien to be recorded in the land records of the County Clerk’s office
relating to the filing of the initial notice of lien under §
93.26 of this chapter.
   (C)   If payment for the costs is not made to the city within the 30-day
time period following billing then the City Clerk shall forward a certified
statement of the amount of the cost to the County Treasurer. The certified
statement shall contain at a minimum the following information:
      (1)   The legal description of the property;
      (2)   The statement of the amount of the total costs of abatement
indicating that the city claims a lien against the property in the stated
amount for abatement as described in the initial lien filing under §
93.26 of this chapter;
      (3)   The name of the owner and address of the owner as shown by the
current year’s tax rolls in the County Treasurer’s office;
      (4)   The lien shall make reference to the initial notice of lien filed
under §
93.26 of this chapter by reference to the book, page and date of filing of the
initial notice of lien in the records of the County Clerk’s office; and
      (5)   The lien shall state that: “It is filed pursuant to 11 O.S. § 22-
111 and shall be levied on the property and collected by the County Treasurer
as other taxes authorized by law.”
(Prior Code, § 4-5-10) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.29 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   If the lien of the city remains unpaid past the due date for the payment of
ad valorem taxes for the year in which the lien was levied on the property the
city may obtain a statement from the County Treasurer that the County Treasurer
has been unable to collect the assessment. The city may then pursue a civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and applicable costs and interests
thereon as prescribed for the collection of liens by an action in personam
against the property owner and in rem against the property to foreclose the
lien against the property.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-11) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.30 NOTICE AND PROCEDURE FOR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS WITHIN SIX MONTHS.
   (A)   In the event a notice is given for abatement as provided in this
chapter, and such notice is not vacated or reversed in an appeal of the notice,
any subsequent accumulations of trash or weeds on the property occurring within
a six-month time period calculated from the date of the first notice may be
declared to be a nuisance and violation of this chapter and may be summarily
abated by the city without further prior notice to the property owner.
   (B)   Following the summary abatement immediate notice of lien shall be
recorded as set forth in §
93.26 of this chapter and the owner shall be mailed a statement as required by
§
93.28(A) of this chapter which shall serve as notice of the abatement and shall
contain a statement that: “The owner has a right to file an appeal within ten
days of the date of mailing of this notice pursuant to the appeal process set
forth in §§
93.20 through
93.32 of the city’s code of ordinances in such matters.”
   (C)   If an appeal results and the abatement is confirmed on appeal then the
costs shall be due within ten days from the owner following the decision on
appeal and if the costs are not paid they may be collected as the collection
process for costs is set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   If the property has been transferred to another owner during the six-
month time period described in division (A) of this section, this section for
summary abatement without notice shall not apply to the matter.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-12) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.31 SPECIAL APPLICATION TO AGRICULTURAL LAND AND RAILROADS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property zoned
and used for agricultural purposes, save and except the provisions of §
93.32 of this chapter and save and except in instances in which weeds or trash
upon the property pose a hazard to traffic and are located in, or within ten
yards of the public right-of-way at intersections.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to railroad property
under the jurisdiction of the Oklahoma Corporation Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-13) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
§ 93.32 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Unlawful.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to open burn any material, of any type
outdoors within the city except where said open burning is performed pursuant
to an open burn permit issued by the city as hereinafter provided, and said
burning is carried out in compliance with the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Open burn in residential areas for residential recreational
purposes safely contained and safely conducted in chimineas, outdoor
fireplaces, fire pits, cookers and other such devices designed in such a manner
as is safe to the public for purposes of containing and conducting the burning
of materials shall be exempt from the requirements and restrictions of this
section with the exceptions of divisions (C)(2), (C)(3) and (F) of this
section, provided further that the activity is carried out in compliance with
the following additional requirements:
         (a)   The device is used in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions, if a commercially sold device;
         (b)   The device’s designed fuel load is not exceeded, if a
commercially sold device;
         (c)   The burn is constantly attended by a person over the age of 18
years until it is completely extinguished;
         (d)   Some means of immediate extinguishment is kept close at hand;
         (e)   The burn is conducted a safe distance from structures and other
combustible materials; and
         (f)   The burn is not conducted in such a manner as to be an annoyance
or nuisance to neighbors.
      (3)   The Fire Chief, or the Chief’s designee shall have discretion in
the determination of whether the burn is conducted in compliance with the
requirements of this exclusion and shall have the further discretion to order
the burn to cease in the event that in the discretion of the Chief or the
Chief’s designee the burn poses an unreasonable risk of fire danger or is
otherwise being conducted in a manner which constitutes a nuisance or annoyance
to neighbors or the public.
   (B)   Permit application.
      (1)   Applications for open burning shall be made by an adult in writing
on the application form adopted and approved by the City Council by resolution.
      (2)   Applications for open burning shall be signed by the party
responsible for conducting the open burn, which person must be of legal age,
and by the owner of the property on which the burning is to take place.
      (3)   Open burn applications shall be obtained from the city’s Fire
Department, Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.
      (4)   Completed applications for open burn shall be submitted for review
to the city’s Fire Department, Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:30 p.m., which applications shall be reviewed and approved or denied
by the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or the designee of the Chief or
Assistant Chief.
      (5)   The open burn permit shall issue upon approval by the Fire Chief,
Assistant Fire Chief, or the designee of the Chief or Assistant Chief and upon
payment by the applicant to the city of the applicable open burn permit fee.
(See Appendix A of this code of ordinances for applicable permit fee.)
      (6)   Open burn permits shall be valid for the periods of time starting
on the date the permit is issued as follows:
         (a)   Residential open burn permit. Ten days;
         (b)   Commercial open burn permit. Ten days;
         (c)   Agricultural open burn permit. One year; and
         (d)   Recreational/ceremonial burn permit. Ten days.
   (C)   Requirements for open burn.
      (1)   All material to be burned must be material originating from the
property upon which the burn site is located. No off-site material may be
imported to the burn site for purposes of being accumulated to be burned. This
division (C)(1) shall not apply to recreational/ceremonial open burns.
      (2)   The type of material to be burned shall be allowed or not allowed
at the discretion of the Fire Chief, or Assistant Fire Chief or their designee.
There shall be no burning of trash, refuse, hazardous or dangerous materials
including, but not necessarily limited to: insulation; treated lumber;
plastics; garbage; non-wood construction/demolition materials; potentially
explosive materials; chemical wastes; animal carcasses or waste; and items
containing natural or synthetic rubber.
      (3)   No burn may take place when the county falls within a burn ban
issued at the state or local level. No burn may take place when conditions are
unfavorable for performance of the burn in the discretion of the Fire Chief, or
Assistant Fire Chief or their designee. In instances in which a permit for open
burning has been issued by the city and a burn ban goes into effect prior to
the expiration of the permit and prior to the open burn being conducted which
prohibits the planned permitted burn during the permit period, the permit
period shall be automatically extended for a period equal to the initial permit
period immediately following the lifting of the burn ban, from the date
following the lifting of the burn ban. In instances where burn has been delayed
by the city’s determination of unfavorable conditions resulting in the
expiration of the permit during the time period of unfavorable conditions, the
permit period shall be automatically extended for a period of time equal to the
unexpired term of the permit remaining from the point in time of determination
of unfavorable conditions.
      (4)   Upon accumulation of all material to be burned and prior to
initiating the burn the permit holder shall notify the Fire Department that all
material to be burned is in place, whereupon the material to be burned shall be
finally inspected by the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief or their designee for
final approval of the burn to be carried out in accordance with this section
and the permit previously issued by the city for the burn. No additional or
different material may be added to the burn after final inspection.
      (5)   Not less than one hour, nor more than two hours prior to initiating
the burn, the permit holder shall contact the Fire Department for clearance of
conditions to initiate the burn. A burn conducted without final clearance of
conditions from the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee is prohibited
and shall be unlawful notwithstanding that a permit has been previously issued.
      (6)   No open burn may be conducted when wind speeds meet or exceed ten
mph.
      (7)   Open burns may not take place between the hours of sunset and
sunrise except upon express approval of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief or
their designee.
      (8)   The person designated on the permit as being the person responsible
for conducting the open burn must be present for the duration of the burn until
the fire is completely extinguished and must be in possession of the permit
which permit shall be available for examination by any law enforcement officer
or city personnel.
      (9)   The permit holder and the person designated on the permit as being
the person responsible for conducting the burn shall provide at the burn site,
during the time of the burn and until the fire is completely extinguished, a
reliable water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment as specified on the
permit.
      (10)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief or their designee may make
additional requirements at their discretion upon the permit holder and person
responsible for conducting the burn as deemed reasonable under the
circumstances and in the best interest of the city and protection of the safety
of the public. Such additional requirements shall be noted by the Chief,
Assistant Chief or their designee on the permit either/or at the time the
permit is issued, at the time of completion of the inspection of the materials
to be burned under division (C)(4) of this section, at the time of final
clearance for the burn under division (C)(5) of this section.
      (11)   Residential open burns:
         (a)   Shall be of no more than two piles of material, each having a
dimension of not to exceed ten feet by ten feet by five feet;
         (b)   Shall not be conducted less than 50 feet from any habitable
structure;
         (c)   Shall not be conducted less than 30 feet from any overhead
wires, cables, public roadway, power line or other exposure including, but not
limited to, a property boundary line, street sign, or telephone box;
         (d)   There shall be established a ten-foot perimeter surrounding the
burn pile cleared of all vegetation; and
         (e)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee may in their
discretion prescribe different distances from those set forth in divisions (C)
(11)(b), (C)(11)(c) and (C)(11)(d) of this section as determined by them to be
reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances for the best interest of the
city and protection of the public. Any such discretionary change in distances
by the Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee shall be noted in writing upon
the permit prior to initiation of the burn.
      (12)   Commercial open burns:
         (a)   Shall be of the number and size of piles of material as approved
by the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee, which number and size of
piles shall be noted on the permit at the time of the permit being initially
issued;
         (b)   Shall not be conducted on property which is less than one acre
in size except upon approval of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief or their
designee;
         (c)   Shall not be conducted less than 200 feet from any habitable
structure;
         (d)   Shall not be conducted less than 50 feet from any overhead
wires, cables, public roadway, power line or other exposure including, but not
limited to, a property boundary line, street sign, or telephone box;
         (e)   There shall be established a 20-foot perimeter surrounding the
burn pile cleared of all vegetation; and
         (f)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee may in their
discretion prescribe different distances from those set forth in divisions (C)
(12)(c), (C)(12)(d) and (C)(12)(e) of this section as determined by them to be
reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances for the best interest of the
city and protection of the public. Any such discretionary change in distances
by the Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee shall be noted in writing upon
the permit prior to initiation of the burn.
      (13)   Agricultural open burn:
         (a)   Shall be of the maximum size of piles of material as approved by
the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee, which maximum size of piles
shall be noted on the permit prior to initiation of the burn;
         (b)   Burning of pastures shall be conducted upon such reasonable
requirements as deemed in the best interest of the city and protection of the
public at the discretion of the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or their
designee, which requirements shall be noted on the permit prior to the
initiation of the burn;
         (c)   Shall not be conducted of piles of material less than 50 feet
from any habitable structure;
         (d)   Shall not be conducted of piles less than 50 feet from any
overhead wires, cables, public roadway, power line or other exposure including,
but not limited to, a property boundary line, street sign or telephone box;
         (e)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee may in their
discretion prescribe different distances from those set forth in divisions (C)
(13)(c) and (C)(13)(d) of this section as determined by them to be reasonable
and appropriate under the circumstances for the best interest of the city and
protection of the public. Any such discretionary change in distances by the
Chief, Assistant Chief or their designee shall be noted in writing upon the
permit prior to initiation of the burn.
   (D)   Liability; compliance. The authority to conduct outdoor burning under
this section does not exempt or excuse any person responsible from the
consequences, damages or injuries resulting from the burning and does not
exempt or excuse anyone from complying with all other applicable laws or
ordinances, even though the burning is otherwise conducted in compliance with
this chapter and does so at his or her own risk and in no event shall any
liability or damage be imposed upon the city approving the permit if damages
and/or injury are sustained as a result of burning. The legal owner of property
must provide authorization to burn. Proof of liability insurance is required.
   (E)   Recreational/ceremonial fires. Fires used solely for recreational or
ceremonial purposes shall be exempt from the payment of a permit fee.
   (F)   Penalty. Failure to comply with any provision of this section, or of
the additional discretionary requirements noted on the permit issued for open
burn under this section by the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or their
designee will result in a penalty as prescribed in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Repeat violations; denial of eligibility for permit. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, no person or organization shall be
eligible for an open burn permit which person or organization has committed two
previous violations of this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-14) (Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-18-2018)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person found violating any provision of §§
93.20 through
93.32 shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-3) (Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 94: JUNKED, WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Nuisance declared
   
94.03   Storing, parking or leaving prohibited
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
Junkyards, definitions, see §
116.01
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed
thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current motor vehicle
safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property, as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, alley or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly owned or maintained for
the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-1)
§ 94.02 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Motor vehicles which are abandoned, dismantled, partially dismantled,
wrecked, junked, inoperative or discarded, or left about the city in places
other than authorized junkyards or other areas authorized by the City Council,
and which tend to do any one or more of the following are hereby declared to be
a nuisance:
   (A)   Impede traffic in the streets;
   (B)   Reduce the value of private property;
   (C)   Create fire hazards;
   (D)   Extend and aggravate urban blight; or
   (E)   Result in a serious hazard to the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-2) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving
of any junk motor vehicle or vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled condition,
whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city
for a period of time in excess of ten days. The presence of an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled vehicle, or
parts thereof, on private or public property, is hereby declared a nuisance, a
public offense and misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to any vehicle
enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held, stored
or parked in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the
city and on property operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the
zoning laws of the city, nor shall this section apply to a city-owned vehicle
in an appropriate storage place maintained in a lawful place by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-3) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, by doing any act
prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to be an offense or
misdemeanor thereby, is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day upon which any such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-4)
CHAPTER 95: SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE
IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Prohibition of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices in
certain places
   
95.03   Exemptions
   
95.04   Designated smoking rooms and areas
   
95.05   Posting
   
95.06   Enforcement
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic and/or battery operated device, the
use of which may resemble smoking that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose
of nicotine or other substances. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any such
device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic
cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an
electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.
   INDOOR WORKPLACE. Any indoor place of employment or employment type service
for or at the request of another individual or individuals, or any public or
private entity, whether part time or full time and whether for compensation or
not. Such services shall include, without limitation, any service performed by
an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner, proprietor,
manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant or
volunteer. An INDOOR WORKPLACE includes work areas, employee lounges,
restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any
other spaces used or visited by employees, and all space between a floor and
ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows,
regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to such indoor workplace at any
given time, whether or not work is being performed.
   OUTDOOR AREA. Any covered area, partially covered area or area open to the
sky that is on a property owned by the city.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than
employees are invited or permitted; the term is synonymous with the phrase “any
indoor place used by or open to the public”.
   RECREATIONAL AREA. Any area that is owned, controlled or used by the city
and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee
or age requirement. The term RECREATIONAL AREA includes, but is not limited to,
parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths,
gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller and
ice skating rinks, beaches surrounding lakes and skateboard parks.
   RESTAURANT. Any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity.
   SMOKING. The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted smoking device.
   STAND ALONE BAR, STAND ALONE TAVERN and CIGAR BAR. An establishment that
derives more than 60% of its gross receipts, subject to verification by
competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and low point beer
and no person under 21 years of age is admitted, except for members of a
musical band employed or hired as provided in 37 O.S. § 537(B)(2) and that is
not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common indoor
area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a restaurant.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and
any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of
nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed
with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the
human body. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include any cessation product specifically
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating
nicotine or tobacco dependence.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-1) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 95.02 PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES IN
CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is in
any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation or any
indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law.
   (B)   All buildings and other properties, including indoor and outdoor
areas, owned or operated by this city, shall be entirely tobacco free to
include all forms of tobacco products including electronic smoking devices.
   (C)   All indoor and outdoor recreational areas owned or operated by this
city, shall be entirely tobacco free to include all forms of tobacco products
including electronic smoking devices.
   (D)   All motor vehicles owned or operated by this city.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-2) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   The restrictions provided in §
95.02 of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Stand alone bars, stand alone taverns and cigar bars;
   (B)   The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being
operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games;
   (C)   Up to 25% of the guestrooms at a hotel or other lodging establishment;
   (D)   Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption
on the premises;
   (E)   Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the
immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace,
and the workplace has only incidental public access. INCIDENTAL PUBLIC ACCESS
means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is not an
employee, present at the business to transact business or make a delivery. It
does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part of
their business;
   (F)   Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the
workplace has only incidental public access;
   (G)   Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers;
   (H)   Private residences and workplaces within private residences, except
that smoking shall not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as
a licensed childcare facility during hours of operation;
   (I)   Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the
research or treatment;
   (J)   A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present
members of the armed forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to §§ 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 U.S.C. §§ 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19), when such facility is
utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the conduct of
post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event or activity
which is open to the public; and
   (K)   Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking shall not
be allowed within 15 feet of any exterior public doorway or any air intake of a
restaurant.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-3) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 95.04 DESIGNATED SMOKING ROOMS AND AREAS.
   (A)   An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so under this chapter
may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for
cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking,
provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the
outside in such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking
area. No exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within 15 feet of any
entrance, exit or air intake.
   (B)   If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in section §
95.03 of this chapter or in a smoking room pursuant to division (A) of this
section, such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space
or, if it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking
space shall be fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air
from the smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative
air pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area
when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room
shall not be exhausted within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. Any
employer may choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including being totally
smoke free.
   (C)   A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act may
designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be
fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative
air pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is
recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building.
   (D)   Restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking
areas and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such
designated smoking rooms which shall be in a location which is fully enclosed,
directly exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot
escape when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of
the building. No exhaust from such room shall be located within 25 feet of any
entrance, exit or air intake. Such room shall be subject to verification for
compliance with the provisions of this division (D) by the State Department of
Health.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-4) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 95.05 POSTING.
   (A)   The person who owns or operates a place where smoking or tobacco use
is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at least
four inches by two inches in size, at each entrance to the building indicating
that the place is smoke free or tobacco free.
   (B)   Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows:
      (1)   In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is
in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible;
      (2)   In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of
the facility involved shall be responsible; and
      (3)   In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the
facility shall be responsible.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-5) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 95.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   The state or local governmental agency or the person who owns or operates a
public place shall, at a minimum, do the following in order to prevent smoking
in public places:
   (A)   Post signs at entrances to places where smoking is prohibited which
state that tobacco use is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of
tobacco smoke; and
   (B)   Ask tobacco users to refrain from using any form of tobacco products,
including electronic smoking devices upon observation of anyone violating the
provisions of this act.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-7) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any law or code
adopted by reference in this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. In addition thereto, such person may be
enjoined from continuing such violations.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-6) (Ord. 2014-1, passed 5-20-2014)
CHAPTER 96: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
   
96.01   Delivery to Chief of Police; records
   
96.02   Disposition of personal property
   
96.03   Seized property
§ 96.01 DELIVERY TO CHIEF OF POLICE; RECORDS.
   All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer,
which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession
of any prisoner or person suspected of or charged with being a criminal, and
which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, shall be, by
the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the Chief
of Police. The Chief of Police shall, in a permanent record book kept for that
purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with the date and
circumstances of the receipt thereof and the name of the person from whom it
was taken and the place where it was found. The record shall also disclose the
subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the
purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-1)
§ 96.02 DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Sale authorized; conditions.
      (1)   The Chief of Police is authorized to sell personal property, other
than animals, money or legal tender of the United States, except as provided in
division (B) of this section, which has come into his or her possession in any
manner if:
         (a)   The owner of the personal property is unknown or has not claimed
the property;
         (b)   The property has been in the custody of the Chief of Police for
at least six months; or
         (c)   The property or any part thereof is no longer needed to be held
as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation.
      (2)   Any owner, to recover or claim property, must be able to
satisfactorily prove ownership to the Police Chief.
   (B)   District Court application; hearing. The Chief of Police shall file an
application in the District Court of the county requesting the authority of the
Court to conduct a sale of such personal property or money or legal tender
which has a fair market value of more than its face value. The Chief of Police
shall attach to his or her application a list describing each property or money
or legal tender, including any identifying numbers and marks, the date the
property or money or legal tender came into his or her possession, and the name
of the owner and his or her address, if known. A hearing on the application
will be set by the Court for not less than ten days nor more than 20 days after
filing of the application.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. At least ten days prior to the date of the hearing,
notice of the hearing shall be sent, by the Chief of Police, by certified mail,
to each owner at his or her address as listed in the application. The notice
shall contain a brief description of the property or money or legal tender of
the owner and the place and date of the hearing. The notice shall be posted at
the assigned place for the posting of city notices, and at two other public
places in the city.
   (D)   Ownership not established; sale. If no owner appears and establishes
ownership to the property or money or legal tender at the hearing, an order
will be entered by the Court authorizing the Chief of Police to sell the
personal property or money or legal tender for cash to the highest bidder.
After the Court issues the order, the Chief of Police, with concurrence of the
City Council, will sell the property at an auction sale, after at least five
days’ notice of the sale has been published. The Chief of Police shall
thereafter make a return of the sale, and the order of the Court confirming the
sale shall vest title to the property or money or legal tender in the
purchaser. The money received from the sale of the personal property or money
or legal tender shall be deposited in the city’s General Fund; however, the
City Council may, by resolution, transfer all monies received from such sales,
less court costs and other expenses, to any account or fund desired.
   (E)   Money, legal tender; hearing. All money or legal tender of the United
States, except as provided in division (B) of this section, which has come into
the possession of the Chief of Police pursuant to the circumstances provided
for in division (A) of this section, shall be transferred by the Chief of
Police for deposit in the General Fund. Prior to any such transfer, the Chief
of Police shall file an application in the District Court requesting the Court
to enter an order authorizing him or her to transfer the money for deposit in
the General Fund. The application shall describe the money or legal tender, any
serial numbers, the date the same came into his or her possession, and the name
of the owner and his or her address, if known. Upon filing the application,
which may be joined with an application as described in division (B) of this
section, a hearing on the application will be set by the Court not less than
ten days nor more than 20 days from the filing of the application. Notice of
the hearing shall be given as provided for in division (C) of this section. The
notice shall state that upon failure of anyone to appear to prove ownership to
the money or legal tender, the Court shall order the same to be deposited in
the General Fund. The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal
property as provided for in division (B) of this section. If no one appears to
claim and prove ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, an order
will be issued by the Court to deposit the same in the General Fund as provided
in this division (E).
   (F)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
dangerous or deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives or any
property of any kind or character, which the possession of is prohibited by
law. By order of the trial court, any such property filed as an exhibit or held
by the city shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the
conditions prescribed in such order.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-2)
§ 96.03 SEIZED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Gambling related.
      (1)   Report. If any personal property used for the purpose of violating
any of the gambling laws of this state shall be seized by any officer or person
with or without a search warrant, such officer or person is hereby required
within five days of the seizure to make a written report under oath and file
the same with the County Clerk, which report shall in detail state the name of
the officer or person making the seizure, the place where seized and an
inventory of the property or articles so taken into possession. Within five
days after seizing such property, the officer shall deliver the property to the
Sheriff of the county and take the Sheriff’s receipt therefor, in duplicate,
and the Sheriff shall retain the same and all thereof until the same shall be
destroyed pursuant to the orders of the Court.
      (2)   Computing time. In computing the time five days, Sundays and
holidays shall be excluded and not counted.
      (3)   Duplicate receipt. A duplicate copy of the receipt shall be filed
with the County Clerk, who shall keep a record of same. However, the Sheriff
and his or her deputies shall be required to make the affidavit and issue the
receipt and otherwise comply with the provisions of this section. The Sheriff
shall be liable on his or her bond for the safekeeping of all such property so
turned over to him or her under the provisions of this division (A).
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages related. If city police officers seize:
      (1)   Any apparatus, equipment, vehicle or instrumentality used for or
intended for use in manufacturing or transporting any alcoholic beverages in
violation of the state alcoholic beverage control laws; or
      (2)   Any alcoholic beverages possessed, sold, transported, manufactured,
kept or stored in violation of the state alcoholic beverage control laws, and
if the Court finds from a preponderance of the evidence that the property
seized was lawfully subject to seizure, then the Court shall render judgment
accordingly and order the property forfeited to the city in which the seizure
of the property took place. Such seized property shall be sold by the Police
Chief, after giving ten days’ notice by one publication in a legal newspaper of
the county at least ten days before such sale. Appeal from such an order may be
taken as in civil cases. When such property is sold under the provisions of
this division (B)(2), the proceeds thereof shall be distributed as follows:
         (a)   To the payment of the costs of the case in which the order of
forfeiture was made and the actual expenses of preserving the property; and
         (b)   The remainder shall be deposited with the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-3)
CHAPTER 97: FAIR HOUSING POLICY
Section
   
97.01   Policy
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Administration
   
97.04   Enforcement
   
97.05   Education and conciliation
   
97.06   Unlawful practice
   
97.07   Discrimination
   
97.08   Exemptions
   
97.09   Investigations
   
97.10   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
97.11   Prevention of intimidation
   
97.12   Civil action
§ 97.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations,
for fair housing throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-1) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §
97.07 of this chapter.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or
designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of
18 years) being domiciled with:
      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual
or individuals; or
      (2)   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of such parent or other person.
   FAMILY. Includes single individuals.
   HANDICAP. With respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person’s major life activities;
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such impairment, but such term does not
include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Building, structure or portion thereof which is used
or occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place by a person, by a family or
by a group of persons living together, or vacant land available for the
construction of a housing accommodation.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-2) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Mayor. The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter
shall be in the Mayor.
   (B)   Delegation of duties. The Mayor may delegate any of these functions,
duties and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or
otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this chapter. The
Mayor shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his
or her hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the
city, to boards or officers or to himself or herself, as shall be appropriate
and in accordance with law.
   (C)   Programs and activities related to housing. All executive departments
and agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing
and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the Mayor to further such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-3) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Complaint; investigation by Mayor. Any person who claims to have been
injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he or she
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about
to occur (hereafter “person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Mayor.
Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in
such form as the Mayor requires. Upon receipt of such a compliant, the Mayor
shall furnish a copy of the same to the person who allegedly committed or about
to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after
receiving the compliant or within 30 days after the expiration of any period of
reference under division (C) of this section, the Mayor shall investigate the
complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she
intends to resolve it. If the Mayor decides to resolve the complaints, he or
she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory
housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and
persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may
be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this
chapter without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of
the city who shall make public any information in violation of this provision
shall be, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Time limit to file; response; amendments. A complaint under division
(A) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged
discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and
shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing
practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any
time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him or her and
with the leave of the Mayor, which shall be granted whenever it would be
reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his or her answer at any time. Both
complaints and answers shall be verified.
   (C)   Filing with state agency. If within 30 days after a complaint is filed
with the Mayor, the Mayor has been unable to obtain a voluntary compliance with
this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a
complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. The Mayor will assist in this filing.
   (D)   Civil action. If the Mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30
days hereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the
respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected
by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint.
If the Court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is
about to occur, the Court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such
practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
   (E)   Burden of proof. In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section,
the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Trial; termination of Mayor’s efforts. Whenever an action filed by an
individual shall come to trial, the Mayor shall immediately terminate all
efforts to obtain voluntary compliance.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-4) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.05 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the Mayor shall commence
such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the purposes of
this chapter. The Mayor shall call conferences of persons in the housing
industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of
this chapter and the Mayor’s suggested means of implementing it, and shall
endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of
enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-5) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.06 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of §
97.08 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in this section shall apply to:
   (A)   Dwellings. All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   Exceptions. Nothing in §
97.07(A) of this chapter shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (B)(1) shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided
further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest
in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any
one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family
house shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house
is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman,
or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent,
salesman or person; and
         (b)   Without publication, posting or mailing after notice of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
97.07(A)(3) of this chapter, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the
use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   Persons deemed in business. For the purposes of division (B) of this
section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting
dwellings if:
      (1)   Such person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   Such person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or interest therein;
or
      (3)   Such person is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-6) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.07 DISCRIMINATION.
   (A)   Sale or rental of housing. As made applicable by §
97.06 and except as exempted by §§
97.06(B) and
97.08 of this chapter, is shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise to make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color,
religion, national origin, handicap or familial status;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion,
national origin, handicap or familial status;
      (3)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion or national origin, handicap
or familial status or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; and
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, sex, color, religion or
national origin, handicap or familial status.
   (B)   Financing. It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan
association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or
enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of
commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a
person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against such
person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race,
sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status of such
person or of any person associated with such person in connection with such
loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other
financial assistance, or the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other
financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained
in this division (B) shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception
contained in §
97.06(B) of this chapter.
   (C)   Brokerage services. It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to
or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, rental or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation, on account of race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, handicap or familial status.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-7) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin,
handicap or familiar status. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a
private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such
lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-8) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.09 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Access to evidence. In conducting an investigation, the Mayor shall
have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents,
individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine,
record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements
of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the
investigation; provided, however, that the Mayor first complies with the
provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and
seizures. The Mayor may issue subpoenas to compel his or her access to or the
production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same
limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or
served in aid of a civil action in the United States District Court for the
district in which the investigation is taking place. The Mayor may administer
oaths.
   (B)   Subpoenas for respondent. Upon written application to the Mayor, a
respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of
subpoenas by and in the name of the Mayor to the same extent and subject to the
same limitations as subpoenas issued by the Mayor himself or herself. Subpoenas
issued at the request of such respondent shall show on their face the name and
address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his or her
request.
   (C)   Witness fees. Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the Mayor shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in the District Court of the state. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by such person.
   (D)   Petition to revoke or modify subpoena. Within five days after service
of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the Mayor to revoke or
modify the subpoena. The Mayor shall grant the petition if he or she finds that
the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or
place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any
matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly
onerous or for other good reason.
   (E)   Enforcement of subpoena. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a
subpoena, the Mayor or other person at whose request it was issued may petition
for its enforcement with the Municipal or State Court for the district in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served or transacts
business.
   (F)   Penalty. Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and
testify or to answer all lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or
other evidence, if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena
or lawful order of the Mayor shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Any person who, with intent thereby to
mislead the Mayor shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement
of fact in any report, account, records or other document submitted to the
Mayor pursuant to the Mayor’s subpoena or other order, or shall willfully
neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries in
such reports, accounts, records or other documents, or shall willfully
mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Litigation by City Attorney. The City Attorney shall conduct all
litigation in which the Mayor participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-9) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
§ 97.10 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
97.06 and
97.07 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil
action.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-10) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.11 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force, willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap or familial status and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because such person is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, sex,
color, religion, nation origin, handicap or familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A) of
this section; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because such citizen is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap or familial status, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful
assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-11) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.12 CIVIL ACTION.
   (A)   Authority; conditions; time limit. The rights granted by §§
97.06 and
97.07 of this chapter may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts
of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however,
that the Court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section
or §
97.04(D) of this chapter from time to time before bringing it to trial if the
Court believes that the conciliation efforts of the Mayor are likely to result
in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice complained of
in the complaint made to the Mayor and which practice forms the basis for the
action in Court; and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance or rental
consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the authority
of this chapter and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant
without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil
action under the provisions of this chapter shall not be affected.
   (B)   Relief granted by Court. The Court may grant as relief, as it deems
appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order
or other order, and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than
$2,000 punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees
in the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the said plaintiff in the
opinion of the Court is not financially able to assume said attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 5-7-12) (Ord. 94-3, passed 6-7-1994)
CHAPTER 98: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Rules for facilities
   
98.02   Park Board
   
98.03   Fees
   
98.04   Camping
   
98.05   Lakes and ponds
   
98.06   Motor vehicle use
   
98.07   Golf balls
   
98.08   City park jogging paths
Pryor Creek Community Recreational Center
   
98.20   Pryor Creek Community Recreational Center Board
 
   
98.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 RULES FOR FACILITIES.
   The City Council shall promulgate, invoke, create, amend and enforce such
rules, regulations and other requirements as it deems necessary or expedient in
connection with fishing and fishing privileges, hunting and hunting privileges,
boating and boating privileges and swimming, and the use of all other
recreational facilities owned or operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1)
§ 98.02 PARK BOARD.
   (A)   Created. The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall
appoint seven persons, who shall constitute the Park Board of the city. The
members appointed by the Mayor shall be appointed for terms of two for one
year, two for two years and three for three years from July 1, 1979. All
subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years, except appointments
to fill vacancies, which appointments shall be made by the Mayor, and which
appointees shall serve the unexpired term of the member who they have been
appointed to replace.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Park Board shall serve as an advisory board for the purpose of
assisting the Mayor and Council in the operations of the parks and all public
grounds of the city. The control of operations of the parks and all public
grounds of the city shall remain in the Mayor and City Council.
      (2)   The Park Board shall have the duty and may consider and investigate
any subject matter pertaining to the establishment, development, management,
operation, maintenance, beautifying, landscaping and improving the parks and
all public grounds of the city, and all bills therefor shall first be approved
by the Park Board and submitted to the City Council for allowance, as other
claims are allowed.
      (3)   The Park Board may submit employment recommendations and job
description recommendations for park related positions to the City Council for
approval. All employees in park related positions shall be hired by the city
and shall be under the supervision of the Mayor and City Council and subject to
the disciplinary action by the same.
   (C)   Gifts; contracts. The Park Board shall have the power and duty to
recommend to the Mayor and City Council the receipt gifts of money or other
property which may be used or held in trust for the purpose given, and may with
the approval of the Mayor and City Council, enter into contracts for agreements
with the Board of County Commissioners of the county and the state, through any
commission created for the purpose in connection with the federal government.
   (D)   Organization; meetings. At the first meeting of the Park Board, it
shall organize by electing one of its members Chairperson, one of its members
Vice Chairperson and one of its members ex officio Secretary-Treasurer.
   (E)   Compensation. The members of the Park Board shall serve without
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-2) (Ord. 2015-1, passed 7-21-2015)
Charter reference:
   Library, Park and Cemetery Boards, powers, see Charter §
59
§ 98.03 FEES.
   The city shall provide by rules, from time to time, the fees charged for any
recreational privileges on any property or facility for recreational purposes
owned or operated by the city. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 7-4-3)
§ 98.04 CAMPING.
   (A)   Consent required. The use of the parks and public areas within the
corporate limits of the city for overnight camping is prohibited without the
consent of the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   Outdoor sleeping accommodations. The continuous use or erection of
outdoor sleeping accommodations on private property for more than three
consecutive nights shall be prohibited. For purposes of this section, OUTDOOR
SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS shall mean any item, structure or arrangement, whether
permanent or temporary, used or intended to be used by a person for the purpose
of resting or sleeping in an outdoor environment. This definition includes, but
is not limited to, tents, tarpaulins, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets,
mattresses, cots, hammocks and similar bedding materials or shelters. Such
accommodations shall also include any combination of personal belongings and
materials that, if left unattended, create visible ground clutter, impede
pedestrian or vehicular access or contribute to unsanitary or unsafe conditions
in public or private outdoor spaces.
   (C)   Presumptive evidence of camping. The installation or stopping of any
trailer or the erection of any tent or shelter after one hour before sundown in
the park areas of the city shall constitute presumptive evidence of the breach
of this section.
   (D)   Waiver. The foregoing prohibition and penalty may be waived by the
Mayor and City Council in favor of any organized group or association for such
time as specified, not to exceed five days and nights, consecutively.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-4) (Ord. 2025-1, passed 6-3-2025) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.05 LAKES AND PONDS.
   It is unlawful for any person to wade or swim in any lakes or ponds on
public property, or on property owned by the city, or in public parks within
the city or to climb upon or otherwise damage light poles, bulbs, fixtures or
any property around such lakes or ponds.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-5) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.06 MOTOR VEHICLE USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any truck, automobile,
motorcycle, motor scooter or other motor vehicle, or to ride any horse, pony or
other animal in or upon the public parks within the limits of the city, except
upon clearly defined public roadways or public parking areas in such parks, or
except in cases of public necessity when authorized and directed to do so by
public officials of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-6) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.07 GOLF BALLS.
   It is unlawful for any person to play, practice or otherwise engage in the
game of golf, or in any manner strike or hit golf balls within the city parks
or upon city owned property, except for the conducting of such activities at
Earl Ward Park (Pryor Municipal Golf Course).
(Prior Code, § 7-4-7) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.08 CITY PARK JOGGING PATHS.
   (A)   Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to ride, operate or otherwise
take any bicycle, motorcycle, motorized or nonmotorized scooter or moped upon
the jogging path located in any city park.
   (B)   Animals. It is unlawful for any person to walk or otherwise allow the
placement of any animal upon the jogging path located in any city park.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-8) (Ord. 2003-8, passed 9-2-2003) Penalty, see §
98.99
PRYOR CREEK COMMUNITY RECREATIONAL CENTER
§ 98.20 PRYOR CREEK COMMUNITY RECREATIONAL CENTER BOARD.
   (A)   Board created. The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council
shall appoint seven persons, who shall constitute the Pryor Creek Community
Recreational Center Board of the city. The members appointed by the Mayor shall
be appointed for terms of one for one year, two for two years, two for three
years, and two for four years, from August 1, 2002. All subsequent appointments
shall be for a term of four years, except for appointments to fill vacancies,
which appointments shall be made by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council, and which appointees shall serve the unexpired term of the member who
they have been appointed to replace.
   (B)   Duties. The Pryor Creek Community Recreational Center Board shall have
the custody and care of the Pryor Creek Community Recreational Center. The
Board shall be responsible for making recommendations on the hiring and firing
of any and all necessary personnel needed to operate the Pryor Creek Community
Recreational Center including recommendations on the hiring and firing of an
administrator for the recreational center. The Board shall also make
recommendations as to the compensation of all employees necessary for the
operation of the Pryor Creek Recreational Center. All bills and encumbrances
for the Pryor Creek Community Recreational Center shall first be approved by
the Board and submitted to the City Council for allowance, as other claims are
allowed.
   (C)   Board member qualifications. All members appointed to the Pryor Creek
Community Recreational Center Board shall be at least 18 years of age. No more
than two members of the Board shall at any one time be residents from outside
the city limits of the city.
   (D)   Organization. The Pryor Creek Community Recreational Center Board
shall meet at least monthly. At the first meeting of the Board, it shall
organize by electing one of its members Chairperson, one of its members Vice
Chairperson and one of its members Secretary. The meeting place of the Board is
in the City Council chambers located at City Hall.
   (E)   Compensation. The members of the Pryor Creek Community Recreational
Center Board shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 7-8-1) (Ord. 2002-7, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Offense. Any person who violates any provision of §§
98.01 through
98.08 by doing any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or
declared to be a nuisance, an offense or misdemeanor thereby, or who fails to
do any act required by any such provision, or who fails to do any act when any
such provision declares such failure to be unlawful or to be an offense or
misdemeanor, or who violates or fails or refuses to carry out any lawful order,
rule or regulation of any officer of the city or any lawfully constituted
board, body or agency of the city made pursuant to provisions of the city
ordinances, is guilty of an offense. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall
be punished at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court as provided
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day upon which a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   Injunction. No penalty imposed by and pursuant to division (B)(1)
of this section shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the
proper courts of the state for an injunction, writ of mandamus or other
appropriate action against such person.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-9)
CHAPTER 99: LIBRARY
Section
   
99.01   Library Board created
   
99.02   Duties of Board
   
99.03   Contract with other agencies
   
99.04   Organization; officers
   
99.05   Compensation
§ 99.01 LIBRARY BOARD CREATED.
   The Library Board of the city is composed of five members, appointed by the
Mayor by and with the consent and confirmation of the City Council. All
appointments shall be for a term of three years, except appointments to fill
vacancies, which appointments shall be for the unexpired term for the member
who is replaced.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-1)
§ 99.02 DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The Library Board shall serve as an advisory board for the purpose of
assisting the Mayor and Council in the operations of the city libraries. The
control of operations of the libraries shall remain in the Mayor and City
Council. The Library Board shall have the duty and may consider and investigate
any subject matter pertaining to the establishment, development, management,
operation and maintenance of all libraries owned and operated by the city and
shall have the power and duty to recommend to the Mayor and the City Council
plans, ordinances, rules or regulations pertaining to the establishment,
development, management, operation, and maintenance of all such libraries. The
Library Board shall have the power and duty to recommend for approval of the
Mayor and the City Council, the purchase of books and other supplies necessary
for the operation of the library. The Library Board shall have the power and
duty to recommend to the Mayor and City Council the receipt of gifts of money,
books or other property which may be used or held in trust for the purpose
given. All gifts of money shall be properly accounted for, deposited and held,
and expended according to state law. All expenses upon claims shall be
itemized, filed and paid by the City Clerk, upon approval of the City Council,
as required by state law. When said claims have been presented and payment
authorized, they shall be delivered to the Library Board for delivery to the
various claimants therefor. The Library Board may submit employment
recommendations and job description recommendations to the City Council for
positions within the library. All employees of the library are employed by the
city and are under the supervision of the Mayor and City Council and subject to
disciplinary action by the same.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-2) (Ord. 2015-2, passed 7-21-2015)
§ 99.03 CONTRACT WITH OTHER AGENCIES.
   The Library Board, with the approval of the City Council, may cooperate with
or enter into any contract or other agreement, arrangement or understanding
with the Board of County Commissioners of the county, the State Library
Commission and any agency of the federal government for the purpose of
maintaining the library or deriving benefits from either of the agencies.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-3) (Ord. 2003-14, passed 11-4-2003)
§ 99.04 ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS.
   At the first meeting of the Library Board, it shall organize by electing one
of its members Chairperson, one of its member Vice Chairperson and the
librarian shall be ex officio member of the Board and Secretary-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-4)
§ 99.05 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Library Board shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 7-5-5)
CHAPTER 100: CEMETERIES
Section
   
100.01   Sexton
   
100.02   Cemetery Board
   
100.03   Cemetery Care Fund
   
100.04   Fees and charges
   
100.05   Lot sales
   
100.06   Burials
   
100.07   Rules and regulations
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 SEXTON.
   The Mayor, with the consent and confirmation of the City Council, shall
appoint some suitable person to be sexton of the cemetery, and shall fix the
compensation to be paid for such services; and such sexton shall be under the
control and supervision of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-1)
§ 100.02 CEMETERY BOARD.
   (A)   Created. There is a Cemetery Board, which is composed of six members
to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval and confirmation of the City
Council. Each member of the Cemetery Board shall be appointed to hold office
for a term of six years, with the exception that the original members appointed
to the Cemetery Board shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four,
five and six years, respectively, and with the further exception that if a
vacancy occurs in the membership of the Cemetery Board during the unexpired
term of any member thereof, the Mayor, with the approval and confirmation of
the City Council, shall appoint a successor to serve the unexpired term of the
member whom he or she replaces. Each member of the Cemetery Board shall hold
office until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The Mayor and
City Council may declare a vacancy to exist in any membership on the Cemetery
Board in any case where in the opinion of the Mayor and City Council, any
member thereof through incapacity, illness or otherwise, is unable or unwilling
properly to participate in the meetings, deliberations or functions of the
Cemetery Board.
   (B)   Organization; officers. The members of the Cemetery Board shall meet
within two weeks after their appointment and confirmation to organize by
electing from their members a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary, who
shall serve for a period of one year. The Cemetery Board shall adopt from time
to time such bylaws, rules and regulations, and amendments thereto, as may be
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   Duties. The Cemetery Board shall serve as an advisory board for the
purpose of assisting the Mayor and Council in the operations of the cemeteries
owned and operated by the city. The control of operations of the cemeteries
shall remain in the Mayor and City Council. The Cemetery Board shall have the
duty and may consider and investigate any subject matter pertaining to the
establishment, development, management, operation, maintenance, beautification
and preservation of all cemeteries owned and operated by the city and shall
have the power and duty to recommend to the Mayor and the City Council plans,
ordinances, rules or regulations pertaining to the establishment, development,
management, operation, maintenance, beautification and preservation of all such
cemeteries. The Cemetery Board may submit employment recommendations and job
description recommendations for cemetery positions to the City Council for
approval. All employees of the cemetery are hired by the city of Pryor Creek
and are under the supervision of the Mayor and City Council and subject to
disciplinary action by same.
   (D)   Compensation. The members of the Cemetery Board shall serve without
compensation.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-2) (Ord. 2015-3, passed 7-21-2015)
Charter reference:
   Library, Park and Cemetery Boards, powers, see Charter §
59
§ 100.03 CEMETERY CARE FUND.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a Cemetery Care Fund for the
maintenance and improvement of the cemeteries owned and operated by the city in
accordance with state law.
   (B)   Appropriations. At least 25% of the income to the city accruing from
the sale of cemetery lots, from interment fees and from monument permits, is
hereby appropriated and directed/segregated by the officers of the city to the
credit of the Cemetery Care Fund. Such segregation shall be accounted for
monthly and shall be kept in a separate account or fund by the City Treasurer.
   (C)   Investment. The City Treasurer is hereby directed and instructed to
invest the monies in the cemetery care fund in bonds of the United States
government or of the state, as such monies become sufficient for such
investment.
   (D)   Interest. The City Treasurer is hereby instructed and directed to make
available to the City Council the interest accruing from the Cemetery Care Fund
for the purposes set forth in the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-3)
§ 100.04 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Price of grave sites. The price of grave sites in the Fairview
Cemetery, the Graham Memorial Cemetery and Babyland shall be established by
motion or resolution. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Interment fee.
      (1)   The interment fee for opening and closing graves Monday through
Friday, unless such day is a holiday, in the Fairview Cemetery and the Graham
Memorial Cemetery of the city shall be by ordinance, motion or resolution.
      (2)   Interment fee for the burial of cremains Monday through Friday,
unless such day is a holiday, in the Fairview Cemetery and the Graham Memorial
Cemetery of the city shall be by ordinance, motion or resolution.
      (3)   The interment fee for opening and closing graves, including the
burial of cremains, in the Fairview Cemetery and the Graham Memorial Cemetery
on Saturday shall be established by ordinance, motion or resolution.
      (4)   No interment shall be on Sundays or holidays.
   (C)   Setting monument, marker.
      (1)   Any person placing any aboveground grave cover, individual
mausoleum, ground vault or ledger stone in the Fairview Cemetery or Graham
Memorial Cemetery of the city shall pay a one time permit fee as set by the
City Council for setting the same. However, veteran’s markers that are provided
by federal services shall be exempt from the permit fee.
      (2)   No stone, monument or grave marker shall be set, established or
placed in the Fairview Cemetery or the Graham Memorial Cemetery until the
person placing the same has obtained from the sexton a permit in writing
therefor. Such permit shall indicate the specific location for the stone,
monument or marker, its size and the name of the person securing the same. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (D)   Changes. Any prices, fees and charges set forth in this chapter may be
altered, modified or changed by motion or resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Fee required prior to action. No deed for any cemetery lot shall be
issued, no grave opened nor shall any monument be set, located or placed until
and unless the requisite price, fee or charge therefor has been paid in full
and in cash to the appropriate city officer.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-4) (Ord. 2002-3, passed 3-19-2002)
§ 100.05 LOT SALES.
   (A)   Conveyance. All lots in Fairview Cemetery and Graham Memorial Cemetery
shall be sold at such prices as the Mayor and City Council may from time to
time adopt and establish. And all lots sold therein shall be conveyed by
certificate to be issued by the City Clerk and signed by the Mayor, and
countersigned by the City Clerk, under the seal of this city, which certificate
shall show the lot or lots described by numbers as shown upon the plat of the
cemetery, the price paid and by whom paid, and date of issuance. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Records maintained. It is the duty of the City Clerk to keep a record,
in a well bound book to be kept for that purpose, of all sales of lots in the
cemetery, which record shall show the number and location of the lot or lots
sold, the date of sale, to whom sold, and the amount paid for each lot or lots,
and the name of the person whose body is interred in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-5)
§ 100.06 BURIALS.
   (A)   Permit and fee required. In no case shall any person dig any grave or
inter any human body in or upon any lot owned by this city in the cemetery
until the city shall have received the full price to be paid for the lot or
lots in or upon which such grave or interment is to be made, and until a permit
is issued by the City Clerk as provided for herein.
   (B)   Permits issued. The City Clerk shall have the power and authority to
contract and sell any lot or lots in the cemetery, at the price or prices fixed
and established by the Mayor and City Council, and to issue permits for the
burial of the human dead in the cemetery, provided such permits shall not be
issued until all monies and charges due this city shall have been paid.
   (C)   Container construction. All interments in the Fairview Cemetery and
Graham Memorial cemetery of the city must be in caskets enclosed within a box
or container constructed of concrete, steel or plastic and that no wooden
outside enclosure shall be accepted.
   (D)   Interments of cremains. No more than two cremains shall be buried per
grave site. All such cremains shall be interred using a container of concrete,
steel or plastic. All interments of cremains shall be made by the city pursuant
to the regulations set forth within this code.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-6) (Ord. 2004-15, passed 5-18-2004)
§ 100.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Installing improvements.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to install any coping, walk or wall
in Fairview Cemetery and Graham Memorial Cemetery, however, this prohibition
shall not apply to the city where such improvements are necessary for the
public good in maintaining the cemetery.
      (2)   The erection of monuments, tombstones, filling of graves,
improving, adorning and embellishing graves, or the marking thereof, by private
parties in the cemeteries shall be done under the supervision of the sexton and
not otherwise, and no improvements shall be made and no erection of monuments
or marking of graves be had until all charges owing to the city on the lot or
lots to be improved, shall have been fully paid.
   (B)   Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to drive any automobile or
other vehicle, for any purpose whatsoever, into or within the cemeteries,
without first having obtained permission of the sexton so to do, and all
vehicles driven into the cemeteries shall be subject to the orders and
directions of the sexton, or other authorized officer in charge of the
cemeteries.
   (C)   Removal of wreaths. The city, its agents, representatives or employees
may one week following Memorial Day or other occasion when graves in the
cemeteries may be decorated, remove and dispose of such decorations, other than
permanent plantings and potted flowers or plants placed upon grave markers in a
position where they do not interfere with the mowing of the cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-7) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by doing any act
prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to be a nuisance, an
offense, or misdemeanor thereby, or who fails to do any act required by any
such provision, or who fails to do any act when any such provision declares
such failure to be unlawful or to be an offense or misdemeanor, or who violates
or fails or refuses to carry out any lawful order, rule or regulation of any
officer of the city or any lawfully constituted board, body or agency of the
city made pursuant to provisions of the city ordinances, is guilty of an
offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished at the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day upon which a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   No penalty imposed by and pursuant to division (A) of this section
shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts
of the state for an injunction, writ of mandamus or other appropriate action
against such person.
(Prior Code, § 7-6-8)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEES
      
111.   TRANSIENT/ITINERANT MERCHANTS
      
112.   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
113.   RESIDENTIAL SALES AND AUCTIONS
      
114.   ENTERTAINMENT AND AMUSEMENT
      
115.   PAWNBROKERS
      
116.   JUNK AND JUNKYARDS
      
117.   TREE TRIMMERS LICENSING
      
118.   SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS
      
119.   TAXICABS
      
120.   LIQUOR CONTROL
      
121.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CONTROL
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE FEES
Section
   
110.01   Fee levied on certain occupations
   
110.02   Ex-service persons
   
110.03   Separate licenses required
   
110.04   Display of license
   
110.05   Transferability
   
110.06   Duplicate license
   
110.07   Revocation of license
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 FEE LEVIED ON CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Occupations specified. A license fee is hereby levied on every person
engaging in, exercising or pursuing any of the following for-profit businesses,
professions, trades, occupations or privileges in this city, in the amount set
by the City Council by motion or resolution on itinerant occupations, including
the following:
      (1)   Agents or solicitors selling insurance, or taking orders for
insurance policies;
      (2)   Agents or solicitors selling or taking orders for sale of books,
magazines, periodicals or publications of any description;
      (3)   Carnival, circus or menagerie where admission is charged;
      (4)   Collection agents;
      (5)   Concessions, games and amusements not a part of an organized
carnival where a fee is charged;
      (6)   Fortune tellers;
      (7)   Palm readers;
      (8)   Persons selling or undertaking to sell unsolicited services not
specifically listed herein;
      (9)   Photographers;
      (10)   Real estate agents;
      (11)   Shows, including tent shows, other than circuses and menageries,
where admission is charged; or
      (12)   Salesmen, solicitors, vendors or peddlers, selling or taking
orders for sale of goods and merchandise at retail not heretofore listed.
   (B)   State permit required. In order to receive a license under this
chapter, every person regulated pursuant to this section is required to possess
a valid and current state sales tax permit if such person is a vendor subject
to collection of sales taxes under the Sales Tax Code of the city and state. A
copy of this permit shall be provided by the applicant for a license to the
City Clerk prior to issuance of the city license.
   (C)   Term; delinquency; proration. All annual occupation taxes hereinbefore
assessed each and every year shall become delinquent after May 1 unless another
expiration is provided. License fees are prorated if purchased new (not
renewal) after May 1 with a minimum fee of $1. (Refer to Appendix A following
this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
§ 110.02 EX-SERVICE PERSONS.
   Nothing in this chapter or in other ordinances of the city shall be deemed
to require ex-service persons to secure a license or pay a license fee for
engaging in a business, occupation or privilege when he or she is exempted
therefrom by statutes of the state or other provisions of law, and provides
proof thereof to the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 110.03 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED.
   Every person who engages in, exercises or pursues a business, profession,
trade, occupation or privilege for which a license is required, at or from more
than one place in the city, or who engages in, exercises or pursues more than
one such business, profession, trade, occupation or privilege, shall pay the
fee and secure a separate license for each such place or for each such
business, profession, trade, occupation or privilege.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)
§ 110.04 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every holder of a license to engage in, exercise or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation or privilege, shall conspicuously display the
license at all times in some part of his or her place of business or activity
where a person who has entered the place may readily see it; or, if he or she
has no particular place of business or activity, shall carry the license and
shall display it to any person who requests to see it. In lieu of the manner of
displaying such licenses provided above, when licenses are required for coin-
operated music or amusement devices, vending machines and similar devices and
equipment, the license may be placed on or attached to such device or equipment
in such position and manner that it will be clearly visible, and shall be so
placed or attached if the license so states on its face. It is unlawful to fail
or refuse to display the license as required in this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-4) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 TRANSFERABILITY.
   The assignment or transfer of a license shall not be permitted in this city.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)
§ 110.06 DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   Whenever any license to engage in, exercise or pursue a business,
profession, trade, occupation or privilege, has been lost or destroyed without
any wrongful act or connivance by the holder, the City Clerk, on application,
shall issue a duplicate license for the unexpired time. Before the duplicate is
issued, the holder shall make and file with the City Clerk an affidavit that
the licensee has in fact lost or destroyed the license without any wrongful act
or connivance by the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued by the city to any person to engage in, exercise or
pursue any business, profession, trade, occupation or privilege, may be revoked
by the City Council after adequate opportunity for a hearing.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-7)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Title XI by doing any act
prohibited or declared to be unlawful thereby, or declared to be an offense or
misdemeanor thereby, or who shall fail to do any act required by any such
provision, or who shall fail to do any act when such provision declared such
failure to be unlawful or to be an offense or misdemeanor, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day upon which any such violation
continues shall constitute a separate misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-1)
CHAPTER 111: TRANSIENT/ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Enforcement
   
111.03   License required
   
111.04   Exceptions
   
111.05   Application for license
   
111.06   Fee for license
   
111.07   Issuance of license; transferability; validity
   
111.08   Expiration of license
   
111.09   Possession of license required
   
111.10   Loud noises and speaking devices
   
111.11   Revocation of license
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person who sells, or offers to sell, in this state,
at wholesale or retail, any personal property and transports the same on any
highway in this state by the use of a motor vehicle.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other legal
entity.
   TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT BUSINESS. Any business or home improvement service;
siding, roofing or resurfacing services, conducted for the sale or offer for
sale of goods, wares or merchandise which is carried on in any building,
structure, motor vehicle, mobile home, travel trailer, railroad car or real
estate for a period of less than two years.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other
entity which engages in, does or transacts any temporary or transient business
in this state, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place in
this state, offering for sale or selling goods, wares, merchandise or services,
and includes those merchants who, for the purpose of carrying on such business,
hire, lease, use or occupy any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad car
or real estate.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 111.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   It is the duty of the police officers of the city to examine all places of
business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions
of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with and to
enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating
the same.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No transient merchant shall transact business within the city unless such
merchant and the owners of any goods, wares or merchandise to be offered for
sale or sold, if such goods, wares or merchandise are not owned by the
merchant, shall have secured a license and have otherwise complied with the
requirements of this code.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Specified. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business, to retail merchants in that
line of business;
      (2)   Wholesale trade shows or conventions;
      (3)   Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample, catalog or brochure
for future delivery;
      (4)   Fairs and convention center activities conducted primarily for
amusement or entertainment;
      (5)   Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored by any church
or religious organization;
      (6)   Any sale sponsored by schools and universities or any charitable
organization;
      (7)   Wholesale trade fairs with no on-site sales and delivery;
      (8)   Garage sales held on the premises devoted to residential use;
      (9)   Sales of crafts or items made by hand and sold or offered for sale
by the person making such crafts or handmade items;
      (10)   Sales of agricultural products grown by the seller;
      (11)   Sales made by a seller at residential premises pursuant to an
invitation issued by the owner or legal occupant of such premises;
      (12)   Any person who maintains a permanent place of business in this
state and has a registered agent therein upon whom process, notice or demand
permitted by law may be made; and
      (13)   Any person whose participation with a transient merchant or in the
temporary or transient business, as defined in §
111.01 of this chapter, is limited to providing any building, structure, motor
vehicle, railroad car or real estate.
   (B)   Association with local business. A transient merchant not otherwise
exempted as set out above, shall not be relieved or exempted from the
provisions of this chapter by reason of associating himself or herself
temporarily with any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant,
or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or in
the name of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 111.05 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Required; contents. Any transient merchant desiring to transact
business in the city shall make application for and obtain a license to
transact business. The application for license shall be filed with the City
Clerk at least three business days prior to the transaction of business, and
shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and permanent address of the transient merchant making the
application, and if the applicant is a firm or corporation, the name and
address of the members of the firm or the officers of the corporation, as the
case may be;
      (2)   If the applicant is a corporation, there shall be stated on the
application form the date of incorporation, the state of incorporation, and if
the applicant is a corporation formed in a state other than this state, the
date on which such corporation qualified to transact business as a foreign
corporation in this state;
      (3)   A statement showing the kind of business proposed to be conducted,
the length of time for which the applicant desires to transact such business
and the location of such proposed place of business;
      (4)   The name and permanent address of the transient merchant’s
registered agent or office; and
      (5)   Proof that the applicant has acquired all other required county and
state permits and licenses. The applicant shall provide to the City Clerk
applicant’s current state and federal tax identification number.
   (B)   Verification by City Clerk. The City Clerk shall verify the validity
of the application within three days of application.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 111.06 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   Each application for a transient/itinerant vendor and transient/itinerant
merchant license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license fee of $50.
(Refer to Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)
§ 111.07 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY; VALIDITY.
   (A)   A transient business license shall be issued only when all the
requirements of this chapter have been met.
   (B)   Such license shall not be transferable, shall be valid only within the
territorial limits of the city, and shall be valid only for the business stated
in the application.
   (C)   A license so issued shall be valid for only one person, unless such a
person shall be a member of a partnership or employee of a firm or corporation
obtaining such license.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-7)
§ 111.08 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire 30
days after the date of issuance thereof, unless a prior date is fixed therein.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-8)
§ 111.09 POSSESSION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person receiving a license under this chapter shall have the same in
possession at all times while conducting business.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-9)
§ 111.10 LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his or her behalf, shall
shout, make an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device,
including any loud speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places of the city, or upon any private premises
in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or
other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods,
wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Causes. The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may
be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
      (5)   Conducting the business license under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Hearing; notice. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall
be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee, at his or her last known address, at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-11)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-12)
CHAPTER 112: MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Permit for operation required, offense
   
112.04   Multiple mobile food service permits requirement
   
112.05   Conditions for issuance of permit
   
112.06   Restrictions on locations of operation
   
112.07   Restrictions on location as to time
   
112.08   Possession of valid license and tax permit required
   
112.09   Reasonable conduct of operations
   
112.10   Special events
   
112.11   Use of public property and public rights-of-way
   
112.12   General requirements of operations
   
112.13   Administrative officer designation
   
112.14   Right to appeal
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the actions/operations of mobile
food service establishments conducting business operations within the city
limits of the city to the limited and restricted extent as expressly set forth
herein. It is not the purpose of this chapter to adopt “health regulations”
governing or pertaining to mobile food service establishments. The matters of
“health regulations” and enforcement thereof pertaining to mobile food service
establishments are matters the city deems appropriate and in the best interest
of the city to leave to the jurisdiction and control of the State Department of
Health.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-1) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD. A raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
   FULL SERVICE MOBILE. A vehicle or trailer designed and equipped to prepare
and serve open food products.
   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE. A facility that prepares or serves food and is vehicle
mounted or is otherwise readily movable and includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, “full service mobile”, “prepackaged mobile” and “pushcart” as those
terms are defined herein.
   PREPACKAGED MOBILE. A vehicle or trailer limited to the sale of commercially
manufactured prepackaged food products.
   PUSHCART. A non-self-propelled vehicle, the operation of which is limited to
serving non- potentially hazardous foods and/or commercially prepackaged foods.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-2) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.03 PERMIT FOR OPERATION REQUIRED, OFFENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food service
within the city limits without a valid mobile food service permit issued by the
city.
   (B)   Violation of this permit requirement shall be an offense and
punishable pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OPERATE.
         (a)   Physically participating in the active conduct of the operation
of a mobile food service at the location where such activities are occurring;
or
         (b)   A person having the authority to direct and/or manage the
operations of a mobile food service, causing the mobile food service to operate
in violation of this section, regardless of the person being present at the
location where such activities are occurring.
   (D)   There shall be only one form of permit issued by the city regardless
of classification under §
112.02 of this chapter. The permit shall be a permit for mobile food service
establishment.
   (E)   There shall be three classes of permits issued by the city as follows:
      (1)   One day permit (valid for one day specified);
      (2)   Special event permit (valid for duration of time of special event);
and
      (3)   One year permit (valid for calendar year of issuance).
   (F)   The amount of the fee to be paid for the issuance of a permit pursuant
to an approved application for the permit shall be that as set by the City
Council from time to time in Appendix A of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   In addition to the fee for issuance of the permit pursuant to an
approved application as set forth in division (F) of this section there shall
be assessed an administrative processing fee for all applications for permits
in an amount as set by the City Council from time to time in Appendix A of this
code of ordinances.
   (H)   Nonprofit entities shall be exempt from payment of the fee for
issuance of the permit, but shall not be exempt from payment of the fee for
processing of the application for permit.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-3) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 MULTIPLE MOBILE FOOD SERVICE PERMITS REQUIREMENT.
   A separate mobile food service permit shall be required for each individual
mobile food service unit being operated within the city limits regardless of
common ownership thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-4) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.05 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   No mobile food service permit will be issued by the city to an applicant
unless and until the applicant satisfies the following conditions of issuance:
   (A)   Provides to the city a copy of the applicant’s approved “application
for food or lodging establishment license” issued by the State Department of
Health;
   (B)   Provides to the city a copy of the applicant’s current, valid state
sales tax permit;
   (C)   An applicant for issuance of a permit under the status of a nonprofit,
charitable or religious organization shall provide official written proof of
exemption from the requirement of collecting sales tax in lieu of the
requirement of a valid state sales tax permit;
   (D)   An applicant for issuance of a permit under the status of a nonprofit,
charitable or religious organization shall not be relieved of the obligation to
provide a copy of the applicant’s approved “application for food or lodging
establishment license” issued by the State Department of Health;
   (E)   Provision to the city of a completed application for mobile food
service permit on the application form prescribed by the city;
   (F)   Payment of the prescribed fees to the city for processing the
application for permit and for issuance of a mobile food service permit
pursuant to an approved application as set forth in
Appendix A of this code of ordinances; and
   (G)   Approval of the application for mobile food service permit by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-5) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.06 RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATIONS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Mobile food service operations shall be conducted in conformance with
the restrictions as set forth in this section.
   (B)   A first time violation under division (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), (C)(5)
or (C)(6) of this section shall subject the violator to a written warning which
may be issued by a city law enforcement officer or other appropriate city
official as may be designated by the City Council to issue such warnings.
   (C)   A second violation of division (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), (C)(5) or (C)
(6) of this section which occurs within 60 days of the issuance of a warning
for any violation of any of the aforesaid division (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), (C)
(5) or (C)(6) shall result in the issuance of a ticket by city law enforcement
and shall be deemed an offense punishable pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances and shall further serve as sufficient grounds
for revocation by the city of the mobile food services permit issued by the
city at the discretion of the city.
      (1)   No mobile food service may locate or conduct business operations
within areas designated by the city’s zoning code as a “residential district”
where such location or conduct of business operations involves the stationary
parking or placement of the mobile food service in one location for a period of
time exceeding ten minutes. Violation of this provision shall constitute an
offense upon the occurrence of the first violation and shall further serve as
sufficient grounds for revocation by the city of the mobile food services
permit issued by the city at the discretion of the city.
      (2)   No mobile food service may locate or conduct business operations in
such a location or in such a manner as to unreasonably inhibit the flow of
traffic upon the city streets, public use of sidewalks, or public access to
alleys as determined in the discretion of the city or city or state law
enforcement personnel.
      (3)   No mobile food service may locate or conduct business operations in
such a location or in such a manner as to inhibit the public access to public
parking as determined in the discretion of the city or city or state law
enforcement personnel.
      (4)   No mobile food service may locate or conduct business operations in
such a location or in such a manner as to inhibit the public access to public
parking as determined in the discretion of the city or city or state law
enforcement personnel.
      (5)   No mobile food service may locate or conduct business operations in
such a location or in such a manner as to pose a danger, risk or threat to the
public safety as determined in the discretion of the city or city or state law
enforcement personnel.
      (6)   No mobile food service may locate or conduct business operations
upon private property located within the city without the permission of the
owner or other person in authority over the private property.
      (7)   No customer shall be served on the street side of the mobile unit.
All service must be on the curb side when the mobile unit is on or abutting a
public street.
      (8)   No drive-through or drive-by customer service shall be provided or
permitted as part of a mobile food service as contemplated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-6) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.07 RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION AS TO TIME.
   (A) No mobile food service may remain located at the same location for more
than 12 hours during any single 24-hour period of time.
   (B) No mobile food service may be located at the same location more than 90
days, whether consecutive or not, during any calendar year.
(Ord. 2024-4, passed 6-4-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.08 POSSESSION OF VALID LICENSE AND TAX PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   At all times of operation a mobile food service must maintain and have
in its possession a copy of its current and valid food or lodging establishment
license issued by the State Department of Health and state sales tax permit and
mobile food services permit issued by the city.
   (B)   A mobile food service operating within the city limits shall be
obligated to produce copies of the licenses and permits identified in division
(A) of this section for inspection immediately upon request by city law
enforcement officers or officials.
   (C)   The failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall
constitute an offense punishable pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances and shall further serve as sufficient grounds
for revocation by the city of the mobile food services permit issued by the
city at the discretion of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-8) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.09 REASONABLE CONDUCT OF OPERATIONS.
   The conduct of the operation of the mobile food service shall be made and
conducted in such a manner as to not be unreasonably disruptive or offensive to
the peace, health, safety and welfare of the public. Loud music, disruptive
lights and other such activities as may disrupt or offend the peace, health,
safety and welfare of the public are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-9) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.10 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   At the discretion of the city special exceptions or deviations from the
provisions of §§
112.06 (concerning locations) and
112.07 (concerning time) of this chapter may be allowed for special events or
special circumstances. Deviation or exception from other provisions of this
chapter shall not be allowed. Any such exception or deviation shall be made in
advance of the occurrence of the special event or special circumstance by
unilateral action initiated by the City Council or upon advance approval of the
city pursuant to an application by the person seeking the deviation or
exception. Deviations or exceptions shall not be retroactively allowed,
approved or valid.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-10) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.11 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Use of public property and public rights-of-way for the conduct of mobile
food service operations shall be allowed as follows:
   (A)   Use of public streets and rights-of-way is allowed when carried out in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
   (B)   Use of public property such as parks or other public areas may be
allowed when approved in advance by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-11) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.12 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATIONS.
   (A)   All mobile food service operations shall provide garbage receptacles
for customer use.
   (B)   At the conclusion of business activities at a given location the
mobile food service vendor shall clean all the area surrounding his or her
location of all debris, trash and litter generated by the vendor’s business
activities.
   (C)   All mobile food service vendors preparing food by cooking, frying or
other means shall be equipped with at least one fire extinguisher with a
minimum rating of 2A-40-BC.
   (D)   All electrical connections by mobile food service vendors shall fully
comply with requirements of the National Electrical Code (NEC).
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-12) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.13 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER DESIGNATION.
   The City Council shall designate an administrative officer or administrative
officers of the city whom shall be designated by the City Council to be
possessed of the authority to carry out the powers, duties and authorities of
the city as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-13) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
§ 112.14 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any person alleged to be aggrieved by a decision of an administrative
officer designated by the city to act under §
112.13 of this chapter shall have a right of appeal of the decision of the
administrative officer. Appeals under this chapter shall be to the City Council
under the procedures prescribed by this code for administrative appeals in
general.
(Prior Code, § 3-2A-14) (Ord. 2016-3, passed 11-1-2016)
CHAPTER 113: RESIDENTIAL SALES AND AUCTIONS
Section
   
113.01   Residential sales
   
113.02   Auctions
   
113.03   Signage
§ 113.01 RESIDENTIAL SALES.
   (A)   Defined. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RESIDENTIAL SALES. Any sale which is held out to be or commonly known as
a garage, porch, room, yard, neighborhood or driveway sale, or any other type
of general sale conducted from or upon premises not located in a zoning
district which permits such sales, where goods or articles of any type are held
out for sale to the public.
   (B)   Period of sale restricted. No person shall hold or conduct, nor shall
any owner or tenant of any parcel of real property permit the holding or
conducting of, any residential sale which lasts more than two consecutive days
or oftener than once for any one month period of time at the same location or
upon the same premises.
   (C)   Estate and court ordered sales exempt. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to or affect sales conducted in connection with the
administration or closing of estates of deceased persons or sales conducted
pursuant to an order or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 113.02 AUCTIONS.
   (A)   License required. Before any person shall sell or expose for sale, at
public or private auction in this city, any bankrupt or other stock of goods,
wares or merchandise or shall sell or offer for sale any merchandise of any
character whatsoever in this city at public or private auction, the owner
thereof shall first pay to this city a license fee for each day such goods,
wares or merchandise is to be sold or offered for sale in this city. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Exemption. Exempt from the license fee requirement are those
individuals or businesses conducting at least three auctions per calendar month
at a permanent location within the city in an area zoned general commercial
district, light industrial district or heavy industrial district.
   (C)   Application for license. Any person desiring to sell or to offer for
sale any of the goods, wares or merchandise at auction in this city under the
provisions of division (A) of this section, shall make application to the City
Clerk, in writing, specifying the name of the owner of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or exposed for sale, the character of the same and the
name of the person proposing to carry on the business, and the place where the
business is to be carried on, and the length of time such auction business is
to be conducted.
   (D)   Solicitation of orders. It is unlawful for any person to solicit
orders for, solicit the purchase of, or otherwise attempt to sell any goods or
services or to solicit appointments for such purposes either in person, by
telephone or otherwise at any place of residence within the city after 7:00
p.m. of any day, unless the person soliciting such orders, purchases or
appointments has previously obtained an appointment with the occupants of such
place of residence and their consent to solicit such purchases or orders at the
approximate time involved.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.03 SIGNAGE.
   A residential sale, auction, estate and court ordered exempt sales sign must
provide location, date, time of sale and shall not remain for greater than 24
hours after close of sale. Any sign placed not in compliance herewith or which
remains longer than 24 hours after the close of the sale shall be considered a
public nuisance and subject to action as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) (Ord. 2010-3, passed 2-16-2010)
CHAPTER 114: ENTERTAINMENT AND AMUSEMENT
Section
Family Amusement Centers
   
114.01   Defined
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Application for license
   
114.04   Fee for license
   
114.05   Issuance of license
   
114.06   Operating requirements
   
114.07   Revocation of license
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
   
114.20   Definitions
   
114.21   Classification; annual tax
   
114.22   License required
   
114.23   Application for license
   
114.24   Fee for license
   
114.25   Illegal devices
Pool and Billiards
   
114.40   Definition
   
114.41   License required
   
114.42   Application for license
   
114.43   Fee for license
   
114.44   Age limit and time of operation
   
114.45   Revocation of license
FAMILY AMUSEMENT CENTERS
§ 114.01 DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FAMILY AMUSEMENT CENTER. A room or place designed and operated to furnish
recreation for families for a profit offering pool and billiards and similar
games to persons of all ages and either sex and in which are located two or
more pool, billiard or similar tables. No place shall qualify as a FAMILY
AMUSEMENT CENTER where intoxicating liquors and nonintoxicating alcoholic
beverages are sold or offered for sale.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-1)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Authority. The establishment and operation of family amusement centers
in the city is hereby authorized and permitted with the passage of the
ordinance codified herein, subject to the obtaining of a license therefor and
the regulations herein contained.
   (B)   Separate and distinct businesses. Pool halls and family amusement
centers, as defined by the ordinances of the city, shall be considered as
separate and distinct businesses. Any person qualifying and obtaining a license
for either shall not be required to obtain a license for the other.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-2)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Every person desiring a license for a family amusement center shall
make written application therefor and file the same with the City Clerk,
together with the license fee required by this subchapter.
   (B)   The information required on the application, except for the type of
business for which a license is sought, and the procedure for licensing the
same and the qualifications of the owner or operator of a family amusement
center, shall be the same as that set out for pool halls under the ordinances
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-3)
Cross-reference:
   Pool and Billiards, see §§
114.40 through
114.45
§ 114.04 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Required; term. Every license issued for a family amusement center
shall expire on April 30 of each year. The annual fee for such a license shall
be as set by the City Council by motion or resolution. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Each location. An annual fee shall be required for each location of a
family amusement center. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-4)
§ 114.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The license required for family amusement centers shall be issued by the
City Clerk by and with the consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-5)
§ 114.06 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally described. Family amusement centers may operate pool,
billiard and similar tables for a profit and for the use of all ages and either
sex. No beer or other forms of intoxicating liquors or nonintoxicating
alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed or permitted on the premises. No
gambling or wagering of any kind shall be permitted on the premises. Coin-
operated music or amusement machines may be installed and operated in family
amusement centers and such machines shall not give as a bonus more than five
free games and no cash refund for free games shall be made. Each amusement
machine must bear a state and city license showing that such license fees have
been paid for the period of operation. All such family amusement centers shall
not open before 8:00 a.m. or remain open later than 12:00 midnight, except that
on Sunday, such places of business shall not open before 1:30 p.m. and shall
close by 5:30 p.m.
   (B)   Lighting; glass front. Each family amusement center shall be well
lighted and shall have an open glass front so as to permit open vision from the
outside of the center.
   (C)   Admissions during school hours. No owner, operator, manager or
employee of a family amusement center shall permit any youth 16 years of age or
less to be in or about such establishment during school hours when public
schools are in session.
   (D)   Pool and billiard tables; license required. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a place of business where two or more pool, billiard or
similar tables are operated for a profit unless a license therefor is obtained
either for a family amusement center or a pool hall.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-6) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor and City Council may revoke the license of any person to operate a
family amusement center and such revocation shall operate to close such family
amusement center under the license upon any of the following grounds:
   (A)   Violation of subchapter. Violation of the provisions of this
subchapter; and
   (B)   Conduct. Any conduct on the part of the owner, lessee or agent,
servant or employee engaged in the management, conduct, operation or carrying
on of said business which evidences bad moral character.
(Prior Code, § 3-4A-7)
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 114.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE.
      (1)   Includes any and all mechanical devices which, upon the payment or
insertion of a coin, token or similar object, causes or permits, or is the
incentive for, the propelling or motivating of any ball, marble or other gadget
or object that produces or creates or makes possible the production or creation
of a game of skill, amusement, entertainment or test of strength; and
      (2)   Does not include any coin-operated music or music device or coin-
operated vending machines used exclusively for the purpose of selling tangible
personal property such as cold drinks, tobacco products, candies, postage
stamps or other merchandise; or services such as pay telephone booths, parking
meters, gas and electric meters or other distribution of needful service.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, partnership, association or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-1)
§ 114.21 CLASSIFICATION; ANNUAL TAX.
   Coin-operated amusement devices are hereby classified for the purpose of
taxation and an annual license tax as hereinafter set out is hereby levied with
respect to each such device. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-2)
§ 114.22 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   General. Any owner of a coin-operated amusement device who places such
device in operation or in a place available to the public for operation, and
any person who permits such a device to be in operation or accessible to the
public for operation in his or her place of business, without a license affixed
as required by this subchapter, shall be liable for the tax on such device at
the full annual rate as herein levied and shall be liable to a penalty in
addition to the amount of the tax, in an amount equaling the amount of said
license fee due on such device.
   (B)   Special. In those instances where it is shown to the satisfaction of
the City Clerk that a device, upon which a tax is in this subchapter levied,
will be placed available for use by the public for a definite but limited
period of time less than one year, such as where displayed in connection with
fairs, carnivals and places of amusement that operate only during certain
seasons of the year, the City Clerk may issue a special license therefor. Such
special license may be issued for any number of 30-day periods less than a full
year, and shall indicate that it is a special license; and shall be for one or
more 30-day periods and shall state the precise dates for which issued and
shall not be transferred from one machine to another. The tax shall be computed
and paid on the basis of one-tenth of the annual rate for the type of device
licensed, for each 30-day period for which such special license is issued. In
the event the mechanical device is made available to the public for a period
beyond that for which the special license is issued, then a full year’s tax
shall be due. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-3) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.23 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person owning a coin-operated amusement device or operating the premises
where the same is to be operated or exposed to the public, may apply to the
City Clerk for a license for such device and shall at the same time pay to the
City Clerk the annual license tax herein levied. The City Clerk shall, upon
receipt of such payment and approval of such application, issue a license for
the type of device covered by such application and payment. Any number of
machines may be included in one application. Before any coin-operated amusement
device is put in operation or placed where the same may be operated by any of
the public and at all times when the same is being operated or available to any
of the public for operation, a license shall be firmly affixed to the device
covered thereby and plainly visible to and readable by the public.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-4)
§ 114.24 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Enumerated. Every person who owns and has available to any of the
public for operation, or who permits to be operated in or on his or her place
of business, any coin-operated amusement device, shall pay for such privilege
an annual license tax as set by the City Council for each such device. (Refer
to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Taxable year. For the purpose of this subchapter, the taxable year
shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 and shall be divided into four
quarters. The City Clerk shall in each instance issue a license for the
remainder of the taxable year upon payment of the tax on the basis of the
current and remaining quarters.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-5)
§ 114.25 ILLEGAL DEVICES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to legalize any device that
may be prohibited by any of the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the
city. The City Clerk may assume that any device described in any application
and for which a license tax is paid, is lawful and no claim for refund of any
such license tax shall be entertained based on an owner’s inability to operate
such device because of any law of this state or this city, or for any other
reason.
(Prior Code, § 3-4B-6)
POOL AND BILLIARDS
§ 114.40 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE or OPERATES. As used in this subchapter, or any other sections or
ordinances pertaining to a pool, billiard or domino hall, means the taking of
any active part in the management, conducting or carrying on of any business
pertaining to a pool table, billiard table or domino table, either for himself
or herself or as agent, servant or employee of another, whether serving with or
without pay.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-1)
§ 114.41 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, operate or conduct or permit
to be set up, operated and/or conducted in or about any place of business
within the city, whether for himself or herself as owner, lessee or otherwise,
or as an agent, servant or employee of another, whether serving with or without
pay, two or more pool tables, billiard tables or domino tables, or combination
of the same, for the purpose or purposes of having or allowing the same to be
played by the public for a fee or for profit to the owner of said business or
to the operator without having first obtained a license as hereinafter
provided. Only one license shall be required for each place of business.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-2) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.42 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all present, future or
pending applications for a pool, billiard or domino hall license and to all
renewals thereof, and shall require that all such applications shall include
the names of all persons who will take part in the management, operation or
conduct of the business in question and their approval by the Mayor and City
Council as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-3)
§ 114.43 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   The annual fee as set by the City Council shall be paid for five tables and
for each additional table. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-4)
§ 114.44 AGE LIMIT AND TIME OF OPERATION.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play pool,
dominos, billiards or checkers in the pool, domino or billiard hall, unless
accompanied by parent or guardian, nor shall they be allowed to work in said
pool, billiard or domino hall. No such hall shall operate between 12:00
midnight and 7:00 a.m. on any day, nor on the Sabbath, with the exception that
recreation centers containing pool or billiard tables, but not containing
domino tables or similar tables may be opened and operated under the provisions
of this subchapter between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 5:30 p.m. on Sundays.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-5)
§ 114.45 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may revoke the license of any person to
operate a pool, billiard or domino hall and such revocation shall operate to
close any pool, billiard or domino hall under the license upon the grounds set
out in this subchapter.
   (B)   The following are grounds for revocation or suspension:
      (1)   Violation of subchapter. Violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter;
      (2)   Intoxication. Drunkenness of the person holding such license,
including any agent, servant or employee taking any active part in the
management, conducting or carrying on of such business, or permitting any
intoxicated person to loiter in such business;
      (3)   Minors. Permitting persons prohibited by ordinances of the city by
reason of age to resort to such place of business, unless accompanied by parent
or guardian;
      (4)   State laws. Violation of any of the laws of the state pertaining to
intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquors, or violation of any of the laws of the
state in or about such place of business by the owner or lessee thereof or any
person engaged in the management, operation, conducting or carrying on of such
business or permitting anyone to violate such laws in said place of business;
and
      (5)   Conduct. Any conduct on the part of the owner, lessee or agent,
servant or employee engaged in the management, conduct, operation or carrying
on of said business which evidences bad moral character.
(Prior Code, § 3-4C-6)
CHAPTER 115: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
115.01   Defined
   
115.02   Regulatory fee required
   
115.03   Register required
   
115.04   Purchasing certain property prohibited
   
115.05   Sales of property; pledge
§ 115.01 DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person who loans money on deposits of personal property or
who deals in the purchase of personal property on the condition of selling the
same back again at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at his or
her place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their
business: three gilt or yellow balls
(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)
§ 115.02 REGULATORY FEE REQUIRED.
   No person shall carry on or engage in business as a pawnbroker without
having first paid to the city a regulatory fee in the sum as set by the City
Council. The regulatory fee shall be paid annually and shall be paid at the
office of the City Clerk. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-5-2) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.03 REGISTER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Contents. Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business
a register in which he or she shall enter in writing a minute description of
all property taken, purchased or received by him or her, including any number
that may be in or upon any article, together with the time and name and place
of residence (giving street and number, if within the city) of the person
leaving the property, also the amount loaned, the interest charged and the time
when the loan falls due; which register shall be kept clean and legible. He or
she shall make such entry within one hour after the receipt or purchase of such
property.
   (B)   Ink entry. Every entry shall be made in ink and shall not in any
manner be obliterated or erased.
   (C)   Ticket. To the person negotiating or leaving such property, he or she
shall give a plainly written or printed ticket, having upon it a full and
perfect copy of all the entries required by ordinance to be kept in such
register, for which copy no charge shall be made.
   (D)   Deliver to Chief of Police. It is the further duty of every pawnbroker
to make out and deliver to the Chief of Police every day a legible and correct
copy from the register of all personal property or other valuable things
received or deposited or purchased during the preceding week, together with the
time when received or purchased and a description of the person by whom left or
from whom the same was purchased.
   (E)   Property purchased from manufactures, dealers. No person shall be
required to furnish such description of any property purchased from
manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business or
of any goods purchased at open sale or from any bankrupt stock, or from any
other person having an established place of business. But such goods must be
accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate
purchase, and must be shown to any officer when demanded.
   (F)   Open to inspection. The register so kept by the person shall at all
times be kept open to the inspection of the Chief of Police and Sheriff of
Mayes County or the deputy of either, any officer of the police force of the
city, the City Attorney and the Prosecuting Attorney of the county, and anyone
authorized in writing for that purpose by the Chief or Captain of the police
force, which authority shall be exhibited to the pawnbroker. The pawnbroker
shall, upon request, show and exhibit to such person or officer for inspection,
any article purchased, taken or received by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-3)
§ 115.04 PURCHASING CERTAIN PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   No pawnbroker shall purchase, take or receive in pledge or on deposit, any
article or property of or from a minor, or owned by any minor, or from any
common drunkard or person under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs,
or stolen property or property which for any cause, he or she may have reason
to believe or suspect cannot be lawfully or rightfully sold, pawned or pledged
by the person offering it.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-4) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.05 SALES OF PROPERTY; PLEDGE.
   (A)   Twenty-four hours. No personal property received on pledge by any
pawnbroker shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed from the place of business
of such pawnbroker for the space of 24 hours after the copy and statement
required to be delivered to the Chief of Police shall have been delivered as
required by §
115.03(D) of this chapter.
   (B)   Before default. No pawnbroker shall sell any article received by him
or her in pledge before the time to redeem has expired.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-5) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 116: JUNK AND JUNKYARDS
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Application to junk motor vehicles
   
116.03   Restriction and prohibition on establishment
   
116.04   Application for license
   
116.05   Fee for license
   
116.06   Rules and requirements
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. All kinds of previously used or secondhand rags, sacks, bottles, cans,
paper, metal and used or damaged automobiles or other vehicles or machinery not
in running condition or not suitable economically to be repaired or restored to
their original use, or used or damaged automobiles, vehicles or other machinery
purchased, acquired or used for salvage purposes for the benefit of the metal,
material or parts therein contained in whole or in part, and all other articles
of whatsoever nature or kind, commonly purchased after primary use and kept or
sold for subsequent use, consumption or traffic, and otherwise commonly known
as JUNK.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person, firm or corporation, or agent, employee or servant
thereof, engaged in the business of buying, selling or offering for sale or
trade, or otherwise dealing in junk, including the storing or the displaying of
junk or the dismantling, stripping or removal of parts from used automobiles or
other vehicles or machinery in whole or in part for the benefit of the metal,
materials or parts therein contained or stripped. Automobile and tire dealers
who receive or accept used automobiles or tires as down payment or part payment
upon commodities handled by them shall not be included within the terms of this
chapter, provided, however, in the case of automobile dealers, that such used
automobiles are not dismantled or stripped in whole or in part by such
automobile dealer for the purpose of obtaining the metal, material, salvage or
parts therefrom.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes all automobiles, trucks or other motor vehicles
in such used or damaged condition as not to be economically suitable to be
repaired and restored to their original intended use; all automobiles, trucks
or other motor vehicles from which the metals, materials or parts have been or
are being removed for other use and all automobiles, trucks or other motor
vehicles which are not in operating condition, unless such latter automobiles,
trucks or other motor vehicles are actually being repaired by or on behalf of
the owner thereof within the time reasonably required for the repair of the
same after they have ceased to operate. Any automobile, truck or other motor
vehicle which is required by law to bear and display a license tag and which is
not in safe operating condition and does not bear and display a current license
tag as required by law shall be presumed to be a JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE.
   JUNKYARD. Any place where “junk”, as defined herein, is dismantled or
stripped in whole or in part, bought, sold, stored, displayed or otherwise
dealt with by a junk dealer.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-1)
§ 116.02 APPLICATION TO JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to park and leave standing upon any public or
private property within view of the public or persons living nearby, or to
permit to be parked and left standing upon any private property under his or
her possession or control within view of the public or persons living nearby,
any junk motor vehicle, except for such time as may be reasonably required to
cause the same to be removed. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
junk motor vehicles parked and left standing at any place of business
authorized by law to deal with, store or repair such motor vehicles and which
is operating in compliance with the zoning ordinances and other ordinances of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-2) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.03 RESTRICTION AND PROHIBITION ON ESTABLISHMENT.
   No new junkyard shall be established within the corporate limits of the
city. This prohibition shall not apply to junkyards existing in areas which may
subsequently be annexed within the municipal boundaries. Such preexisting
junkyards in annexed areas shall, upon annexation, secure the license for
operation, and shall comply with the other provisions of this chapter within
the time limits from the date of such annexation as are granted to junkyards
existing within the city upon the initial effective date hereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-3) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a license to operate a junkyard shall be made to the City
Clerk on forms provided by him or her. The application shall contain the name
of the junk dealer, the location of the junkyard or business, and such other
information as the Mayor and City Council may from time to time require.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-4)
§ 116.05 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   For the operation of a business of dealing in junk, the license fee for each
junk dealer shall be as set by the City Council per year. The license shall
expire on April 30 of each year and the license fee therefor, for the initial
application, may be prorated upon a quarterly basis. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-6-5)
§ 116.06 RULES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Yard wall. In any case where a junkyard is operated in a yard or open
space outside of any building, it shall be the duty of the operator or
proprietor to erect and maintain a solid fence, not less than seven feet high,
entirely around the premises where junk is stored, displayed or visible. The
fence shall be made of new, noncombustible materials, sightly in appearance. It
shall be kept in good repair at all times. Junk shall be piled in such manner
within the junkyard as not to be visible from the street or alley upon which
such yard abuts, nor from the ground floor of residential or business property
which may be adjacent thereto. Any junkyard which exists on the effective date
hereof is given a period of 30 days within which to comply with the yard wall
requirements herein set forth.
   (B)   Register of property. Each junkyard operator shall maintain a
register, in which he or she shall enter the item or items which he or she
acquires in the course of trading, for sale or trade, showing its true
character, sufficient for purposes of identification, the person from whom
acquired and the date on which acquired. He or she shall make such entry within
two hours of receiving or purchasing the property. Every entry shall be made in
ink and shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased.
   (C)   Register subject to inspection. The register herein required and any
goods, wares and merchandise which such junk dealer may acquire in the course
of his or her business and offers for sale or trade, shall be subject to the
inspection of the Chief of Police, the City Attorney, the County Attorney and
anyone authorized in writing by the Chief of Police, which authorization shall
be exhibited to the junkyard dealer before inspection is made.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-6)
CHAPTER 117: TREE TRIMMERS LICENSING
Section
   
117.01   Permit required
   
117.02   Residents; exemption
   
117.03   Qualifications; fee; issuance
   
117.04   Employees and agents
   
117.05   Revocation of permit; appeal
§ 117.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business or occupation of pruning or trimming
of trees on streets, alleys, public lands or public ways within the city
without having first obtained a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-1) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.02 RESIDENTS; EXEMPTION.
   Nothing herein shall prohibit the resident of any property from trimming or
pruning the trees or shrubs, personally, upon those premises upon which he or
she resides. Likewise, no permit shall be required for the operations described
in this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-2)
§ 117.03 QUALIFICATIONS; FEE; ISSUANCE.
   Any person who holds a valid license as a pruner issued by the State
Department of Agriculture under applicable state law shall be eligible to
qualify for a tree trimmer’s permit. Upon presentation of a state license, the
City Clerk shall issue the permit for an annual fee from May 1 to April 30 of
each year, upon the applicant’s payment of the fee as set by the City Council.
The holder of such permit shall maintain constant, personal supervision of any
employee then engaged in trimming trees. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-7-3)
§ 117.04 EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS.
   The requirement of satisfactorily complying with the city’s regulations
hereunder shall be met by the employees of the city and of its agencies.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-4)
§ 117.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEAL.
   At any time, upon noncompliance with its regulation, or for moral
improvidence, the Park Board, or any of its members, may revoke the tree
trimmer’s permit, provided, any tree trimmer whose permit has been so revoked
may appeal such revocation to the City Council to be heard at the next regular
meeting of the City Council after such revocation. The City Council may vacate
such revocation, affirm the same or impose conditions thereto.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-5)
CHAPTER 118: SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Attendant
   
118.03   Dispensing
   
118.04   Spillage; design requirements
   
118.05   Signs for operating instructions and warning
   
118.06   Emergency controls
   
118.07   Storage of liquid wastes
   
118.08   Provisions supplemental
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LIQUID. Any flammable and combustible liquid used as motor fuel or
otherwise.
   SELF-SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where liquids are stored and
subsequently dispensed from fixed approved dispensing equipment by persons,
other than a service station attendant, and may include facilities available
for sale of other retail products.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-1)
§ 118.02 ATTENDANT.
   (A)   Required. A self-service station shall have at least one attendant on
duty while the self-service station is open to the public. The attendant shall
be mentally and physically capable of performing the functions and assuming the
responsibilities prescribed to him or her in this chapter.
   (B)   Duties. Any attendant at a self-service station shall supervise,
observe and control the dispensing of liquid while such liquids are actually
being dispensed. He or she shall prevent the dispensing of liquids into a
portable container unless the container is of metal or is approved by the
office of the State Fire Marshal, has a tight closure with screwed or spring
cover, and is fitted or so designed that the contents can be poured without
spilling. The attendant shall control sources of ignition and immediately
handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers, if needed.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-2)
§ 118.03 DISPENSING.
   (A)   Area; clear view. The dispensing area shall at all times be in clear
view of the attendant and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come
between the dispensing area and the attendant control area shall be prohibited.
The attendant shall at all times have voice communication with any person in
the dispensing area.
   (B)   Devices. Approved special dispensing devices, such as, but not limited
to, coin-operated and remote-controlled types, are permitted at a self-service
station.
   (C)   Hose nozzle valves. Hose nozzle valves used at a self-service station
shall be an approved automatic closing-type, without a latch-open device.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-3)
§ 118.04 SPILLAGE; DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Provisions shall be made in the area where liquids are dispensed to prevent
spilled liquid from flowing into the interior of self-service station
buildings. Such provision may be made by grading driveways, raising door sills
or other equally effective means.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-4)
§ 118.05 SIGNS FOR OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS AND WARNING.
   Operating instructions and warning signs shall be conspicuously posted in
the dispensing area. Warning signs shall read: “It is unlawful and dangerous to
dispense gasoline into unapproved containers. No smoking. Turn off engine.”
(Prior Code, § 3-8-5)
§ 118.06 EMERGENCY CONTROLS.
   In a self-service station, emergency controls shall be installed at a
location acceptable to the department having jurisdiction, and shall not be
more than 100 feet from the dispensers. The emergency controls shall be clearly
identified and easily accessible control switches or circuit breakers remote
from the dispensing devices, including any remote pumping system, that will
shut off power to all dispensing devices in the event of an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-6)
§ 118.07 STORAGE OF LIQUID WASTES.
   Crankcase drainings and flammable or combustible liquids shall not be dumped
into sewers, streams or adjoining property, but shall be stored in tanks or
drums outside any building until removed from the premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-7)
§ 118.08 PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL.
   The provisions of this chapter are intended to be supplemental to any
provisions of ordinances of the city relating to the public health and safety
and are intended to impose more stringent standards on the construction and
operation of self-service stations.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-8)
CHAPTER 119: TAXICABS
Section
   
119.01   Defined
   
119.02   License; permit required
   
119.03   Application for license
   
119.04   Fee for license
   
119.05   Inspection of vehicle prior to licensing
   
119.06   Issuance; term; display
   
119.07   Liability insurance
§ 119.01 DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. Any vehicle carrying passengers for hire.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-1)
§ 119.02 LICENSE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Taxicabs. All drivers or operators of taxicabs within the city shall,
before driving or operating a taxicab upon the streets, alleys or public ways
of the city, first obtain a license therefor from the City Clerk.
   (B)   Vehicles for hire.
      (1)   Permits for the driving and operating of such motor vehicles for
hire within the city shall be issued to any person of good moral character
attested to by the affidavit of two resident freeholders of the city who have
not had their motor vehicle operator’s license or commercial chauffeur’s
license revoked by the Commissioner of Public Safety of Oklahoma or his or her
counterpart in any other state within three years immediately prior to the date
of the application, and who has not been convicted of a felony, which
information shall be attested to by the Chief of Police according to his or her
best knowledge, who shall:
         (a)   Exhibit to the City Clerk proof of his (or her) being the holder
of a valid commercial chauffeur’s license issued by the state; and
         (b)   Submit to the City Clerk a recent photograph not less than one
inch by one inch and not larger than two inches by four inches in size for
attachment to a permit to operate such motor vehicle.
      (2)   Such photograph shall be attached by the City Clerk to the permit
for such driver and said permit shall be permanently and visibly displayed at
all times in the taxi or motor vehicle operated by said driver for hire.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-2)
§ 119.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   In order to obtain said license, the said applicant shall file with the City
Clerk a written application stating that he or she has never been convicted of
violating any of the rules of the road of the state or been charged and
convicted in any city of violation of any of the city’s ordinances relative to
operating motor vehicles upon the streets, alleys, avenues or public ways of
any city or town within the state, and that he or she has not been convicted in
any court for the commission of a felony within the preceding ten years and
that he or she has not been confined in any penal institution for the
commission of a felony within the preceding ten years.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-3)
§ 119.04 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   The fee for such license shall be as set by the City Council for each
taxicab and each additional license. Licenses shall extend from May 1 until
April 30 the following year, and full license fee must be paid for any part of
such year. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-9-4)
§ 119.05 INSPECTION OF VEHICLE PRIOR TO LICENSING.
   No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab until it has been thoroughly
inspected by the Chief of Police or such other official as the Mayor and City
Council may direct, and found to be in a safe, satisfactory and sanitary
condition for the transportation of passengers. All such licensed taxicabs
shall thereafter be inspected in the same manner quarterly between the first
and fifth of January, April, July and October of each year. If any vehicle
licensed as a taxicab is involved in a collision or accident, notice thereof
shall be given to the Mayor and City Council or to such other official as they
may direct, and an inspection shall be made of the taxicab before it can be
again used in service. The report of all such examinations shall be filed with
the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-5)
§ 119.06 ISSUANCE; TERM; DISPLAY.
   Upon making satisfactory showing to the Mayor, the City Clerk shall issue
said license. The license shall continue for and during the period of one year
from the date of the issuance thereof, and said license shall be in conformity
with the licenses issued in other cities within the state, and shall have
pasted thereon a picture of said operator and the license number shall appear
in bold numbers in the upper right-hand corner thereof. No taxicab shall
operate upon any of the public streets, alleys, avenues and public ways of this
city without the display of said license.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-6)
§ 119.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Upon an application being granted, the applicant shall, before the license
is issued, take out liability insurance in a company licensed to do business in
the state and to be approved by the Mayor and City Council, in a sum not less
than $100,000 for each person, $300,000 each accident for personal injuries and
a sum of not less than $50,000 property damage for each taxicab licensed, not
cancelable without ten days’ written notice to the city. The applicant must
also file competent evidence with the Mayor and City Council that the policy
covers the period for which a license is to be granted. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 3-9-7)
CHAPTER 120: LIQUOR CONTROL
Section
Alcoholic Beverages
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Application; certificates
   
120.03   Occupation tax
   
120.04   Issuance of certificates
   
120.05   Separation from adjoining premises
   
120.06   Location restrictions
   
120.07   Rules and regulations
   
120.08   Minors
   
120.09   Permitting or allowing gatherings where minors are consuming alcoholic
beverages
Nonintoxicating Beverages
   
120.20   Definitions
   
120.21   License required
   
120.22   Fee for license
   
120.23   State requirements; transferability
   
120.24   Location restrictions
   
120.25   Minors
   
120.26   Rules, regulations and requirements
   
120.27   Revocation of license
Charter reference:
   Power to regulate intoxicating beverages, see Charter §
27
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Words, phrases and terms used in this subchapter shall have the meaning
prescribed by, and be construed in conformity with, the definitions of the same
set forth in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act codified at 37A O.S.
§§ 1-101 et seq., as now existing or hereafter modified, with the same force
and effect as if the definitions were set forth in full in this subchapter,
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-1) (Ord. 2015-14, passed 9-15-2015; Ord. 2021-18, passed
11-2-2021)
§ 120.02 APPLICATION; CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Required. Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the
zoning, fire, health and safety codes of the city, required by 37A O.S., shall
apply at the office of the City Clerk by:
      (1)   Application form. Filing a written application on forms prescribed
by that office; and
      (2)   Fee. Paying a verification and certification fee in such amount as
set by the City Council at the time of filing.
   (B)   Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of
compliance, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine
whether the premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the
provisions of the zoning title and any health, fire, building and other safety
codes applicable to it.
   (C)   Time limit for action. The City Clerk shall act on all such
applications within 20 days of receipt thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-2) (Ord. 2021-19, passed 11-2-2021)
§ 120.03 OCCUPATION TAX.
   There is hereby established, pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act (37 O.S. §§ 501 et seq.) by the city an occupational tax to be
levied annually upon all individuals/licensees under said Act having their
principal place of business within the corporate limits of the city and
operating as a retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event
or special event licensee, bottle club, manufacturer, wholesaler or class B
wholesaler as those terms are defined by said Act.
   (A)   Fee schedule. Refer to schedule of fees and charges, Appendix A of
this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Payment, documents required. All persons originally entering upon any
occupation herein listed shall pay the tax therefor at the office of the City
Clerk on or before the date upon which the person enters upon such occupation.
Said person shall provide a copy of their current state license issued pursuant
to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (37 O.S. §§ 501 et seq.) before
payment of any occupation tax may be accepted by the City Clerk. Thereafter,
the person shall pay the tax annually to the office of the City Clerk on or
before April 1.
   (C)   Prorated. The occupation tax subject to this section shall be prorated
on a monthly basis for the year in which an occupation begins operation.
   (D)   Receipt; posting. Upon payment of the said occupation tax, the City
Clerk shall issue a receipt to said person. The person shall post the receipt
in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein the person carries on the
occupation to which this section applies.
   (E)   Penalty for nonpayment. Any person who engages in any of the
occupations taxed by this section without paying said occupation tax imposed
thereon in advance of such operation, is guilty of an offense against the city
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day of such violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (F)   Annual report required. The City Clerk shall make an annual report to
the Alcoholic Beverage Laws Enforcement Commission (ABLE Commission), covering
the fiscal year, showing the number and class of licenses subject to the
occupation tax and the amount of money collected from said tax.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-3) (Ord. 2015-15, passed 9-15-2015) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.04 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Zoning. Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a
certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a
certificate of zoning shall be issued to the ABLE Commission.
   (B)   Fire, safety and health codes. Upon finding that the premises of an
applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable fire, safety,
and health codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the ABLE
Commission.
   (C)   Signatures required. The above certificates of compliance shall be
signed by the Mayor or by the City Clerk.
   (D)   Conditional certificate. A conditional certificate may be granted if
construction, modification or alteration of the premises proposed for licensed
operations is not complete. The conditional certificate shall indicate that the
proposed premises will comply with city zoning, fire, safety and health codes.
A certificate in accordance with divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be
issued within ten days after all final inspections are complete.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-4)
§ 120.05 SEPARATION FROM ADJOINING PREMISES.
   (A)   Required. No person shall maintain, operate or assist in any manner,
the maintenance or operation of a retail alcoholic beverage store or package
store in premises which are not separated from adjoining premises on which any
other goods, wares or merchandise are sold or services are rendered by
nontransparent walls, broken only, if at all, by a passageway to which the
public is not admitted.
   (B)   Beverages through passageway prohibited. No person shall take any
alcoholic beverage through any passageway described in division (A) of this
section for the purpose of selling or reselling such beverage, or for the
purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of such beverage.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-5) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.06 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Zoning regulations. No retail package store or any other business
licensed by this subchapter shall be located or operated at any place except at
locations permitted by the city’s zoning or planning laws.
   (B)   Church, school. The location of a retail package store is specifically
prohibited within 300 feet from any church property primarily and regularly
used for worship services and religious activities, or a public school.
However, if any such church or school shall be established within 300 feet of
any licensed retail premises after such premises have been licensed, this shall
not be a bar to the renewal of such license so long as it has been in
continuous force and effect. The distance indicated in this division (B) shall
be measured from the nearest property entrance door of the premises of such
package store along the street right of way line providing the nearest direct
route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For the purpose of
determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the
street from such church or school shall be considered as if it were located on
the same side of the street with such church or school. A license shall not be
issued for a location on any block where a school or church is located.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-6)
§ 120.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Dates and hours of sale.
      (1)   Retail spirits licensee. No retail spirits licensee shall: sell any
alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
midnight Monday through Saturday and shall not be permitted to be open on
Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; provided sales shall be allowed between the
hours of noon and midnight on Sunday in the event Mayes County, pursuant to the
provisions of 37A O.S. § 3-124(B) and (C) has elected to allow such sales
between the hours of noon and midnight on Sunday. Retail spirits licensees
shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages on the day of any general,
primary, runoff primary or special election whether on a national, state,
county or city election, provided that the election day does not occur on any
day on which such sales are otherwise prohibited by law.
      (2)   Wholesale dealer. No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages and no
officer, agent or employee of such a dealer shall sell or deliver to any retail
alcoholic beverage store within the city any amount of spirits or wines, on
Sunday of any week, on New Year’s Day, on the Fourth of July.
      (3)   Retail wine and beer licensee. No retail wine license or a retail
beer license shall: sell any beer or wine at any hour other than between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Sunday.
Retail wine and retail beer licensees shall be permitted to sell beer and wine
on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election whether
on a national, state, county or city election.
   (B)   Advertising signs.
      (1)   No person owning, operating or maintaining a retail alcoholic
beverage store shall cause or permit it to be designated by more than one sign,
which shall contain only the words “Retail Alcoholic Liquor Store” or any
combination of such words or any of them, and which shall contain no letter or
figure more than four inches in height or more than three inches in width and
in which the lines of words, if more than one, shall not be more than one inch
apart.
      (2)   No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised in any manner,
other than as authorized by division (B)(1) of this section, for the sale of
alcoholic beverages within the limits of the city.
   (C)   Sales and deliveries.
      (1)   No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages out of any
retail alcoholic beverage store other than:
         (a)   In retail containers;
         (b)   At ordinary room temperatures;
         (c)   In the original package; and
         (d)   For consumption off the premises.
      (2)   No person owning, employed in or in any manner assisting in the
maintenance and operation of such a store shall suffer or permit any alcoholic
beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be opened
on the premises of such a store.
   (D)   Consumption on premises. No person shall drink or consume in any
manner alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail alcoholic beverage
store, nor shall any person open or break the seal of any original package or
retail container containing alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such
retail alcoholic beverage store.
   (E)   Intoxicated or deficient persons. No person shall sell, deliver or
furnish alcoholic beverages within the city to an intoxicated person or
knowingly to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally deficient.
   (F)   Transportation in vehicle. It is unlawful to transport any alcoholic
beverage, unless the same is:
      (1)   In an unopened original container with seal unbroken and the
original cap or cork not removed from the container; or
      (2)   In the trunk or other closed compartment or other container, out of
public view and out of reach of the driver or any occupant of a vehicle.
   (G)   Public drinking and intoxication. No person within this city shall
drink intoxicating liquor or alcoholic beverage in any public place, nor shall
any person be intoxicated in a public place within this city, nor shall any
owner, operator or manager of any business or public place to which the public
is generally invited allow an intoxicated person to remain in or upon said
premises.
   (H)   Recreational places. No person operating a café, restaurant, club or
any place of recreation within this city, and no employee engaged in connection
with the operation of such a café, restaurant, club or place of recreation,
shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in said place of business.
   (I)   Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume
alcoholic beverages or low point beer while upon any city owned or city
controlled property unless the City Council shall have previously authorized
the premises or the event at which such consumption is authorized, for the
lawful consumption of alcoholic beverages or low point beer subject to such
reasonable restrictions and conditions as the Council prescribes.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-7) (Ord. 2015-11, passed 8-4-2015; Ord. 2021-20, passed
11-2-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.08 MINORS.
   (A)   Sell, deliver or furnish. No person shall sell, deliver or furnish
alcoholic beverages, at any place within the city limits, to any person who is
a minor. Neither shall any minor misrepresent his or her age verbally or in
writing, or present false documentation of age or otherwise for the purpose of
inducing any other person to sell him or her alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   Employment; loitering. No minor shall be employed in the selling,
manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic beverages at any place
within the city. No person shall employ or assist or aid in causing the
employment of any minor at any place within this city in the selling,
manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic beverages. No minor
shall be permitted to remain within or to loiter about the premises of a retail
alcoholic beverage store. Violation of this provision shall subject the owner
or proprietor, as well as the underage person, to prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-8) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.09 PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is
fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and “low point
beer” as defined herein.
      GATHERING. A party, gathering or event, where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for social occasion or social
activity.
      INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. Includes beverages containing more than 3.2%
alcohol by weight.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      LOW POINT BEER. Means and includes beverages containing more than 0.5%
alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight, including, but not
limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic
fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
      MINOR. Any person less than 21 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent
or stepparent of another person.
      PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
      RESPONSE COST. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire and other emergency responses providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire
or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding
to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributable to such response(s);
         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
         (c)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged,
and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at,
or leaving the scene of the gathering; and
         (d)   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
   (B)   Consumption of alcohol by minor in public place, place open to the
public, or place not open to the public. Except as permitted by the state law,
it is unlawful for any minor to:
      (1)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public
alcoholic beverages; or
      (2)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   Hosting, permitting or allowing a party, gathering, or event where
minors are consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited.
      (1)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, which
knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering
by inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government issued identification cards
to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in division (C)(1) of this
section.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her
parent or legal guardian.
      (4)   Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any
family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use
of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents or
guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and
is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in
the same manner as a non- family gathering.
      (5)   Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any
religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor
leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public then
said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a
nonreligious gathering.
      (6)   This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state
to dispense alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished for violation of an offense, with a fine of $500, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, plus
all court costs and statutory penalties, as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Reservation of legal options. Violations of this section may be
prosecuted by the city criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as provided
by this code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs
associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures
provided by statute, ordinance or law. This section shall not limit the
authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any
criminal offenses arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall
they limit the city’s ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offenses
arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this
section.
   (F)   Local authority. This section shall not apply where prohibited or
preempted by state or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 3-10A-9) (Ord. 2009-9, passed 11-3-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES
§ 120.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MINOR. A person who has not yet attained the age at which a person is
permitted to consume nonintoxicating beverages under state law.
   NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES. All beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol
by volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
   RETAIL DEALER. Any person, firm, corporation, association or concessionaire
who sells, distributes or dispenses at retail, any nonintoxicating beverage
within the corporate limits of the city, without regard as to any place where
such beverages may be consumed or used.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-1)
§ 120.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or temporary, to
sell, distribute or dispense any nonintoxicating beverages without having first
received a city license as herein required.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-2) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.22 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Fee schedule. Refer to schedule of fees and charges, Appendix A,
following this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Payment upon issuance. All such city license fee taxes shall be paid
to the City Clerk at the time of issuance of license and in the manner
prescribed herein.
   (C)   Term; prorating. All license fees levied under the provisions of this
subchapter shall expire on April 30 of each year. The amount of any license fee
levied shall be computed pro rata from the months remaining in the year ending
April 30. Such fees paid on or before the fifteenth day of any month shall be
on the basis of the first day of the month and such fees paid after the
fifteenth day of the month shall be on the basis of the first day of the next
succeeding month.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-3)
§ 120.23 STATE REQUIREMENTS; TRANSFERABILITY.
   No city license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the City Clerk
without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state and
county permits required by law, and has in all other respects complied with the
state and local alcoholic beverage control requirements. No license shall be
transferable.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-4)
§ 120.24 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any place licensed to sell nonintoxicating beverages for
on-premises consumption to be located within 300 feet from any public school or
church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious
activities. If any public school or church shall be established within 300 feet
of any place which sells nonintoxicating beverages for on-premises consumption
after such place has been licensed, this shall not be a deterrent to the
renewal of such license so long as there has not been a lapse of more than 60
days. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest
property line of such public school or church to the nearest public entrance
door of the premises of any place licensed to sell such nonintoxicating
beverages for on-premises consumption along the street right- of-way line
providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such
points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the
opposite side of the street from such public school or church shall be
considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the school
or church. The above restrictions shall not affect premises already licensed as
of the initial effective date of this section to sell nonintoxicating beverages
for on premises consumption on premises which may presently or in the future be
licensed to sell nonintoxicating beverages for on premises consumption even
though a school or church is subsequently established within 300 feet of such
licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-5)
§ 120.25 MINORS.
   (A)   Sale and purchase to or by. It is unlawful for any person to sell,
offer for sale, give away, procure for, or otherwise dispense to any minor, any
nonintoxicating beverage; or for any minor to purchase, receive or procure any
nonintoxicating beverage.
   (B)   Employment.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator or employee of a
place where nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the premises
to employ a person under 18 years of age to work in such place; or for any
person under 18 years of age to work in such place. This division (B)(1) shall
not apply to any licensed premises where sales of nonintoxicating beverages do
not exceed 25% of the gross sales of the licensee.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work in
any capacity whatsoever in the separate or enclosed bar area of a place where
the main purpose of the area is the sale or consumption of nonintoxicating
beverages. This division (B)(2) shall not apply to any area which has as its
main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of nonintoxicating
beverages, in which sales or serving of nonintoxicating beverages are
incidental to the main purpose.
   (C)   Possession in public place. It is unlawful and an offense for any
minor to be in possession of any nonintoxicating beverage while such person is
on any public street, road or highway, or in any public building or place.
   (D)   Frequenting bars.
      (1)   The owner of any bar, beer hall, tavern or other place wherein any
nonintoxicating beverage is dispensed for consumption on the premises shall not
permit any minor to be admitted to, enter or to remain in a separate enclosed
bar area of the licensed premises which has as its main purpose the selling or
serving of nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises unless the
person’s legal guardian or parent is present, nor shall any minor enter or
remain about such separate or enclosed bar area.
      (2)   This division (D) shall not prohibit minors from being admitted to,
entering or remaining in an area which has as its main purpose some objective
other than the sale or serving of nonintoxicating beverages, in which sales or
serving of nonintoxicating beverages are incidental to the main purpose, if the
minors are not sold or served or do not consume nonintoxicating beverages.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-6) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.26 RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Hours of sale.
      (1)   Nonintoxicating beverages. It is unlawful for any person or
establishment licensed to sell nonintoxicating beverages for consumption on the
premises to sell the same between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning and 7:
00 a.m. on the following Monday, unless said person or establishment also sells
food for on premises consumption which total food sales amount to at least 60%
of his, her or its gross monthly sales, and on other days of the week between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the same day.
      (2)   Low point beer. It is unlawful for any person to sell low point
beer, as defined in 37 O.S. § 163.2, for off-premises consumption between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the same day. Any person who violates this
division (A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Intoxicated persons. It is unlawful for the owner, manager or operator
of a place where nonintoxicating beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises to sell or otherwise furnish such beverages to an intoxicated person
or to permit an intoxicated person to remain or loiter therein.
   (C)   Gambling; disorderly conduct. It is unlawful for the owner, manager or
operator of such a place to permit therein gambling, betting, operation of a
lottery; sale, furnishing or drinking of intoxicating liquor; disorderly
conduct; loud or disturbing language, noise or music; profane language; or any
other violation of the laws of the state or of the ordinances of the city, or
for any person to engage in any such activity or conduct in such a place.
   (D)   Contests of physical strength. It is unlawful for the owner, manager
or operator of such a place to permit therein fighting, boxing, wrestling or
other contests of physical strength; or for any person to fight, box, wrestle
or engage in other contests of physical strength in such a place.
   (E)   Transporting open containers.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving
vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any nonintoxicating beverage
except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from
which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed unless the opened
container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment. The rear trunk or
compartment shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or
panel truck or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (E), “nonintoxicating beverage”
shall be as defined in §§
120.01 and
120.20 of this chapter.
   (F)   Consumption and intoxication in public place. No person within this
city shall drink nonintoxicating beverages in any public place, nor shall any
person be intoxicated in a public place within this city, nor shall any owner,
operator or manager of any business or public place to which the public is
generally invited allow an intoxicated person to remain in or upon the
premises.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-7) (Ord. 2005-8, passed 10-4-2005; Ord. 2008-5, passed 9-
16-2008) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 120.27 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council shall have power, after public hearing, to revoke any
license granted hereunder for violation of law or ordinance by the license
holder.
(Prior Code, § 3-10B-8)
CHAPTER 121: MEDICAL MARIJUANA CONTROL
Section
   
121.01   Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority (OMMA) certificates; application
   
121.02   Issuance of certificates
§ 121.01 OKLAHOMA MEDICAL MARIJUANA AUTHORITY (OMMA) CERTIFICATES; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Required. Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the
zone, fire, health and safety codes of the city, required by Oklahoma Medical
Marijuana Authority (OMMA). Rules, shall apply at the office of the City Clerk
by:
      (1)   Application form. Filing a written application on forms prescribed
by that office; and
      (2)   Fee. Paying a verification and certification fee in such amount as
set by the City Council at the time of filing.
   (B)   Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of
compliance, the City Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine
whether the premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the
provisions of the zoning title and any health, fire, building and other safety
codes applicable to it.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-1) (Ord. 2023-9, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 121.02 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Zoning. Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a
certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a
certificate of zoning shall be issued to the Oklahoma Medical Marijuana
Authority (OMMA).
   (B)   Fire, safety and health codes. Upon finding that the premises of an
applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable fire, safety,
and health codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the Oklahoma
Medical Marijuana Authority (OMMA).
   (C)   Signatures required. The above certificates of compliance shall be
signed by the Mayor or by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-2) (Ord. 2023-9, passed 12-19-2023)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
      
136.   MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Attempts to commit offense
   
130.02   Aiding in offense
   
130.03   Offense defined
   
130.04   Violation defined
   
130.05   Penalty not to excuse offense
   
130.06   Capacity to commit offense
   
130.07   Intoxication no defense
   
130.08   Witness, self-incrimination
   
130.09   Nuisances
   
130.10   Conspiracy
   
130.11   Limitations of actions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-1)
§ 130.02 AIDING IN OFFENSE.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-2)
§ 130.03 OFFENSE DEFINED.
   The word OFFENSE, whenever used in this code of ordinances or in any title,
chapter or ordinance of the city, means the unlawful act of doing, or failing
to do, some particular act or thing construed therein to be detrimental to the
general welfare, morals, peace, health or safety of the inhabitants of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-3)
§ 130.04 VIOLATION DEFINED.
   The doing of any of the acts or things prohibited, or failing to do any of
the acts or things commanded to be done, as more fully specified and set forth
by any provision of this code of ordinances or any title or chapter hereof, or
future ordinances of the city, is hereby declared to be an offense against the
good order, public peace, morals, health, proper government and welfare of the
city and unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-4)
§ 130.05 PENALTY NOT TO EXCUSE OFFENSE.
   The imposition of one penalty for any offense shall not excuse it or permit
it to continue, nor prevent the imposition of further penalties, should the
offenses be continued or permitted to continue.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-5)
§ 130.06 CAPACITY TO COMMIT OFFENSE.
   All persons are capable of committing an offense as herein provided, except
those belonging to the classes following:
   (A)   Children under the age of seven years;
   (B)   Children over the age of seven years, but under the age of 14 years,
in the absence of proof that at the time of committing the act or neglect
charged against them, they knew its wrongfulness;
   (C)   Lunatics, insane persons and all persons of unsound mind, including
persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, upon proof that at the
time of committing the act charged against them they were involuntarily
incapable of knowing its wrongfulness;
   (D)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, under an
ignorance or mistake of fact which disproves any criminal intent. But ignorance
of the law does not excuse from punishment for its violation;
   (E)   Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof,
involuntarily; and
   (F)   Persons who committed the act, or made the omission charged, while
under involuntary subjection to the power of superiors.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-6)
§ 130.07 INTOXICATION NO DEFENSE.
   No act committed by any person while in a state of intoxication, whether
from liquor or drugs, shall be deemed less an offense by reason of his or her
being in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-7)
§ 130.08 WITNESS, SELF-INCRIMINATION.
   No person otherwise competent as a witness, shall be incapacitated, excused
or disqualified from testifying concerning the offense mentioned in any
section, chapter or title of this code of ordinances, or any ordinances
hereafter enacted, on the ground that his or her testimony might incriminate
him or her, but the testimony which may be given by such witness shall in no
case be used against him or her.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-8)
§ 130.09 NUISANCES.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit, maintain, aid, abet
or sanction a nuisance on or about any premises owned by him or her or under
his or her control at any place within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances, see
Chapter 93
§ 130.10 CONSPIRACY.
   Any two or more persons assembled or who shall assemble with the intent to
mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence and shall make any
movement therefor against the property of the city or the person or property of
another person shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.11 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
   The time within which a charge may be filed under the provisions of this
title shall be one year from the date of the commission or omission, or in
cases involving fraud, deception or deceit, one year from the discovery of the
fraud, deception or deceit, unless otherwise provided by the statutes of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 5-4A-11)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this title is punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-4G-1)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Petit larceny prohibited
   
131.02   Injuring automobiles, other vehicles
   
131.03   Destroying or injuring buildings, other property
   
131.04   Placing signs on property of another
   
131.05   Throwing or shooting at persons, property
   
131.06   Tampering with, damaging public utilities
   
131.07   Intrusion upon land
   
131.08   Illegal entrance
   
131.09   Throwing advertising on street
   
131.10   Throwing injurious substances
   
131.11   Injury to plants and trees
   
131.12   Public streets and trees
   
131.13   Trespass prohibited
   
131.14   Parking on property of another
   
131.15   Interference with fire hydrants
   
131.16   Political advertising on rights-of-way
   
131.17   Signs and objects attached to utility poles
§ 131.01 PETIT LARCENY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not
exceeding $50 accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive
another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property from the
“person” of another.
   (B)   Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.02 INJURING AUTOMOBILES, OTHER VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to start or otherwise meddle with, molest,
enter, occupy, loiter in or injure any automobile or other vehicle belonging to
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS, OTHER PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear or molest
any structure, building, outbuilding, fence or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use;
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.04 PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to stick with adhesive, paste, paint or to
mark, write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement,
bill, placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building,
fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other
property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.05 THROWING OR SHOOTING AT PERSONS, PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other
object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he or she is
likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or
shoot any stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure,
electric light or other property of another (whether public or private). An
exception to this section is where the prohibited acts are done in defense of
oneself, of another person or of property.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.06 TAMPERING WITH, DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe,
wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying
gas, water or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly
or privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him or her to consume or use
the gas, water or electricity without it passing through the meter or any other
way so as to evade payment therefor.
   (B)   It is also unlawful for any person to damage, destroy, injure, deface,
besmear, molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or any
other part of any public utility including any telegraph or telephone system.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-6) (Ord. 2000-1, passed 3-21-2000) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.07 INTRUSION UPON LAND.
   It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of
land within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or
to erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without
such license or authority, or to place, erect or occupy within the bounds of
any street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, shanty, hovel or other
structure without authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.08 ILLEGAL ENTRANCE.
   It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into
an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or structure
is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or any
notice or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such
entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed or tacit consent of the
owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. It is
unlawful for any person to remain on the property of another after having been
given notice, written or verbal, to leave by the owner or person in charge.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.09 THROWING ADVERTISING ON STREET.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be
thrown, left or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
area, any handbill, circular or other advertising matter.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.10 THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw
upon the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive
or other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or urine,
with intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.11 INJURY TO PLANTS AND TREES.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully and without authority cut, pull,
pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or willfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any
gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or willfully injure or destroy
any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or ground. Any
person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.12 PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Willfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places
within the city;
      (2)   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph or electric wire, or any
wire, to any live tree;
      (3)   Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or
alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under the
supervision or control of the city;
      (4)   Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street,
road, alley or other public place in the city, or to cut, break or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or
      (5)   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the city inspector so to do.
   (B)   Any such digging, removing or driveway connection shall be done under
the supervision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.13 TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any property other than public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. That property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
      TRESPASS. Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or
other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the
implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. TRESPASS
shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in
lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner or
the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of
the premises. TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private
property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after
having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer. The
provisions of this definition shall not apply to persons, including employees,
whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in
lawful possession of such premises, nor shall the provisions of this definition
apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such premises.
TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property
before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business
day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this
definition.
   (B)   Unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private
property.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.14 PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge or by
authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.15 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city
utility personnel or a member of the Fire Department to open, turn on or off,
interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire
hydrant or stopcock belonging to the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant
by placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt or other thing, or in any
other manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.16 POLITICAL ADVERTISING ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   A POLITICAL ADVERTISING SIGN is defined as any sign, poster or placard
printed, painted, made or designed for the purpose of furthering or advertising
political issues or the candidacy of any person who is or intends to become or
may be a candidate for the election to any public office, whether such
political issue or public office be in the local, state or federal government,
or any subdivision thereof.
   (B)   No person shall erect or display any political advertising sign on any
street or alley right-of- way, or upon any public utility easement within this
city.
   (C)   No person shall place, tack, nail, staple or glue any political
advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric or street lighting pole
within this city.
   (D)   Any political advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in
violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property
right shall exist in such sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the
provisions hereof, and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any person.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-16) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.17 SIGNS AND OBJECTS ATTACHED TO UTILITY POLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place, tack, nail, staple or glue any
sign or object on any telephone, telegraph, electric or street lighting pole
within the city.
   (B)   Any sign or objects erected, placed or displayed in violation of the
provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property rights shall exist in
such sign or object erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions
hereof and such sign or object may be removed and destroyed by any person.
(Prior Code, § 5-4B-17) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
Section
   
132.01   Disturbing the peace
   
132.02   Fireworks regulated
   
132.03   Storing, keeping explosives; nitroglycerin
   
132.04   Carrying weapons; exceptions
   
132.05   Reckless conduct
   
132.06   Discharging firearms; exceptions
   
132.07   Minors and firearms; other weapons
   
132.08   Transporting weapons in certain park areas
   
132.09   Loud noise or music; amplified sound
   
132.10   Vehicle sound amplification systems
   
132.11   Use of jake brakes prohibited
   
132.12   Occupation of recreational type trailers or recreational vehicle as
living quarters prohibited
   
132.13   Parking or storage obstructing public way or view
§ 132.01 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTURBING THE PEACE. The doing of any of the following in such a manner
as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
         (a)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent or insulting language or conduct;
         (b)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
         (c)   Engaging in or actively encouraging a fistic encounter;
         (d)   Lewdly exposing one’s person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
         (e)   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or
not at any other person either in anger or otherwise;
         (f)   Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, described
as being persons assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful
act against the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving
toward such acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
         (g)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by
rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or
in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
         (h)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
         (i)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by
profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
         (j)   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably
disturb or alarm the public.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 FIREWORKS REGULATED.
   (A)   Fireworks defined. For the purpose of this section, FIREWORKS shall
have the meaning prescribed by state law, 68 O.S. § 1622.
   (B)   Fireworks usage. The discharge, firing or use of fireworks within the
corporate limits of the city is allowed for residential purposes as stated
within this section. Public firework displays are hereby prohibited excepting
only such activity which is carried out pursuant to a permit issued by the city
effective for the current year in which such activity is carried out.
      (1)   Public fireworks displays.
         (a)   Supervised public displays utilizing either IAG or 1.3G
fireworks shall be lawful when conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the
city and otherwise performed in such a manner as to be in compliance with all
requirements of this code and such restrictions as may be made or required by
the Fire Department and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 1123). The
permit holder shall:
            1.   Furnish a diagram of the site for the display which shall show
the location of the firing site, spectator area and shall meet the requirements
of NFPA 1123;
            2.   Furnish an inventory list of the proposed fireworks to be
fired at the site;
            3.   Conform to all requirements of NFPA 1123;
            4.   Obtain a site inspection prior to the operation of the
display;
            5.   All public displays including displays utilizing IAG fireworks
shall (within ten days prior to the display) publish a public notice in a
newspaper legally authorized for legal notices published for circulation in the
city;
            6.   Any company performing fireworks displays utilizing 1.3G
fireworks shall have on file with the city a copy of their state license for
fireworks displays and proof of public liability insurance in such amount as
may be required by the city at the City Council’s discretion; and
            7.   Any and all subcontractors of the permit holder participating
in any manner with the public display shall be required to be disclosed upon
the permit to be obtained and each subcontractor shall be subject to the
requirements of division (B)(1)(a) of this section.
         (b)   Every public fireworks display shall obtain the commercial
fireworks permit as passed and approved by City Council at a fee as established
for public displays. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
         (c)   Public fireworks displays must be pre-approved by City Council
and meet the requirements of divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Residential fireworks. RESIDENTIAL FIREWORKS shall mean and refer
to all use of fireworks not otherwise described in division (B)(1)(a)a of this
section.
         (a)   The “season” for residential fireworks discharge, firing or
burning shall be limited to be only on July 1 through July 4, between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. on each of said dates, and on New Year’s Eve
beginning at 9:00 p.m. through New Year’s Day at 1:00 a.m. The discharge,
firing or burning of residential fireworks at dates and times not specifically
set forth herein shall be unlawful.
         (b)   Fireworks shall not be discharged within 25 feet to any
permanent structure or within 500 feet of any church, hospital, school, public
park, or where fireworks are stored or sold.
         (c)   No person may use or discharge fireworks on any public easement,
or public property unless approved by the City Council.
         (d)   No person shall ignite or discharge any fireworks within or
neither throw the same from a motor vehicle nor shall any person place or throw
any ignited article or fireworks into or at such a motor vehicle, or at or near
any group of people.
         (e)   No person under the age of 18 years of age shall engage in the
use of residential fireworks unless under the supervision, which term
supervision shall require the physical presence in the immediate area such that
visual observation of the use may be had during all times of use, of an adult
person (over 18 years of age).
         (f)   An adult person (over 18 years of age) overseeing the use of
fireworks by persons under the age of 18 years may not supervise more than four
persons under the age of 18 years in the use of fireworks.
         (g)   The adult person (over 18 years of age) in charge of the use
must be physically present for any household member to use the fireworks and
said use shall be within 60 feet of the front door of the residence. The adult
person (over 18 years of age) is further responsible for cleaning up any debris
caused by any person discharging fireworks under the supervision of the adult
person (over 18 years of age) and such debris must be cleaned up and removed
the same day the fireworks are discharged.
   (C)   Permit exception. The Council of the city shall approve an exception
for the discharge at such times the city sponsors a public display and only on
the area so designated.
   (D)   Sale of fireworks from firework stands.
      (1)   Application for license. Any person, organization or business
seeking to sell fireworks must apply for a license between April 15 through
June 1 and November 15 through December 1 of the license year by filing a
written application in such form and content as the City Manager may prescribe.
      (2)   Eligibility of applicant.
         (a)   Age. Applicants must be at least 21 years of age at the time of
application.
         (b)   Insurance. Applicants must provide minimum liability insurance
of $500,000 for bodily injury and property damage from an insurance agency
currently licensed to do business within the state. Proof of insurance must be
submitted with the application.
         (c)   Invoicing of fireworks. All fireworks must be invoiced from a
distributor or wholesaler licensed to do business in the state. The original
invoice must be in the applicant’s name and be available upon request.
         (d)   Proof of tax payment. Applications must be accompanied with
proof of tax payment for the previous year. Applications of a new business
venture must be accompanied by an affidavit verifying that the applicant has
not engaged in selling fireworks previously or, in the alternative, was not
required to pay city, state or federal taxes.
         (e)   Proof of state permit. Applicants must supply proof of state
permit for the license year and comply with all fireworks laws of the state, 68
O.S. §§ 1621 through 1634.
      (3)   Fees. A fee of $500 must accompany the application. A license fee
is required for each fireworks stand.
      (4)   Firework stand requirements.
         (a)   Location; property owner consent. Each stand must be located on
property zoned commercial, with written consent from the property owner dated
and filed with the application, or on property owned by the city, contingent
upon written approval of the Mayor.
         (b)   Distance from other structures. A minimum of 50 feet must exist
between all fireworks stands and any other structures.
         (c)   Parking. Vehicle parking cannot be within ten feet of any
fireworks stand.
         (d)   Posting of signs. Signs stating “FIREWORKS – NO SMOKING WITHIN
50 FEET” must be posted on all sides of the entire facility.
         (e)   Fire extinguisher. Each fireworks stand must have at least one
approved ABC fire extinguisher, minimum size of five pounds. The travel
distance to any fire extinguisher cannot exceed 35 feet. If the fireworks stand
exceeds 200 square feet, two portable ABC fire extinguishers are required with
at least one being a multi-purpose dry chemical type.
         (f)   Distance from fuel tanks. Fireworks must be a minimum of 300
feet away from fuel pumps, propane tanks or any other facility or structure
where flammable liquid is commercially sold or dispensed.
         (g)   Time limitation. Firework stands may only be erected from June
15 through July 6 or the first Sunday after July 4, whichever is later, and
December 27 through December 31 of the license year.
         (h)   Adult person in charge. A person 18 years of age or older shall
be present and in charge of the fireworks stand at all times.
         (i)   Hours. Fireworks stands may conduct business between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of the license year excluding the evenings of
December 31, July 3, July 4 when they may remain open until 12:00 a.m.
         (j)   Sales to underage persons. It shall be unlawful to offer for
sale any fireworks to children under the age of 12 years, unless accompanied by
an adult.
         (k)   Inspection. The code enforcement officer and/or Fire Marshal
must inspect the fireworks site and stand, for safety and ordinance compliance,
prior to opening for business.
         (l)   Noncombustible surface. All fireworks stands shall be on a
noncombustible surface (asphalt, concrete, gravel), with the surface area being
twice the size in square feet as the actual tent, or in the absence of a tent,
the fireworks stand.
         (m)   Restrooms. All fireworks stands shall have working restroom
facilities on site, whether those be in an enclosed camper on the premises or
through the rental of a portable unit.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person found violating any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-2) (Ord. 2012-3, passed 6-5-2012; Ord. 2024-1, passed 1-2-
2024; Ord. 2024-5, passed 6-4-2024; Ord. 2024-7, passed 7-16-2024) Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 132.03 STORING, KEEPING EXPLOSIVES; NITROGLYCERIN.
   It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder or any other highly explosive material or
substance of any kind without having first complied with the laws of the state
and ordinances of the city for the purpose of selling, storing or keeping such
items.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.04 CARRYING WEAPONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his or
her person any pistol, revolver, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade
knife, spring type knife, metal knuckle or any other dangerous or deadly weapon
or instrument, except when doing so in line of duty or as may be permitted by
law.
   (B)   It is unlawful to carry a firearm or knife, the overall length of
which is six inches or more in length, into an establishment dispensing
alcoholic or nonintoxicating beverages, except as may be authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.05 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful, except as authorized by state law, for any person to engage
in reckless conduct while having in his or her possession any shotgun, rifle or
pistol, such actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk
and probability of death or great bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a
conscious disregard for the safety of another person.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.06 DISCHARGING FIREARMS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall discharge any firearm, in the city or on city owned or
leased property, except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing
so in defense of oneself, or another person, or of property, or otherwise
authorized by law or ordinance, or upon property that is zone for agricultural
use. Discharge within the city limits on property zoned for agricultural use
shall be limited to wildlife hunting with shotgun ammunition size number four
shot or smaller. It is unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun in the
city, or on city owned or leased property, except in those areas zoned
agricultural.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-6) (Ord. 2000-4, passed 10-3-2000) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.07 MINORS AND FIREARMS; OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or furnish to any
minor, any blank or loaded cartridges, or any pistol, revolver, toy or other
thing made for the purpose of exploding any blank or loaded cartridges.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or furnish to any
minor any pistol, revolver, dirk, bowie knife, metal knucks or other dangerous
or deadly weapon.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.08 TRANSPORTING WEAPONS IN CERTAIN PARK AREAS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized peace
officer or game ranger to carry or otherwise transport loaded rifles, shotguns,
pistols or other firearms, or to discharge the same or to carry bows and arrows
designed and constructed for hunting or to shoot the same in the area under
control of the city designated as Earl Ward Park involving all lands in such
area leased to the city by the United States of America and in any other city
parks, except in appropriate areas therein which might hereafter be clearly set
aside and designated by the city as rifle, shooting or archery ranges.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to hunting in a lawful
manner either with a shotgun loaded with birdshot only between October 1 and
January 20 of each year or with a bow and arrow, during any season established
by state law for hunting deer with bow and arrow, in any part of the Earl Ward
Park area lying northerly of the main traveled road running easterly and
westerly across the area, which is so located that such hunting with shotgun or
bow and arrow would not constitute a hazard to users of established picnic or
camping areas or of the golf course area.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.09 LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC; AMPLIFIED SOUND.
   It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any part
of the city by operating, having operated or permitting to be operated, any
contrivance, whether electric or not, or any other device, with or without a
loudspeaker, in such a manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. However,
this section shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes, bells,
carillons or other religious music.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.10 VEHICLE SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Audible distance. No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on
a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system from the vehicle so that the sound
is audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the vehicle.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUDIBLE. Any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within
the vehicle, regardless of whether the vehicle is operating or occupied, which
can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be
auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be
discernible and bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be in
any public or private location.
      SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM. Any radio, tape player, compact disc player,
loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sounds,
including, without limitation, sounds created by human voice or musical
instrumentation.
   (C)   Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from
operating the sound amplification system and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
      (2)   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
      (3)   The vehicle was owned and operated by the city or a public or
private utility company; and
      (4)   The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as
parades, fireworks, sports events or other activities which have been approved
by the City Council.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, excluding costs and assessments.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-10) (Ord. 98-2, passed 4-7-1998) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.11 USE OF JAKE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, except to avert imminent danger, for any person
to use compression release type engine brakes, commonly known as “jake brakes”,
unless the blow down from the compression release and the exhaust of any
internal combustion engine is discharged through an appropriate muffler system
before entering the ambient air.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, use of compression release type engine
brakes or “jake brakes” shall be defined as a device which when activated
retards one or more pistons on the engine of the motor vehicle in order to
assist the motor vehicle in braking, and in the process of doing so creates a
noise which can be heard from a distance of 50 feet or more from the point of
emission from the motor vehicle when inadequately or improperly muffled.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-11) (Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-18-2005) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.12 OCCUPATION OF RECREATIONAL TYPE TRAILERS OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AS
LIVING QUARTERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Occupation as temporary or permanent living quarters of camping
trailers, travel trailers, motor homes or other recreational type vehicles or
trailers parked or stored within the corporate city limits is hereby prohibited
except as may be otherwise authorized by another provision of this city code of
ordinances.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this provision for family members or
guests of a property owner of property within the corporate city limits to
temporarily occupy a camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home or other
recreational type vehicle or trailer which is otherwise lawfully parked upon
the property of the property owner for a period of not to exceed seven days in
any 30-day time period.
   (C)   It is the stated intent of this provision to prohibit the extended
occupation of camping trailers, travel trailers, motor homes or other
recreational type vehicles or trailers for purposes of living quarters except
in those areas of the city in which it is allowed by applicable zoning.
   (D)   The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee may wave the restrictions of this
section during a declared state of emergency to meet the public needs during
any such emergency.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-12) (Ord. 2023-1, passed 2-21-2023) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.13 PARKING OR STORAGE OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAY OR VIEW.
   (A)   The parking or storage of any vehicle, trailer, motorhome, RV, storage
unit or other portable unit shall be prohibited to occur in such a manner as to
block or obstruct travel or access on any alleyway, public road, public
sidewalk, driveway, public right-of-way or utility easement.
   (B)   The parking or storage of any vehicle, trailer, motorhome, RV, storage
unit or other portable unit shall be prohibited to occur in such a manner as to
block the view of traffic traveling upon the streets or at intersections in
such a manner as to create an unsafe condition for the traveling public.
   (C)   The parking or storage of any vehicle, trailer, motorhome, RV, storage
unit or other portable unit shall be prohibited to occur in such a manner as to
block the view of traffic to detect and/or avoid pedestrians or bicyclists
traveling upon the city sidewalks or crosswalks.
(Prior Code, § 5-4C-13) (Ord. 2023-1, passed 2-21-2023) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST THE HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
Section
   
133.01   Public intoxication and drinking
   
133.02   Possession; intoxicating, nonintoxicating beverages
   
133.03   Intoxicating liquors
   
133.04   Marijuana
   
133.05   Prostitution
   
133.06   Disorderly house
   
133.07   Maintaining or leasing disorderly house
   
133.08   Residents and visitors to disorderly house
   
133.09   Nudity; improper dress; indecent exposure
   
133.10   Definitions; obscenity regulations
   
133.11   Prohibited obscene conduct
   
133.12   Vagrancy defined for specific acts, offenses
   
133.13   Exposing minors to harmful materials
   
133.14   Sleeping in public
   
133.15   Begging
   
133.16   Gambling
   
133.17   Being about place where gambling
   
133.18   Harmful deception
   
133.19   False or bogus checks
   
133.20   Swindling
   
133.21   Possession of a controlled dangerous substance
   
133.22   Occupancy of property after discovery of methamphetamine activity
§ 133.01 PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street, alley
or other public place in the city in a state of intoxication. For the purposes
of this section, a STATE OF INTOXICATION means the condition in which a person
is under the influence of any intoxicating, nonintoxicating, spirituous, vinous
or malt liquors, or of any narcotic or drug, to such extent as to deprive the
person of his or her full physical or mental power, or in which a person is a
danger to himself, herself or others.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.02 POSSESSION; INTOXICATING, NONINTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any intoxicating or nonintoxicating alcoholic beverage while such
person is upon any public street, road or highway, or in any public place
within the city limits.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the age of
21 years to permit such person to be in possession of an intoxicating alcoholic
beverage.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, “intoxicating beverage” and
“nonintoxicating beverage” shall be as defined in §§
120.01 and
120.20 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.03 INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   It is unlawful:
   (A)   For any person to barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to
another any intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind
except as permitted by law;
   (B)   To have in possession or under control any intoxicating or
nonintoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law, or to transport
or in any manner convey from place to place in the city any intoxicating or
nonintoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law;
   (C)   To be in or remain about a place where intoxicating or nonintoxicating
liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
   (D)   To keep, maintain, aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place where
intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away or
otherwise furnished in violation of law.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.04 MARIJUANA.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to:
      (1)   Manufacture, grow, harvest, cultivate, propagate, plant, compound,
convert, produce, process, test, pack, repack, store, distribute, dispense or
possess with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense marijuana;
      (2)   Use, have, inject, ingest, inhale, otherwise introduce into the
human body or possess marijuana;
      (3)   Use or possess drug paraphernalia or to deliver, possess or
manufacture any such paraphernalia singly or in conjunction with any other
person; or
      (4)   Appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business or
other public place in the city while under the influence of a controlled,
dangerous substance or marijuana.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, MARIJUANA shall have the meaning
prescribed by 63 O.S. § 2-101. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA shall have the meaning
prescribed by 63 O.S. § 2-101, including the factors to determine in 63 O.S. §
2-101.1.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the consumption, possession,
transportation, cultivation, distribution or other acts otherwise deemed lawful
in the state pursuant to 63 O.S. §§ 420 through 426 or any marijuana lawfully
obtained or authorized by valid prescription order from a licensed physician
while acting in the course of his or her professional practice.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-4) (Ord. 2018-15, passed 10-2-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.05 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Be a prostitute;
      (2)   Solicit, entice or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      (3)   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      (4)   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution;
      (5)   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution; or
      (6)   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of
prostitution in the limits of city.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section:
      (1)   Prostitution is the giving of the body for sexual intercourse or
sodomy for hire or money;
      (2)   Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing,
directing or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of
promoting prostitution; and
      (3)   Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of
use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the
practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with
that knowledge.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.06 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   A DISORDERLY HOUSE means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the
people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
   (A)   The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled, dangerous
substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is declared
unlawful by state statute;
   (B)   The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of
this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic
beverages, including beer containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume;
   (C)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute
or city ordinance, including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
   (D)   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.07 MAINTAINING OR LEASING DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist, in keeping
and maintaining a disorderly house.
   (B)   No owner, lessee, lessor or other person, partnership or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise
permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house,
and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no persons, partnership or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.08 RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into or remain in a disorderly
house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have
the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by
circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers
in the discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.09 NUDITY; IMPROPER DRESS; INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
   (B)   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or
lewd dress; or
   (C)   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.10 DEFINITIONS; OBSCENITY REGULATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC. The matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
   DISSEMINATE. To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
   KNOWINGLY. Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material
or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial
representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction, or any other articles,
equipment or machines.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in
a discernible turgid state.
   OBSCENE. To the average person applying contemporary community standards:
      (1)   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity
or excretion;
      (2)   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by 21 O.S.; or
      (3)   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   PERFORMANCE. Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity.
   PROMOTE. To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
   SERVICE TO PATRONS. The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages; including, but not limited to,
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bar tending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-10)
§ 133.11 PROHIBITED OBSCENE CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Knowingly disseminate, sell, offer for sale, publish, display,
distribute, make available to the public or buy any obscene material;
      (2)   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
      (3)   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
      (4)   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
         (a)   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region;
         (b)   Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region;
         (c)   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
         (d)   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
   (B)   Each complete or partial display or other material exhibition of any
motion picture film or other material shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense. The provisions of §
133.10 of this chapter and this section shall not apply to a projectionist,
assistant projectionist, usher or cashier, provided such person has no
financial interest in the motion picture theater so long as that person is not
acting as director or manager of the theater.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.12 VAGRANCY DEFINED FOR SPECIFIC ACTS, OFFENSES.
   It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes
of this section, a VAGRANT means any person who loiters or remains in or
wanders about a public or private place for any of the following purposes:
   (A)   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice or other gambling
paraphernalia;
   (B)   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution
or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
   (C)   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any
building, property or automobile of another;
   (D)   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing any
property of another;
   (E)   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
   (F)   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms; provided, that this
section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious,
charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such
organizations; or
   (G)   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise
exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.13 EXPOSING MINORS TO HARMFUL MATERIALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HARMFUL TO MINOR. That quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic
abuse, when it:
         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid
interest of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
         (c)   Is determined that the work lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
grounds for belief, which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
         (a)   The character and content of any material described herein which
is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and
         (b)   The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple or areola, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernably turgid state.
      OPAQUE. Impenetrable by light; cannot be seen through.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or unclad or the condition of
being fettered or bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one
so clothed or unclothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. The acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse or physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals,
pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell to a minor, or
display to a minor when the purpose of such display is the sale of the item, or
to loan for monetary consideration to a minor:
      (1)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or
similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and which is
harmful to minors; or
      (2)   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in division (B)(1) of this
section or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of
sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and which is
harmful to minors.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision hereof
shall be subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.14 SLEEPING IN PUBLIC.
   It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m., to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on any property of
another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge
of such place.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-16) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.15 BEGGING.
   It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization or
agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-17) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.16 GAMBLING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or
conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value;
      (2)   To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
      (3)   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
      (4)   To knowingly permit his, her or its premises, houses, lot or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this section.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play
any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the
element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks or
any other representatives of value.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-18) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.17 BEING ABOUT PLACE WHERE GAMBLING.
   It is unlawful for any person to be about in the immediate vicinity where
persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or
other device, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-19) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.18 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of
a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-20) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.19 FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS.
   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain
or attempt to obtain from any person, any money, property or valuable thing of
the value of $50 or less by means of any false or bogus check or by any other
written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term FALSE OR
BOGUS CHECK shall include checks or orders given for money or property which
are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as
against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering
of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient
funds in or credit with, such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer
shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the
protest fees, and the check or order shall be presented for payment within 30
days after same is delivered and accepted.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.20 SWINDLING.
   It is unlawful to get money or property from any other person or business
under false pretenses, deception, cheating or by any other fraudulent act.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-22) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.21 POSSESSION OF A CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to
possess a controlled dangerous substance unless such substance was obtained
directly, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order from a practitioner,
while acting in the course of his or her professional practice, or except as
otherwise authorized by the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act
codified at 63 O.S. §§ 2-101 et seq.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase any preparation
excepted from the provisions of the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous
Substances Act pursuant to 63 § 2-313 in an amount or within a time interval
other than that permitted by 63 O.S. § 2-313.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to sell, market,
advertise or label any product containing ephedrine, its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers, for the indication of stimulation, mental
alertness, weight loss, appetite control, muscle development, energy or other
indication which is not approved by the pertinent Federal OTC final monograph,
tentative final monograph or FDA-approved new drug application or its legal
equivalent. In determining compliance with this requirement, the following
factors shall be considered:
      (1)   The packaging of the product,
      (2)   The name of the product, and
      (3)   The distribution and promotion of the product, including verbal
representations made at the point of sale.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE shall
have the meaning prescribed by 63 O.S. § 2-101.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-23) (Ord. 2018-11, passed 3-6-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.22 OCCUPANCY OF PROPERTY AFTER DISCOVERY OF METHAMPHETAMINE ACTIVITY.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect occupants of real
property from hazardous and contaminated living environments.
      (2)   Although other types of synthetic drugs may be manufactured in
clandestine drug laboratories, this chapter is specifically intended for the
contamination and environmental dangers associated with methamphetamine
manufacturing and using.
(Prior Code, § 5-9-1)
   (B)   (1)   Upon discovery that an owner’s property is, or has been, the
location for any type of methamphetamine activity, including manufacturing and
using, an owner shall immediately report such activity to local law
enforcement.
      (2)   Prior to the commencement of a rental agreement, if a landlord
knows or has reason to know that the dwelling unit or any part of the premises
was used in the manufacture of methamphetamine, the landlord shall disclose
this information to a prospective tenant. Provided however, if the landlord has
had the level of contamination assessed within the dwelling unit or pertinent
part of the premises, and it has been determined that the level of
contamination does not exceed 0.1 microgram per 100 square centimeters of
surface materials within the dwelling unit or pertinent part of the premises,
no disclosure shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 5-9-2)
(Ord. 2011-4, passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
134.01   Assault and battery
§ 134.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   (A)   Definitions.
      ASSAULT. Any intentional, willful or unlawful attempt or offer with force
or violence to do a corporal hurt to another.
      BATTERY. Any intentional, willful or unlawful use of force or violence
upon the person of another, or by making any physical contact with another
without consent.
   (B)   Unlawful. It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and
battery within the jurisdiction of the city. any person committing an assault
or an assault and battery within the jurisdiction of the city, shall be guilty
of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-4E-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
135.01   Resisting officer
   
135.02   Refusing or failing to assist officer
   
135.03   Assault or battery upon police or other officer
   
135.04   Rescuing prisoners
   
135.05   Escape of prisoners
   
135.06   Impersonating officer or employee
   
135.07   False alarms
   
135.08   False representation to officer
   
135.09   Removal of barricades
   
135.10   Resisting public officials
§ 135.01 RESISTING OFFICER.
   (A)   It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere
with, a police officer or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the
officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his or her official
duties within the limits of the city or while in hot pursuit.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to
assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an
arrest, or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or
in front of an approaching officer.
   (C)   Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to,
or obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity, and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to
know that the person arresting, seizing property or serving process is acting
in his or her official capacity.
   (D)   The words OBSTRUCTION OF shall, in addition to their common meaning,
include:
      (1)   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him or her and after notice is given that he or she is under
arrest;
      (2)   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and
before he or she is under arrest; or
      (3)   Refusal by the arrested party to give his or her name and make his
or her identity known to the arresting officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.02 REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   (A)   An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to
suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon persons to assist
him or her in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such
riot, affray or unlawful assembly.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an
officer of the city to refuse or fall to do so.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.03 ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly commit any assault, battery or
assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the
law while in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.04 RESCUING PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty,
rescue or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner or prisoners, from any
officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the
city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner
in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either before or after
conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.05 ESCAPE OF PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of
confinement in the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of
the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison or custody.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.06 IMPERSONATING OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee of the
city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers
of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.07 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in
any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department or Police
Department, or any officer or employee thereof, with reference to any fire
alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency, or knowingly to cause the
Fire Department or Police Department, or its officers or employees, to make a
useless run.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.08 FALSE REPRESENTATION TO OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to make any material
misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the city government in
any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such
officer or agency; or to commit perjury before any tribunal or officer of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.09 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.10 RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
   (A)   Resist, oppose or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other police
officer, the Municipal Judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his or her official duties;
   (B)   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official duties; or
   (C)   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or
indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 5-4F-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 136: MINORS
Section
General Provisions
   
136.01   Curfew
   
136.02   Contributing to delinquency of minor
Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco and Vapor Products
   
136.15   Definitions
   
136.16   Enforcement
   
136.17   Furnishing to minors
   
136.18   Purchase, receipt or possession; falsifying age
   
136.19   Signs in retail establishments
   
136.20   Retail employees; notice and acknowledgment
   
136.21   Vending machine sales
   
136.22   Distribution of samples
   
136.23   Sales except in original, sealed packaging
   
136.24   Refusal of minor to disclose information
   
136.25   Provide information to ABLE Commission
Truancy
   
136.40   Prohibited activities; hours
   
136.41   Hearing; parental obligation to attend
   
136.42   Prohibited act; cost recovery
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 136.01 CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CUSTODIAN. Any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to
a minor, including an adult authorized by a parent or guardian of a minor to
take the parent’s place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of
time and purpose within a specified area.
      DURING SCHOOL TERM. That period of time when the Pryor school system
convenes in August or September and continues until school is completed in May
of the following year.
      GUARDIAN. Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor, or the state or any department thereof which has legal custody of a
minor.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      PARENT. The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
      STREET. A way or place of any nature open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purpose of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk
thereof for pedestrian travel. The term STREET includes the legal right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the
sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found
within the legal right- of-way of a street. The term STREET applies
irrespective of what it is called or formally named, whether avenue, alley,
court, highway, road or otherwise.
      SUMMER. The period of time that school is out in May until school
reconvenes in August or September.
   (B)   Time of curfew specified. Except as authorized herein, it is unlawful
for any minor to remain, wander, stroll or play in any street on foot, or to
cruise about without a set destination in any vehicle in, about or upon any
street in the city at night during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning
at:
      (1)   For minors 14 years of age or less, 10:00 p.m., Sunday through
Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday evenings during school terms;
      (2)   For minors 15 through 17 years of age, at 11:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday evenings and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday evenings during the
school terms;
      (3)   For minors 14 years of age or less, at 11:00 p.m. during the
summer; and
      (4)   For minors 15 through 17 years of age, at 12:00 midnight during the
summer.
   (C)   Exceptions. It is not unlawful for any minor to be on a street during
the hours specified in division (B) of this section if:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other
adult person having custody or control of such minor;
      (2)   The minor is on an emergency errand or activity directed by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor in a case of reasonable necessity, such as going after medical supplies;
      (3)   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation, and going to or
returning from employment;
      (4)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of assembly;
      (5)   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides;
      (6)   When returning home within 45 minutes of the termination of school
activity, or an activity of a religious or other voluntary association; or
      (7)   When the minor is in interstate travel.
   (D)   Parent, guardian responsibility.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having custody or control of any minor to knowingly suffer or permit or
by inefficient control to allow such person to be on any public place within
the city between the hours of curfew designated in division (B) of this
section. KNOWINGLY includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that person’s
custody. The provisions of this division (D) do not apply if:
         (a)   The minor is legally on the street pursuant to division (C) of
this section; or
         (b)   The parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a
missing person notification to the Police Department.
      (2)   It is no defense that a parent, guardian or custodian was
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of a minor.
   (E)   Special events. The City Council may permit by resolution or motion
procedures for advance notice or registration with the city of special events
or functions sponsored by churches, schools, clubs or other organizations which
require minors to be out at a later time. The City Council may also prescribe
the procedures for taking into custody minors found in violation of this
section.
   (F)   Duty of offices upon violation. A police officer of the city, upon
finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie
violation of this section normally shall take the minor to the city police
station, where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor,
whereupon they shall be interrogated. This procedure is intended to permit
ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to
centralize responsibility in the officer in charge there and then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording. In
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, driver’s
license or other proof, a police officer on the street shall in the first
instance use his or her best judgment in determining age. A police officer may
under appropriate circumstances deliver a minor to his or her home where the
identity and address may readily be ascertained or are known. In any event, the
police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a written report with the Chief of
Police.
   (G)   Release of minor. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the
minor shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be
located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released
to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with
police regulations and approval by the juvenile authorities, the minor may
temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will on
behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of parent.
   (H)   Parental responsibility. A parent, legal guardian, or person acting in
loco parentis of a minor child who is convicted of a curfew violation may be
held liable and assessed a fine as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Any minor who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section more than three times shall be referred to the
office of juvenile affairs. Reporting to the juvenile authorities shall also be
authorized in any case where the imposing of a fine or fines upon a parent
shall not be effective, or where for any other reason the provisions of this
section cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under this
section.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-13) (Ord. 95-8, passed 12-19-1995; Ord. 2000-3, passed 10-
3-2000; Ord. 2015-12, passed 8-4-2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.02 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF MINOR.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Includes a minor who shall have been or is violating
any penal statute of this state, or any ordinance of this city, or who shall
have been or is committing any one or more of the following acts:
         (a)   Associating with thieves, vicious or immoral persons;
         (b)   Frequenting a house of ill repute;
         (c)   Frequenting any policy shop, or a place where a gambling device
is operated;
         (d)   Frequenting any saloon, dram shop, still or any place where
intoxicating liquors are manufactured, stored or sold;
         (e)   Possession, carrying, owning or exposing any vile, obscene,
indecent, immoral or lascivious photograph, drawing, picture, book, paper,
pamphlet, image, device, instrument, figure or object;
         (f)   Willfully, lewdly, lasciviously exposing his or her person, or
private parts thereof, in any place, public or private, in such manner as to be
offensive to decency, or calculated to excite vicious or lewd thoughts, or for
the purpose of engaging in the preparation or manufacture of obscene, indecent,
or lascivious photographs, pictures, figures or objects;
         (g)   Possessing, transporting, selling or engaging or aiding or
assisting in the sale, transportation or manufacture of intoxicating liquor, or
the frequent use of the same;
         (h)   Being a runaway from his or her parent or legal guardian;
         (i)   Violating any penal provisions of the Uniform Control Dangerous
Substance Act as set out by the statutes of the state; and
         (j)   Giving, selling or furnishing alcoholic or nonalcoholic
beverages to a minor where such person is not the parent or legal guardian of
the minor.
      ENCOURAGE. In addition to the usual meaning of the word, includes a
willful and intentional neglect to that which will directly tend to prevent
such act or acts of delinquency on the part of such minor, when the person
accused shall have been able to do so.
      MINOR or CHILD. A person who has not arrived at the age of 18 years.
   (B)   Unlawful. Every person who shall knowingly or willfully cause, aid,
abide or encourage a minor to be, to remain or to become a delinquent child, as
defined herein, shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Penalty. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-4D-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS
§ 136.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or
association, however formed.
   PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, license for identification only or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 21
years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the
individual and appears on its face to be valid.
   SAMPLE. A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost
for the purpose of promoting the product.
   SAMPLING. The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
   VAPOR PRODUCT. Noncombustible products, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. VAPOR PRODUCTS shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic device. VAPOR PRODUCTS do
not include any products regulated by the United States Food and Drug
Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 2021-5, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Specified. The city police are authorized and empowered to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The city police shall enforce these provisions in a
manner that can reasonably be expected to reduce the extent to which tobacco
products and vapor products are sold or distributed to persons under 21 years
of age.
   (B)   Assistance by persons under 18. Persons under 18 years of age may be
enlisted by the city police to assist in enforcement; provided, however, that
such persons may be used to test compliance only if written parental consent
has been provided and the testing is conducted under the direct supervision of
the city police after giving written notice to the Alcoholic Beverage Laws
Enforcement (ABLE) Commission in the manner prescribed by the ABLE Commission.
Provided however, that this division (B) shall not apply to the use of persons
under 18 years of age to test compliance if the compliance test is being
conducted by or on behalf of a retailer of cigarettes, as defined in 68 O.S. §
301, at any location the retailer of cigarettes is authorized to sell
cigarettes.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-2) (Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 2021-6, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.17 FURNISHING TO MINORS.
   (A)   Prohibited.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any
tobacco product or vapor product to another person who is under 21 years of
age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product or vapor product on behalf
of any such person; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for an
employee under 21 years of age to handle such products when required in the
performance of the employee’s duty.
      (2)   Any person who shall furnish to any person who is under 21 years of
age by gift, sale or otherwise any cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff,
chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco, or vapor product shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Proof of age. A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco
products or vapor products shall demand proof of age from a prospective
purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of
appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under 21 years of age.
   (C)   Liability.
      (1)   Employee. If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a
store at which tobacco products, or vapor products are sold at retail, the
employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine.
      (2)   Multiple locations. For the purpose of determining the liability of
a person controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations
for any violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, each individual
franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
   (D)   Administrative fine. When a person violates division (A) or (B) of
this section, the Municipal Court may assess such person an administrative fine
of $25 for the first offense within a one-year period, $50 for the second
offense within a one-year period and $75 for a third offense or subsequent
offense within a one-year period. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown
and reasonably relied upon proof of age, shall be a defense to any action
brought pursuant to this division (D).
   (E)   Failure to pay. Upon failure of the employee to pay the administrative
fine within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the Court Clerk
shall notify the Department of Public Safety and request the Department suspend
or not issue a driver’s license to said employee until proof of payment has
been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-3) (Ord. 2018-6, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 2021-7, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.18 PURCHASE, RECEIPT OR POSSESSION; FALSIFYING AGE.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age
to purchase, accept receipt of, or have in their possession a tobacco product,
nicotine product or vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any
purported proof of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her
own, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product, nicotine
product or vapor product; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for
such a person to handle such tobacco product, nicotine product or vapor product
when required in the performance of such person’s duties.
   (B)   Administrative fine; failure to pay. When a person violates division
(A) of this section, the Municipal Court may assess such person an
administrative fine of $25 for the first offense within a one-year period and
an administrative fine of $50 for a second or subsequent offense within a one-
year period. Upon failure of the individual to pay such administrative fine
within 90 days of the day of such fine, the Court Clerk shall notify the
Department of Public Safety and request the Department suspend or not issue a
driver’s license to said individual until proof of payment has been furnished
to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-4) (Ord. 2018-8, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 2021-8, passed 2-2-
2021; Ord. 2023-10, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 136.19 SIGNS IN RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Posting required. Every person who sells tobacco products at retail
shall post conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign, as
specified by the ABLE Commission, stating the following: “It’s the law. We do
not sell tobacco products to persons under 21 years of age.”
   (B)   Administrative fine. When a person violates division (A) of this
section, the Municipal Court may assess such person an administrative fine of
$50 for each day such offense occurs. The notice required by division (A) of
this section shall be the only notice required to be posted or maintained in
any store that sells tobacco products at retail.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-5) (Ord. 97-6, passed 11-4-1997; Ord. 2021-9, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.20 RETAIL EMPLOYEES; NOTICE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   (A)   Notice of state law. Every person engaged in the business of selling
tobacco products or vapor products at retail shall notify each individual
employed by that person as a retail sales clerk that state law:
      (1)   Prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor
products to any person under 21 years of age and the purchase or receipt of
tobacco products or vapor products by any person under 21 years of age; and
      (2)   Requires that proof of age be demanded from a prospective purchaser
or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance
that the prospective purchaser or recipient may be under 21 years of age.
   (B)   Acknowledgment. This notice shall be provided before the individual
commences work as a retail sales clerk or in the cases of an individual
employed as a retail sales clerk, on the date when this section becomes
effective, within 30 days of that date. The individual shall signify that he or
she has received the notice required by this section by signing a form stating
as follows:
I understand that state law prohibits the sale or distribution of tobacco
products or vapor products to persons under 21 years of age, and out-of-package
sales, and requires proof of age of purchaser or recipient if an ordinary
person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser
or recipient may be under 21 years age. I promise, as a condition of my
employment, to observe the law.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-6) (Ord. 2018-9, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 2021-10, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.21 VENDING MACHINE SALES.
   (A)   Location restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell
tobacco products through a vending machine, unless the vending machine is
located:
      (1)   In areas of factories, businesses, offices or other places that are
not open to the public;
      (2)   In places that are open to the public, but to which persons under
21 years of age are not admitted;
      (3)   In places where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises, but only if the vending machine is under the continuous supervision
of the owner or lessee of the premises or an employee thereof, and is
inaccessible to the public when the establishment is closed; and
      (4)   In other places, but only if the machine is under the continuous
supervision of the owner or lessee of the premises or an employee thereof, or
can be operated only by the activation of an electronic switch by the owner or
lessee of the premises, or an employee thereof, prior to each purchase or can
be operated only by a special token purchased from the owner or lessee of the
premises, or an employee thereof.
   (B)   Proof of age. In any place where supervision of a vending machine,
activation of an electronic switch or sale of a special token is required by
division (A) of this section, the person responsible for that supervision or
the activation of the switch shall demand proof of age from a prospective
purchaser if any ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that
the prospective purchaser may be under 21 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-7) (Ord. 97-6, passed 11-4-1997; Ord. 2021-11, passed 2-2-
2021) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.22 DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLES.
   (A)   Under 18 prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute
tobacco product or vapor product samples to any person under 21 years of age.
   (B)   Distance to facility. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, no
person shall distribute tobacco product or vapor product samples in or on any
public street, sidewalk or park that is within 300 feet of any playground,
school or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons
under 21 years of age.
   (C)   Administrative fine. When a person violates division (A) or (B) of
this section, the Municipal Court may assess such person an administrative fine
of $25 for the first offense within a one-year period, $50 for the second
offense within a one-year period and $75 for a third offense or subsequent
offense within a one-year period.
   (D)   Failure to pay. Upon failure of the individual to pay the
administrative fine within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the Court
Clerk shall notify the Department of Public Safety and request the Department
suspend or not issue a driver’s license to said individual until proof of
payment has been furnished to the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-8) (Ord. 2018-5, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 2021-12, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.23 SALES EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGING.
   (A)   Required. It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes, except in
the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
   (B)   Fine. When a person violates division (A) of this section, the
Municipal Court may assess such person a fine of $200 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-9) (Ord. 97-6, passed 11-4-1997)
§ 136.24 REFUSAL OF MINOR TO DISCLOSE INFORMATION.
   Any person under the age of 21 years being in possession of vapor products,
cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any other form
of tobacco product and being by any police officer, constable, court officer,
truant officer or teacher in any school, asked where and from whom such vapor
products, cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any
other form of tobacco product were obtained, who shall refuse to furnish such
information, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-10) (Ord. 2018-7, passed 2-6-2018; Ord. 2021-13, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 136.25 PROVIDE INFORMATION TO ABLE COMMISSION.
   The city police shall furnish information requested by the ABLE Commission
in the form, manner and time as may be determined by the ABLE Commission which
will allow the ABLE Commission to comply with 37 O.S. § 600.11(C) concerning
conduct prohibited and penalized under provisions of 37 O.S. §§ 600.3, 600.4,
600.8 or 600.9 and §§
136.17,
136.18,
136.22 and/or
136.23 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-11) (Ord. 97-6, passed 11-4-1997)
TRUANCY
§ 136.40 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES; HOURS.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person who has
custody of such minor child over the age of five years and under the age of 18
years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child, who is subject to
compulsory education of public, private or other school:
         (a)   To be absent from school during such times as school is in
session in excess of ten unexcused absences each semester; and
         (b)   To be absent from school during such times as school is in
session four or more days or parts of days within a four-week period without
valid excuse.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of 12 years
and under the age of 18 years, and who has not finished four years of high
school work, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some
public, private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the
full term the schools of the district are in session:
         (a)   In excess of ten unexcused absences each semester; and/or
         (b)   To be absent from school during such times as school is in
session four or more days or parts of days within a four-week period without
valid excuse.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A) of this section, a minor is absent from
school and found in a public place if said minor is found loitering, idling,
wandering, strolling, playing, or aimlessly driving or riding about in or upon
any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground,
or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or
eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, or any place open to the public
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. of the same day on days when said
minor’s school is in session, or when the city’s public schools are in session
should the minor be homeschooled.
   (C)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not apply when:
      (1)   The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the
minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal
care or custody of said minor, which excuse provides a reasonable explanation,
as determined by the courts, for the minor’s absence from school;
      (2)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s)
or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;
      (3)   The minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent
(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having legal care or custody of
the minor;
      (4)   The minor is going directly to or returning directly from a medical
appointment;
      (5)   The minor has permission to leave campus and has in his or her
possession a valid school issued, off campus permit;
      (6)   The minor is going directly to, or returning directly from, a
public meeting or a place of entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting
event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a
school approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school
personnel of the minor’s school;
      (7)   The presence of the minor in said place or places is connected with
or required by, a school approved or school related business, trade, profession
or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged; or
      (8)   If any child who has attained his or her sixteenth birthday is
excused from attending school by written, joint agreement between the school
administrator of the school district where the child attends school, and the
parent, guardian or custodian of the child. Provided, further, that no child
shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school
administrator and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child unless and
until it has been determined that such action is for the best interest of the
child and/or the community, and that said child shall thereafter be under the
supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until the child has reached
the age of 18 years.
   (D)   Violation of division (A) of this section shall constitute an
infraction punishable by a fine as set forth in §
40.08 of this code of ordinances; provided, however, the Court may set aside
the fine, or any portion thereof, if the fine is based on the minor’s first
infraction under this section and the minor produces proof satisfactory to the
Court that the following has occurred during the period between the initial
hearing on the infraction and any subsequent hearing set by the Court:
      (1)   The minor has had no unexcused absences from school; and
      (2)   The minor has performed ten hours of court approved community
service during times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance; or
      (3)   The minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s)
having the legal care or custody of the minor has or have attended a parenting
class or a series of parenting classes approved by the Court.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the School Resource Officer to determine if a
truancy notification is required and who will receive the truancy notification
(parent or youth). Oral and documented or written notification should be given
to the person allegedly at fault for the truancy. If this notification process
does not result in the elimination of the problem, action may be taken in
Municipal Court. In the prosecution of a parent, guardian, or other person
having custody of a child for violation of any provision of this section, it
shall be an affirmative defense that the parent, guardian, or other person
having custody of the child has made substantial and reasonable efforts to
comply with the compulsory attendance requirements of this section but is
unable to cause the child to attend school. If the Court determines the
affirmative defense is valid, it shall dismiss the complaint against the
parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child and shall notify
the school resource officer, who shall refer the child to the district attorney
for the county in which the child resides, for the filing of a child in need of
supervision petition against the child pursuant to the Oklahoma Juvenile Code.
   (F)   Any parent, guardian, custodian, child or other person violating any
of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows. The school resource officer shall
make written recommendation to the judge to be presented on court date.
      (1)   For the first offense, a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$50, upon party determined at fault; and
      (2)   For the second offense:
         (a)   A child found in violation shall be remanded to district
attorney for the county in which the child resides for the filing of a child in
need of supervision petition against the child pursuant to the Oklahoma
Juvenile Code; and
         (b)   Parent, guardian, custodian or other person found in violation,
a fine of not greater than $500 and/or imprisonment for not more than ten days,
or both such fine and imprisonment.
   (G)   Each day the child remains out of school after the oral, documented
and written warning has been given to the parent, guardian, custodian, child or
other person, or the child has been ordered to school by the juvenile court
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (H)   At the trial of any person charged with violating the provisions of
this section, the attendance records of the child or ward may be presented in
Court by any authorized employee of the school district.
   (I)   The Court may order the parent, guardian or other person having
custody of the child to perform community service in lieu of the fine set forth
in this section. The Court may require that all or part of the community
service be performed for a public school district.
   (J)   The Court may order as a condition of a deferred sentence agreement,
or as a condition of sentence upon conviction of the parent, guardian or other
person having the custody of the child, any condition that the Court considers
necessary to obtain compliance with school attendance requirements. The
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Verifying attendance of the child with the school;
      (2)   Attending meeting with the school officials;
      (3)   Taking the child to school;
      (4)   Taking the child to the bus stop;
      (5)   Attending school with the child;
      (6)   Undergoing an evaluation for drug, alcohol or other substance abuse
and following the recommendations of the evaluator;
      (7)   Taking the child for drug, alcohol or other substance abuse
evaluation and following the recommendations of the evaluator, unless excused
by the Court; and
      (8)   Individual or family counseling, including the child and all the
members of the immediate family or other persons as the Court may order and
court costs; provided, however, the Court may suspend the fine, or any portion
thereof, at the Court’s discretion.
   (K)   Furthermore, the sentencing powers of the Court shall include
discretion in the sentencing of the minor for up to ten hours’ community
service by the minor under the same conditions as provided for in division (F)
of this section, or such other and further conditions as the Court may
prescribe.
   (L)   Any appeal of the Court’s decision shall be made to the District Court
as in other proceedings before the Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-1) (Ord. 2011-5, passed 6-21-2011; Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-3-
2019)
§ 136.41 HEARING; PARENTAL OBLIGATION TO ATTEND.
   A minor cited for an infraction under §
136.40 of this chapter must attend a court hearing on the infraction and must
be accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or
other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor. If any
such parental or custodial person fails to attend the hearing with the minor,
and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the Court shall
continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to said parental or custodial
person, directing that person to appear at the continued hearing with the
minor.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-2) (Ord. 2000-10, passed 11-21-2000)
§ 136.42 PROHIBITED ACT; COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   Determination by the Court. When, based on a finding of civil
liability or criminal conviction for the violation of curfew, for being absent
from school and found in a public place in violation of §
136.40 of this chapter or for misconduct in violation of §
136.24 of this chapter, a minor under 18 years of age is detained for a period
of time in excess of one hour, which required the supervision of the juvenile
offender by personnel of the city’s Police Department, the parent(s), legal
guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the
minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such
personnel over and above the detention, processing and supervision services
normally provided by said Department.
   (B)   Determination by Chief of Police. As determined by the Chief of Police
or his or her designee, the parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person
(s) having the legal care or custody of a minor who has committed any public
offense as described in division (A) of this section may be assessed, and
billed for, the cost of providing the personnel for the services relating to
the detention, processing and supervision of the minor.
   (C)   Appeal. Any person wishing to appeal a bill for police services
pursuant to this section must, within ten days after the billing date, file a
written request appealing the imposition of said charges. Any billing sent
pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal
said billing. Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the Municipal
Judge, or his or her designee, as the hearing officer. Within ten days after
the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to
the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill
for the police services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the
hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to
the city shall be paid within 30 days after notice of the decision of the
hearing officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-3) (Ord. 2000-10, passed 11-21-2000)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
152.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
Section
Building Regulations
   
150.001   Building Code adopted
   
150.002   Additions, insertions and changes
   
150.003   Building Official
   
150.004   Fire limits defined
   
150.005   Building permit required; fee
   
150.006   Marquees and fixed awnings
   
150.007   Proximity of penal institutions to public schools
   
150.008   Moving buildings
   
150.009   Street address placement
   
150.010   On-site management of stormwater or payment of fee in lieu of
required on-site management
   
150.011   Commercial structures to include horn-strobe unit, Storz coupling
unit and rapid entry lock box system
Utility Construction
   
150.025   Building permit required
   
150.026   Application for permit
   
150.027   Fee for permit
   
150.028   Submission of as-built plans
   
150.029   Appeal
   
150.030   Underground lines and utility lines
Plumbing Code
   
150.045   Adoption of Plumbing Code
   
150.046   Additions, insertions and changes
   
150.047   Plumbers; registration, permits and fees
   
150.048   Plumbing; permits and inspections
   
150.049   Registration
   
150.050   Journeymen, employment by contractor
Electrical Code
   
150.065   Electrical equipment defined
   
150.066   Adoption of Electrical Code
   
150.067   Additions, insertions and changes
   
150.068   Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.
   
150.069   Administrative provisions
   
150.070   Permit requirements
   
150.071   Temporary permits
   
150.072   Electrician’s registration
   
150.073   Owner installations
   
150.074   Unlawful connections
   
150.075   Exceptional conditions
   
150.076   Nonliability of city
Mechanical Code
   
150.090   Adoption of Mechanical Code
   
150.091   Additions, insertions and changes
   
150.092   Contractor’s registration
   
150.093   Fees for inspection
   
150.094   Journeymen; employment by contractor
Residential Code
   
150.105   Adoption of Residential Code
   
150.106   Additions, insertions and changes
Fuel Gas Code
   
150.120   Adoption of Fuel Gas Code
   
150.121   Additions, insertions and changes
Property Maintenance Code
   
150.135   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
   
150.136   Additions, insertions and changes
Energy Conservation Code
   
150.150   Adoption of Energy Conservation Code
   
150.151   Additions, insertions and changes
Sewage Disposal Code
   
150.165   Definitions
   
150.166   Connection to public sanitary sewer service required for structures
and uses of property, exceptions to requirement
   
150.167   Connection to public sewer service required for subdivisions
   
150.168   Adoption of Private Sewage Disposal Code
   
150.169   Additions, insertions and changes
   
150.170   Prohibited discharges
   
150.171   Connections to public sanitary sewer system/design and construction
   
150.172   Extension of available sewer, required connects
   
150.173   Interceptors rate of flow controls
   
150.174   Interceptors venting, accessibility and maintenance
   
150.175   Interceptors required and capacity
   
150.176   Lagoons prohibited, exceptions
   
150.177   Use of private sewage disposal systems, systems allowed,
discontinuance of use
   
150.178   Special provisions applicable to septic tanks
Tornado Shelters and Safe Rooms
   
150.190   Adoption of Code
Existing Building Code
   
150.205   Adoption of Existing Building Code
   
150.206   Additions, insertions and changes
 
   
150.999   Penalty
BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 150.001 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2015
edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), as amended and
revised by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city for regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the offices of
the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in §
150.002 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-1) (Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.002 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   Section 101.1: City of Pryor Creek.
   Section 1612.3: City of Pryor Creek.
   Section 1612.3: September 16, 2011.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-2) (Ord. 2015-19, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.003 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The building official shall have the powers and duties prescribed for the
“building official” by the city’s Building Code; provided, that his or her
powers and duties may be exercised by his or her authorized representatives
under his or her supervision and control. The term BUILDING INSPECTOR, whenever
used in the ordinances of the city, means the building official. The terms
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR, PLUMBING INSPECTOR and GAS INSPECTOR; whenever used in
the ordinances of the city, also each refer to and mean the building official,
unless a separate electrical inspector, plumbing inspector or gas inspector is
appointed.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-3)
§ 150.004 FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.
   (A)   The fire limits of the city shall include the property within the C-
G District. All property which hereafter may be brought into this district
shall automatically be brought within the fire limits or fire zones by such
change in fire classification. However, all new commercial structures within
any commercial district shall conform to the existing Fire Code.
   (B)   Every building hereafter erected or enlarged within the fire limits
shall comply at a minimum with the requirements of type 3 construction as set
out in § 602.3, 2006 International Building Code (IBC).
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-4) (Ord. 2010-8, passed 4-20-2010)
§ 150.005 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter,
move or demolish a building or structure, or to begin to do the same, without
securing from the building inspector a permit therefor. No building permit
shall be issued absent a determination by the building inspector that any
proposed or current use of the property is in compliance with the applicable
zoning classification.
   (B)   Fee. The fee shall be as set by the City Council by motion or
resolution. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (C)   Temporary structures. A special building permit for a limited time
must be obtained before the erection of temporary structures such as
construction sheds, seats, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work
or for temporary purposes such as reviewing stands. The permit fee shall be
based on the schedule as set forth in division (B) of this section.
      (1)   Permission may be obtained for the location of a mobile trailer
house on a construction site during construction of a residence house or more
comprehensive project, provided:
         (a)   A building permit has been properly issued and paid for;
         (b)   Application for permission for such purpose is made in writing
to and approved by the City Council;
         (c)   If utilities are used by such trailer headquarters, they are to
be installed as otherwise provided herein;
         (d)   Reasonable progress continues on the construction; and
         (e)   No such permit herein provided may extend for a greater time
than six months.
      (2)   Such structures shall be completely removed upon expiration of the
time limit stated in the permit, or upon the completion of the construction,
whichever shall first occur. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-5) (Ord. 2009-1, passed 1-6-2009)
§ 150.006 MARQUEES AND FIXED AWNINGS.
   (A)   Fire resistive protection. All combustible materials used in the
construction of awnings or marquees shall be protected with not less than one
hour fire resistive protection as specified in the city building code. All
glazing in marquees or fixed awnings shall be of wired glass.
   (B)   Clearing. Every fixed awning or marquee shall be at least seven and
one-half feet in the clear, between the lowest point of projection and a
sidewalk immediately below.
   (C)   Extension. The roof of any fixed awning or marquee may extend over the
entire width of any sidewalk in front of the building to which it is attached;
provided however, that if such fixed awning or marquee is supported by posts,
such posts shall be set back at least 18 inches from the curb and that such
posts shall be placed in a position as nearly as possible in line with any of
the light poles along said sidewalk, if any. The overall height of any marquee,
including signs, shall not exceed eight feet, measured from the roof of such
marquee. No fixed awning or marquee shall extend more than 25 feet along the
direction of the length of the street unless constructed with a roof live load
of not less than 40 pounds per square foot, in which case such fixed awning or
marquee shall be permitted to extend the full width of the building (front) and
full depth of the building, corner location.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-6)
§ 150.007 PROXIMITY OF PENAL INSTITUTIONS TO PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PENAL INSTITUTION. Any facility which houses, feeds, allows to reside or
imprisons any person convicted of any crime. Further, the term PENAL
INSTITUTION shall include any facility which, pursuant to court order or
administrative order, houses, feeds, allows to reside or imprisons any narcotic
addicted or drug dependent person. PENAL INSTITUTION shall not include the city
jail, nor shall it include the Mayes County jail.
      PUBLIC SCHOOL. Any school supported in whole or in part by taxes paid by
the public.
   (B)   Location restricted. No penal institution may be located within 2,640
feet of any public school within the city.
   (C)   Application for injunction. In the event a penal institution is
located or proposed to be located within 2,640 feet of any public school within
this city, the City Attorney shall apply to either the United States District
Court or a State District Court for an injunction prohibiting the location of
the penal institution within 2,640 feet of the public school.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-7)
§ 150.008 MOVING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Permit; application; bond.
      (1)   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved on
the streets or alleys of the city any house or building, or part thereof, or
any similar structure, without having first obtained from the building
inspector a permit therefor. The applicant for a permit shall pay the general
manager of the Municipal Utility Board the sum as set by the City Council for
each such permit, and shall deposit with the general manager a good and
sufficient surety or personal bond with sufficient sureties in the amount of
$3,000.
         (b)   The bond shall be approved by the general manager and shall
provide for the payment of all damages that may be sustained by the city or any
public utility or individual by virtue of the moving operations by virtue of
such permit.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any
house or building, or part thereof, or any similar structure, on the streets or
alleys of the city, without having first obtained such permit, paid such permit
fee and deposited such bond with the general manager of the Municipal Utility
Board.
   (B)   Regulations on moving buildings.
      (1)   Height, width. It is unlawful for any person to move houses,
buildings or structures, or portions thereof, which exceed 18 feet in height or
exceed 30 feet in width over or across any street or alley within the city.
      (2)   Tree, utility line damage. It is unlawful for any person moving
houses, buildings or structures to trim, cut or damage trees upon any street or
alley without the written consent of the adjacent owner or upon private
property without the written consent of the owner or to move or damage
telephone, electric or other utility lines.
      (3)   Warning devices. Any person moving a building along a street or
alley of the city shall place and maintain about the building at night proper
and sufficient warning devices to warn other persons using the streets and
alleys.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-8) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.009 STREET ADDRESS PLACEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or person in charge of any house,
business or other place of habitation to fail and/or refuse to place and keep
placed upon a predominate structure at that location an appropriate street
address number in Arabic numerals at least four inches high and one-half inch
stroke and placed in such manner as will allow viewing and recognition from the
street.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-9) (Ord. 96-1, passed 2-6-1996; Ord. 2003-10, passed 9-16-
2003) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.010 ON-SITE MANAGEMENT OF STORMWATER OR PAYMENT OF FEE IN LIEU OF
REQUIRED ON-SITE MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   All construction that will increase the impervious surface of the site
or otherwise increase the amount of stormwater runoff from the site upon which
the construction is to be made shall be planned and designed to ensure that
peak release rates of stormwater resulting from the construction to be made on
the site will not exceed the rate of runoff that occurred from the site before
the construction for all storm frequencies up to and including the 100-year
frequency storm, as determined by the City Floodplain Administrator and/or the
city certified Floodplain Manager.
   (B)   Before a building permit will be issued for any construction that will
increase the impervious surface of the site or otherwise increase the amount of
stormwater runoff from the site the owner/developer plans for stormwater
management of the site must be approved by the city as satisfying the
requirements of division (A) of this section. A request for a building permit
must be accompanied by a site development plan and calculations in form
satisfactory to the city that clearly delineate the plan for management of the
increased stormwater on-site.
   (C)   At the discretion of the city an owner/developer may pay a fee in lieu
of providing on-site stormwater management upon an approved application from
the city to do so. The procedure for approval of such an application is as
follows:
      (1)   The owner/developer shall submit a written request to the city
requesting that the construction to be made be considered by the city as
eligible for payment of a fee in lieu of providing on-site stormwater
management;
      (2)   The owner/developer shall submit the site development plan required
under division (B) of this section together with calculations in form
satisfactory to the city which fully disclose the impact of the construction to
be made upon the downstream areas to be impacted by the increased stormwater
runoff caused by the planned construction;
      (3)   The owner/developer shall pay an application fee upon submittal of
the request in accordance with the application fee set forth in Appendix A of
this code of ordinances;
      (4)   Upon the city’s review and approval of the requested fee in lieu of
providing on-site stormwater management the owner/developer shall pay the
applicable fee in lieu as set forth in
Appendix A of this code of ordinances at the time the building permit is issued
by the city;
      (5)   All applications for fee in lieu of providing on-site stormwater
management shall be reviewed by the city’s Engineer and the city’s Floodplain
Administrator or certified Floodplain Manager for recommendation to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for approval or denial of the application. No
application shall be approved by the Commission which would result in the
violation of any applicable FEMA guideline; and
      (6)   The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to approve or
deny the application may be appealed by the party making the application, or by
an owner of property downstream alleged to be affected by the decision to
approve the application, or by the City Engineer or other official of the city
in the manner prescribed in
Chapter 34 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-11) (Ord. 2018-10, passed 2-20-2018)
§ 150.011 COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES TO INCLUDE HORN-STROBE UNIT, STORZ COUPLING
UNIT AND RAPID ENTRY LOCK BOX SYSTEM.
   Commercial structures constructed or remodeled or to which additions or
modifications are made from and after the adoption of this section, which
remodel, addition, or modification exceeds 5% of the property’s preexisting
value or increase the square footage of the structure shall comply with the
following construction requirements in addition to all other requirements of
this code of ordinances, state and federal law.
   (A)   Construction shall include a weather-proof horn and strobe unit
activated only upon water flow to be connected to the building fire alarm
system and located directly above the Fire Department connection or on the side
of the building that can be seen from the road with the precise location
thereof to be as approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designated
representative.
   (B)   Construction shall include a water supply connection for firefighting
service which shall be a four-inch Storz type connection on a 30-degree elbow
as approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designated representative.
   (C)   Construction shall include an exterior, wall-mounted rapid entry
system lock box housing building keys which operate locking mechanisms for
entry of the building from the exterior which must be compatible with the rapid
entry system utilized by the city’s Fire Department and which lock box must be
placed upon the exterior of the building at a location approved by the Fire
Chief.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-12) (Ord. 2017-7, passed 6-20-2017)
UTILITY CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.025 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person, including telephone companies, cable television companies,
public utility companies or construction companies who shall install, relocate,
extend or modify either underground or overhead utility or other services
within any public easement, street, alley or right-of-way, shall be required to
secure from the city a building permit for such construction work. This
subchapter shall not, however, apply to repair work for existing services, nor
to the services and work of the Municipal Utility Department.
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-1)
§ 150.026 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   The person or agency who shall be the owner of such underground or overhead
facilities shall, not less than ten days prior to any proposed construction,
submit first to the Municipal Utility Department, preliminary plans and
specifications showing the type of facilities and proposed location thereof.
The Municipal Utility Department shall confer with the building official with
reference to said plans and both shall jointly determine if the location of the
proposed facilities shall be reasonably expected to interfere with any
requirements or proposed or contemplated needs of the Municipal Utility
Department for joint use of said easement, or with any proposed or contemplated
use by other agencies of the city with such streets or alleys. If the proposed
facilities appear to unduly interfere with any proposed or contemplated use of
the city or its agencies with such easements or rights-of-way, the
representatives of the city and the applicant shall confer and attempt to
resolve any differences with reference to the location of such facilities. If
the differences can be resolved, the building permit shall be issued and signed
by the representative of the Municipal Utility Department and the building
official. If such differences cannot be resolved, the issuance of such building
permit shall be denied.
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-2)
§ 150.027 FEE FOR PERMIT.
   No fee shall be charged any applicant for issuance of such building permit.
(Refer to
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-3)
§ 150.028 SUBMISSION OF AS-BUILT PLANS.
   Within 30 days following completion of construction of any facilities as
provided for by this subchapter, the owner of such facilities shall be required
to submit to the Municipal Utility Department a set of as-built plans, showing
the exact location of the facilities constructed.
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-4)
§ 150.029 APPEAL.
   If the permit be denied by reason of the refusal of the representative of
the Municipal Utility Department to issue the same, the applicant may, within
ten days thereafter, file notice of intent to appeal the decision to the
Municipal Utility Board, which shall schedule a hearing thereon at the next
regularly scheduled meeting. If the permit be denied by reason of refusal of
the building official to issue the permit, the applicant may, within ten days
thereafter, file notice of intent to appeal the decision with the City Clerk,
and the same shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City
Council. If both the representative of the Municipal Utility Board and the
building official deny such permit, both notices of appeal as set forth above
shall be required. If either or both the Municipal Utility Board and City
Council deny issuance of such permit, the applicant may, within 30 days,
commence an appeal to the District Court of the county, as otherwise provided
by law.
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-5)
§ 150.030 UNDERGROUND LINES AND UTILITY LINES.
   All installations of underground cable lines, telephone lines, communication
lines, or other utility lines of whatsoever nature or type shall be installed
at a minimum cover depth of not less than 18 inches below grade, or at such
other deeper depth as may be required by applicable laws or regulations of the
city, county, state or other governmental entity having jurisdiction thereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-7) (Ord. 2015-4, passed 7-21-2015)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.045 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2015
edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), as amended and
revised by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), is hereby
adopted as the Plumbing Code of the city regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code on file in the offices of the city
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.046 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-1) (Ord. 2015-26, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.046 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Pryor Creek.
Section 106.6.2. Insert: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 106.6.3. Insert: fifty (50), fifty (50).
Section 108.4. Insert: See § 10.99, General Penalty, of the city code of
ordinances.
Section 108.5. Insert: See appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 109 through 109.7. Deleted and insert replacement: Sections 109 through
109.7 of this Code are intentionally deleted from the International Plumbing
Code, 2015 edition. Appeals from a decision of the code official shall be
governed by § 152.342 of the Pryor Creek City Code.
Section 305.6.1. Insert: Six inches (6”); twelve inches (12”).
Section 903.1. Insert: Twelve inches (12”).
(Prior Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 2015-26, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.047 PLUMBERS; REGISTRATION, PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Definitions. The phrases and words JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER, PLUMBER’S
APPRENTICE, PLUMBING CONTRACTOR and PLUMBING, when used in the ordinances,
regulations and other official acts and communications of this city, shall have
the meanings respectively prescribed for them by 59 O.S. §§ 1001 et seq., the
State Plumbing License Law, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
   (B)   Registration required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business, trade or occupation of a plumbing contractor (otherwise known as a
master plumber), or of a journeyman plumber or of a plumber’s apprentice in
this city unless he or she is registered with the city and has a current and
valid certificate of registration issued by the city.
   (C)   State requirements. Only persons who have current and valid licenses
as plumbing contractors or as journeyman plumbers issued by the State
Commissioner of Health, as provided by the state plumbing license law, may
register as such with the city. Only persons who have current and valid
certificates of registration as plumber’s apprentices issued by the State
Commissioner of Health, as provided by law, may register as such with the city.
   (D)   Issuance of certificate; term; renewal. Applicants for certificates of
registration, after complying with the laws of the state and with this code of
ordinances, and after payment of the fee hereinafter specified, shall be
registered by the city. The registration shall expire annually, but may be
renewed from year to year. Plumbing contractors desiring to renew their
registration shall furnish the same evidence of compliance with state licensing
laws and the same bond is required as set forth by this code.
   (E)   Cancellation after expiration. All plumbing registrations not renewed
within 90 days after the date of expiration of the fiscal year shall be
canceled, and a new application for registration must be made and the fee for a
new registration paid. After July 15 of each year, no work permits shall be
issued to, nor any plumbing inspection made for, any plumbing contractor whose
registration has not been renewed unless written permission is obtained from
the plumbing inspector and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
   (F)   Fee. The fee for registration shall be as set by the City Council by
motion or resolution. (See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (G)   Revocation; hearing. The City Council, upon at least ten days’ notice
and adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may revoke the city registration
of any plumbing contractor or journeyman plumber for violating any provisions
of the ordinances or regulations of the city relating to the installation of
plumbing or for any other cause specified in the state plumbing license law.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-3) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.048 PLUMBING; PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. No plumbing work shall be undertaken without a permit
from the plumbing inspector.
   (B)   Application. The application for such work must follow the city’s
Plumbing Code and directions from the city.
   (C)   Fees. The schedule of permit fees shall be set forth by resolution or
motion of the City Council. Payment of the fee will be made upon application.
(See Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (D)   Inspection. Inspection of the work must conform to the guidelines set
forth in the city’s Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-4) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.049 REGISTRATION.
   Each and every person desiring to do business as a plumbing contractor shall
be required to register in the office of the City Clerk, shall furnish proof of
compliance with state law and shall adhere to the following requirements:
   (A)   Restore with the same material and in the same manner as before, all
streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters in any way disturbed by the
principal;
   (B)   Save the city harmless from any and all damages resulting from any act
or omission of the principal; and
   (C)   Obey all laws and ordinances of the city relating to plumbers and
plumbing work.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-5)
§ 150.050 JOURNEYMEN, EMPLOYMENT BY CONTRACTOR.
   It is unlawful for any journeyman plumber to do plumbing work within the
corporate limits of the city unless such work is done by employment of such
journeyman plumber by a plumbing contractor or master plumber. All plumbing
work done within the corporate limits of the city shall be done under contract
or agreement with a plumbing contractor or master plumber and any such plumbing
work done by a journeyman plumber within the corporate limits of the city shall
be under employment by a plumbing contractor. Should any journeyman plumber
perform plumbing work within the corporate limits of the city except under
employment by a plumbing contractor, such shall be deemed an offense and a
violation of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-2-6) Penalty, see §
150.999
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.065 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DEFINED.
   The term ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT, as used in this subchapter, refers to
electrical conductors, metallic raceways, fittings, devices, fixtures,
appliances, apparatus and any electrical material of any nature, kind or
description, to be installed within or on any building or structure.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-1)
§ 150.066 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   All installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter, with the statutes of the state and any orders,
rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific standards are
prescribed by this subchapter or by the statutes of the state by any orders,
rules or regulations issued by authority thereof, conformity with the
regulations set forth in the current issue of the National Electrical Code as
approved by the National Fire Protection Association, shall be prima facie
evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons or to
property.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-2)
§ 150.067 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The National Electrical Code is amended as needed to provide that all
electrical wiring in the city, from the meter base to the breaker box, shall be
installed in rigid metal or rigid nonmetallic conduit. Flexible tubing is not
to be used at this location. The maximum length between meter base and breaker
box is not to exceed ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-3)
§ 150.068 UNDERWRITERS’ LABORATORIES, INC.
   All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter, the statutes of the state and any orders, rules
and regulations issued by the authority thereof, and with approved electrical
standards for safety to persons or to property. Unless by this subchapter, by a
statute of the state or any orders, rules or regulations issued by authority
thereof, a specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for
installation and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved
standards for safety to persons or to property.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-4)
§ 150.069 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Special rulings. The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall have
the authority to make special rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the
safeguarding of life and property and the improvement of electrical
installations. In all cases, persons engaged in the installing of electrical
equipment and holding an electrical license must be notified by letter of these
decisions.
   (B)   Right of entry. Every person owning, leasing, operating or in
possession of any building or structure within the city shall permit the
electrical inspector to enter such building or structure as often as it shall
be deemed necessary by the Inspector for the purpose of inspecting the
electrical or fixture work theretofore done or installed in, on or about such
building or structure. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or lessee
of any premises wherein or whereon any electrical work has been done or
installed and is being or is in use, to prevent or interfere with any such
inspector in the discharge of his or her duties under provisions of this code
of ordinances; provided however, that the inspector shall, upon request of the
owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, exhibit his or her authority to make
such inspection.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-5) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.070 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to install any
electrical wiring, fixtures or apparatus in or on any building or structure or
make extensions to any existing electrical installations in the city limits of
this city without first securing a permit from the building official.
   (B)   Application. Applications for electrical permits shall be made to the
City Clerk. The applicant shall provide such plans, specifications and other
data as may be reasonably required.
   (C)   Fee. The fee for an electrical permit shall be as prescribed by motion
or resolution passed by the City Council. (Refer to Appendix A following this
code of ordinances.)
   (D)   Commencement of work; time limit. If any work authorized by a permit
is not commenced within 30 days after the date thereon, such permit shall
thereupon and thereafter be void. In such case, before such work is commenced,
a new permit shall be paid as is specified herein for the first time. Any work
once started shall not be suspended except for some unavoidable cause, and in
such case a statement of the facts shall be made in writing, giving the date
the work is to again begin and such statement shall be filed in the office of
the Inspector.
   (E)   Inspections.
      (1)   Required. The inspector shall make inspections of all work for
which a permit has been obtained within 24 hours after having been notified
that the work is ready for inspection (Sundays and holidays excluded). In
making inspections of new work “roughed in”, he or she shall leave a tag in the
cabinet clearly stating whether the work has been approved, and is ready to
conceal, or that work is not standard and must not be covered until approved by
the inspector.
      (2)   Fee. The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall establish
inspection fees to be paid to the city when electrical installations are
inspected by the electrical inspector. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 9-3-6) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.071 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   When from good and sufficient cause, it is necessary to have electricity on
any installation before the final certificate can be issued, the electrical
inspector may issue a temporary permit; provided, that all the parts to which
current is applied are in a safe and satisfactory condition; provided further,
that before the temporary permit is issued, the party receiving the same shall
pay the electrical inspector the permit fee, the permit to run for 30 days. If
at the end of 30 days the installation is still incomplete, another permit must
be taken out for the next 30 days, and for each succeeding 30 days. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 9-3-7)
§ 150.072 ELECTRICIAN’S REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Required; fee. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business, trade or vocation of electrical contractor, journeyman electrician or
apprentice electrician without a certificate of registration as such secured
from the city. The initial fee for a registration certificate, and any renewal,
to be paid to the City Clerk, shall be as set by the City Council. A
registration certificate must be renewed within 90 days following expiration of
the fiscal year. After the expiration, an application for a new certificate
must be requested and the initial fee paid again. No person may be registered
with the city as contractor, journeyman or apprentice unless he or she
possesses a valid and current state license issued by the state and pays the
registration fee. This certificate is not transferable to any other individual
or company. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Requirements. Every person receiving a certificate as an electrical
contractor shall be required to install all electrical wiring, fixtures,
appliances and equipment in accordance with the law and the ordinances and
other regulations of the city relating to electrical installations and in a
workmanlike manner; remedy any defective or faulty work caused by poor
workmanship or inferior or nonstandard material; fully indemnify and hold
harmless the city from any and all costs, expenses or damage resulting from the
performance of his or her work as an electrical contractor or apprentice
electrician, as the case may be.
   (C)   Under 12 volts. For the installing of bell, telephone or signal
systems not using over 12 volts, no registration or bond will be required. The
installation of same must comply with all other requirements of the ordinances
of the city.
   (D)   Revocation; hearing. After adequate opportunity for a hearing, the
City Council may revoke the certificate of an electrical contractor, an
apprentice electrician or a journeyman electrician.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-8)
§ 150.073 OWNER INSTALLATIONS.
   A permit for the installation of electrical or fixture work in or about any
building used or occupied as a dwelling in the city shall be issued by the
inspector to the owner of the building, provided the electrical or fixture work
is done by such owner or spouse, sibling or issue of such owner. A permit shall
not be issued to an owner unless the person who is to install the electrical
work is named on the permit. The named person shall appear before the inspector
or the Municipal Utility Board and show by answering such questions as may be
asked by them that he or she has sufficient knowledge to do or install such
electrical or fixture work. All work so installed shall comply with all the
requirements and must be inspected the same as that of an electrician or
contractor.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-9)
§ 150.074 UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to connect or use any
electrical wiring equipment or to supply electric current over the same, until
notice of approval certificate or tag is issued. It is unlawful for any utility
to connect or cause to be connected, any service or building for the supply of
electrical current until they have been notified by the inspector that
electrical work has been inspected and approved and is ready for electric
service.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-10) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.075 EXCEPTIONAL CONDITIONS.
   If in the installation of any electrical job the electrician installing the
same shall find that on account of some mechanical construction of the
building, location of fixtures or something that it would be impossible to
follow the sections of this subchapter, in that case he or she shall first
apply to the inspector, stating his or her reasons for any changes and set
forth the conditions with a statement of his or her desire for exceptions to
the provisions of the sections for the particular job. If the inspector finds
that the conditions warrant the same and that it would be impractical and
unreasonable to require a strict conformance to the sections, he or she shall
have the authority to make special rulings, for the safeguarding of life and
property and the improvement of electrical installations; but in all cases,
persons engaged in the installing of electrical equipment and holding an
electrical license, must be notified in writing of the decision.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-11)
§ 150.076 NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   Provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to relieve from or
lessen the liability of any person owning, operating or installing any
electrical wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment, or causing
the same or any part thereof to be done, for damages to anyone injured by any
defect therein, or any negligent doing or installation thereof; nor shall the
city or any agent thereof be held liable therefor by reason of any inspection
herein authorized and made by reason of the authority or by any reason of the
certificate of inspection and approval issued by the inspector.
(Prior Code, § 9-3-12)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.090 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code,
2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), as amended
and revised by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), be and is
hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the city for regulating and governing
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in
the offices of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.091 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-1) (Ord. 2015-23, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.091 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Pryor Creek.
Section 106.5.2. Insert: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 106.5.3. Insert: fifty percent (50%); fifty percent (50%).
Section 108.4. Insert: See § 10.99, General Penalty, of the city code.
Section 108.5. Insert: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 109 through 109.7. Deleted and insert replacement: Sections 109 through
109.7 of this code are intentionally deleted from the International Mechanical
Code, 2015 edition. Appeals from a decision of the code official shall be
governed by § 152.342 of the city code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-2) (Ord. 2015-23, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.092 CONTRACTOR’S REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Required; term; fee. All persons desiring to engage in the business of
installing heating, air conditioning and refrigeration in or on any building
within the corporate limits of the city must first secure a contractor’s
certificate of registration from the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall issue
applications to persons desiring mechanical contractor’s certificate. Upon
presentation of a valid and current state mechanical contractor’s license to
the City Clerk, accompanied by a required fee as set by the City Council, and
upon the City Clerk being satisfied that the ordinances relating thereto are in
all respects complied with, the City Clerk shall issue the certificate of
registration. The registration shall be for one year or part thereof, expiring
June 30 following. The annual fee for the second year in which a registration
is in effect shall be as set by the city. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Transferability; responsibility. The rights and obligations of a
registered mechanical contractor shall not be transferred, assigned or
delegated. No mechanical subcontract shall be let to any person not also
possessing a mechanical contractor’s registration. The contractor shall be
responsible for all work installed under his or her certificate. Such
mechanical contractor shall at all reasonable or necessary times supervise
workers performing mechanical work. Each worker doing mechanical work shall be
familiar with the Mechanical Code adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-3)
§ 150.093 FEES FOR INSPECTION.
   Fees for inspecting heating, ventilating, ductwork, air conditioning and
refrigeration systems shall be as set by the City Council for each combination
of heating and air conditioning units and each refrigeration unit. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 9-4-4)
§ 150.094 JOURNEYMEN; EMPLOYMENT BY CONTRACTOR.
   (A)   Required. It is unlawful for any journeyman to do mechanical work
within the corporate limits of the city unless such work is done by employment
of such journeyman by a mechanical contractor. All mechanical work done within
the corporate limits of the city shall be done under contract or agreement with
a mechanical contractor. Any such mechanical work done by a journeyman within
the corporate limits of the city shall be under employment by a mechanical
contractor. Should any journeyman perform mechanical work within the corporate
limits of the city except under employment by a mechanical contractor, such
shall be deemed an offense and a violation of this code.
   (B)   State license required. Journeymen are required to possess a current,
valid state license.
(Prior Code, § 9-4-5) Penalty, see §
150.999
RESIDENTIAL CODE
§ 150.105 ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code,
2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), as amended
and revised by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), be and is
hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the city for regulating and governing
the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three
stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Residential Code on file in the offices of the city are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.106 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-5-1) (Ord. 2015-25, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 2021-1, passed 1-5-
2021)
§ 150.106 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   Section R101.1. Insert: City of Pryor Creek.
   Table R301.2(1). Insert: Design criteria.
   Section P2603.5.1. Insert: Six inches (6”); twelve inches (12”).
(Prior Code, § 9-5-2) (Ord. 2015-25, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 2021-1, passed 1-5-
2021)
FUEL GAS CODE
§ 150.120 ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015
edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), as amended and
revised by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (OUBCC), be and is
hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the city for regulating and governing
fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code
on file in the offices of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.121 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-1) (Ord. 2015-22, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.121 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Pryor Creek.
Section 106.6.2. Insert: The fees to be charged and assessed shall be the
applicable “trade permit fee” and OUBCC - State and municipal fees assessed to
each trade permit issued.
Section 106.6.3. Insert: fifty percent (50%); fifty percent (50%).
Section 108.4. Insert: See § 10.99, General Penalty, of the city code of
ordinances.
Section 108.5. Insert: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 109 through 109.7. Deleted and insert replacement: Sections 109 through
109.7 of this code are intentionally deleted from the International Fuel Gas
Code, 2015 edition. Appeals from a decision of the code official shall be
governed by § 152.342 of the city code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-6-2) (Ord. 2015-22, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 2017-8, passed 8-
15-2017)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.135 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.136 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-7-1) (Ord. 2006-8, passed 9-19-2006; Ord. 2021-4, passed 2-2-
2021)
§ 150.136 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
   Section 101.1.: City of Pryor Creek.
   Section 103.5.: See “Appendix A” to Code of Ordinances.
   Section 302.4.: Twelve inches (12”).
   Section 304.14.: January 1; January 1.
   Section 602.3.: September 1; June 1.
   Section 602.4.: September 1; June 1.
(Prior Code, § 9-7-2) (Ord. 2006-8, passed 9-19-2006; Ord. 2021-4, passed 2-2-
2021)
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
§ 150.150 ADOPTION OF ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2006 edition, including the Appendix, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation
Code of the city for regulating and governing energy efficient building
envelopes of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy
Conservation Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.151 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-8-1) (Ord. 2006-14, passed 9-19-2006)
§ 150.151 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
   Section 101.1.: City of Pryor Creek.
(Prior Code, § 9-8-2) (Ord. 2006-14, passed 9-19-2006)
SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE
§ 150.165 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AVAILABLE. As used herein with reference to when sewer is available, this
term shall mean the public sewer line is located within 100 feet of the point
at which a building sewer line exits the building, or within 100 feet from any
exterior wall of a new construction, or within 100 feet of a property line of a
property upon which no structure exists and no structure is to be served by
public sewer but a use of the property generates waste water.
   NOTICE. As that term is used with reference to notices to be given by the
city or by the Utility Department to any person shall mean notice in writing
mailed by regular mail or hand delivered to the person to whom notice is
required. NOTICE by mail shall be effective from the date of mailing.
   REASONABLY AVAILABLE. As used herein with reference to when sewer is
reasonably available to property being subdivided, this term shall mean a
determination as to “reasonable availability” of sewer made by the General
Manager of Utilities and approved by the Municipal Utility Board. The finding
of reasonableness shall take into consideration the costs likely to be incurred
by the developer for construction of the sewer system in the development and
connection to the city sewer system, the probable value of the development with
public sewer and the probable value of the development without public sewer,
the conduciveness of the extensions with the short- and long-term plans for
development of the public sewage system, the public health and welfare, and the
benefits to the economic development of the community.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-1) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.166 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SERVICE REQUIRED FOR STRUCTURES
AND USES OF PROPERTY, EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No structure from which waste water is, or will be generated, shall be
erected, constructed or placed upon any property located within the municipal
limits of the city which does not have a connection to the public sanitary
sewer system pursuant to a permit issued by the city. (See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances for permit fee.)
   (B)   No use of property which generates, or will generate waste water, may
be made of property located within the municipal limits of the city which does
not have a connection to the public sanitary sewer system pursuant to a permit
issued by the city.
   (C)   Where a lawfully existing structure and/or use of property exists at
the effective date of this subchapter which is not connected to the public
sanitary sewer system but which structure and/or use generates waste water
which is being disposed of by lawful means such structure and/or use may
continue without connection to the public sanitary sewer system provided that
public sanitary sewer is not available, and for such period of time as public
sanitary sewer remains not available.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-2) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.167 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE REQUIRED FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   Where public sanitary sewer is reasonably available to property being
subdivided, the developer of the subdivision shall, at the developer’s expense,
connect the subdivision with such sanitary sewer and shall provide adequate
sewer lines accessible to each lot. Subdivision sewer systems shall comply with
the applicable federal and state statutes, rules and regulations, ordinances of
the city and rules, orders, and regulations of the Utility Board and shall be
constructed pursuant to a permit issued by the state’s Department of
Environmental Quality, and pursuant to the reasonable requirements of the
General Manager of Utilities.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-3) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.168 ADOPTION OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council
(ICC), as amended and revised by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission
(OUBCC), is hereby adopted as the Private Sewage Disposal Code of the city
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of individual sewage disposal systems as herein
provided; providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said Private Sewage Disposal Code on file in the offices of the city
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.169 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-4) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.169 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Pryor Creek.
Section 106.4.2. Insert: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 106.4.3. Insert: fifty percent (50%); fifty percent (50%).
Section 108.4. Insert: See § 10.99, General Penalty, of the city code of
ordinances.
Section 108.5. Insert: See Appendix A, Schedule of Fees and Charges, of the
city code of ordinances.
Section 109 through 109.7. Deleted and insert replacement: Sections 109 through
109.7 of this code are intentionally deleted from the International Private
Sewage Disposal Code, 2015 edition. Appeals from a decision of the code
official shall be governed by Chapter 34 of the city code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-5) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.170 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Interfering; hazardous. No person may discharge to public sewers any
waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may:
      (1)   Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or
facilities;
      (2)   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
      (3)   Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent.
   (B)   Domestic wastewater criteria required. All discharges shall be
prohibited except those that meet the criteria for “domestic wastewater”. BOD
concentration shall not exceed 200 milligrams per liter. SS shall not exceed
200 milligrams per liter.
   (C)   Industrial discharges. All industrial discharges are prohibited. At
the present time there are no industrial users in the city. If an industrial
user should desire to locate in the city and make use of the sewerage system,
it shall comply with Ordinance 83-15, as adopted November 1, 1983, and in
accordance with EPA and state regulations at the time to compensate for his or
her use of the system.
   (D)   Inflow sources. Any new connections from inflow sources into the
sanitary sewer portions of the sewer system shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-6) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.171 CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM/DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Connection to public sanitary sewer system. Connections to the public
sanitary sewer system shall conform to the applicable ordinances and building
codes of the city and other applicable rules and regulations of the city and
the Utility Department.
   (B)   Design, construction. All new sanitary sewage works shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of
Health regulations and the applicable ordinances of the city and rules, orders,
and regulations of the Utility Board.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-7) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.172 EXTENSION OF AVAILABLE SEWER, REQUIRED CONNECTS.
   When public sanitary sewer is or becomes “available” to a structure which
generates waste water and/or a property, the use of which generates waste
water, and/or a customer of the Municipal Utility Department, the owner of the
structure, the owner of the property, or the customer shall at his, her or its
sole expense, within 60 days of the determination and notice to the owner of
the structure, the owner of the property, or the customer by the city or the
General Manager of Utilities that public sanitary sewer is available to the
structure, property or customer, cause the structure and/or property sewer to
be connected to the public sanitary sewer pursuant to a permit for same
obtained by the owner and/or customer from the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-8) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.173 INTERCEPTORS RATE OF FLOW CONTROLS.
   Grease interceptors shall be equipped with devices to control the rate of
water flow so that it does not exceed the rate of flow of grease.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-9) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.174 INTERCEPTORS VENTING, ACCESSIBILITY AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Venting. Interceptors shall be so designed that they will not become
air bound if tight covers are used. Each interceptor shall be vented when
subject to loss of trap seal.
   (B)   Accessibility and maintenance. Each interceptor shall be so installed
that it is readily accessible for servicing and maintenance. Interceptors shall
be maintained by periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil or other
floating substances and solid deposits in the interceptor.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-10) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.175 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED AND CAPACITY.
   (A)   Required. A grease interceptor shall be required to receive the
drainage from fixtures and equipment having grease laden water, located in food
preparation areas such as restaurants, hotel kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias
or restaurants and clubs. Food waste grinders and dishwashers shall not
discharge to the building drainage system through a grease interceptor. Other
building fixtures shall enter the building drainage system below the grease
interceptor.
   (B)   Capacity. Grease interceptors shall have the grease retention capacity
indicated in Table 1 of this section for the flow through rates indicated:
Table 1
Capacity of Grease Interceptor
Total Flow Through Ratings in gpm Grease Retention Capacity in Pounds
Table 1
Capacity of Grease Interceptor
Total Flow Through Ratings in gpm Grease Retention Capacity in Pounds
4                                 8
6                                 12
7                                 14
9                                 18
10                                20
12                                24
14                                28
15                                30
18                                36
20                                40
25                                50
35                                70
50                                100
 
 
Table 2
Fixture Outlet Diameter (Inches) Estimated Flow Rate (gpm)
1-1/2                            4—5
2                                8—10
2-1/2                            15—18
3                                25—30
 
(Prior Code, § 9-9-11) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.176 LAGOONS PROHIBITED, EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Open impoundments of raw sewage contained within earthen or other
basins and allowed to stabilize through natural decay also known as sewage
lagoons, sewage ponds, sewage treatment lagoons or storage lagoons shall not be
allowed within the municipal limits of the city and are prohibited save and
except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section. The use of sewage
lagoons in the urban environment of the community has odor, safety, operational
and maintenance issues and characteristics that are not conducive to the
protection and promotion of the public health, welfare and development of
nearby properties to the highest and best use of nearby properties.
   (B)   Sewage lagoons may only be located in industrial zoned areas. Further,
sewage lagoons may only be located in industrial zoned areas when public
sanitary sewer is not available and the Utility General Manager, with approval
of the Municipal Utility Board and the City Council, determines that:
      (1)   The waste water to be discharged would be inconsistent with proper/
safe operation and maintenance of the municipal waste water system; and
      (2)   The use of a lagoon system would not be injurious to the public
health, welfare and development of nearby properties to the highest and best
use of nearby properties.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-12) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.177 USE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, SYSTEMS ALLOWED,
DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Private sewage disposal systems as defined in the International
Private Sewage Disposal Code as adopted by the city and included in the city
code of ordinances as amended from time to time shall only be allowed when
public sanitary sewer is not available to the structure or property to be
served. In the instance of a subdivision such systems may be allowed upon a
finding of no reasonable availability of public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Private sewage disposal systems allowed within the municipal limits of
the city shall be restricted to soil absorption systems, pressure distribution
systems, and tanks as set forth in the International Private Sewage Disposal
Code as adopted by the city and included in this subchapter as amended from
time to time.
   (C)   Exceptions for the use of alternative private sewage disposal systems
not allowed under division (A) of this section, but approved for use by the
State Department of Environmental Quality may be granted when public sanitary
sewer is not available and the Utility General Manager, with approval of the
Municipal Utility Board and the City Council, determines that:
      (1)   The waste water to be discharged would be inconsistent with proper/
safe operation and maintenance of the municipal waste water system; and
      (2)   The use of the alternative system would not be injurious to the
public health, welfare and development of nearby properties to the highest and
best use of nearby properties.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-13) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 150.178 SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SEPTIC TANKS.
   (A)   Lot size. On any lot where a septic tank is to be installed, the lot
shall be of a size to comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   The lot shall contain adequate area for the installation of a
minimum of 400 feet of septic tank lateral lines;
      (2)   No part of any septic tank or laterals shall be located closer than
20 feet to the rear of the rear building line of the principal structure to be
placed on the lot; and
      (3)   Where a water well is to be placed on the same lot with a septic
tank, the lot area required for the water well shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the State Health Department and the County Health Department,
and shall be in addition to the area above required for septic tanks.
   (B)   As-built plans. One set of blueprints or blue-line prints of the as-
built plans of all streets and utilities shall be filed with the General
Manager of Utilities.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-14) (Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
TORNADO SHELTERS AND SAFE ROOMS
§ 150.190 ADOPTION OF CODE.
   All installations shall be performed only upon issuance of a permit for
installation by the city which permitting process shall include site approval
by the city, and that the installation meet the FEMA 361 Design and
Construction Guidance for Community Safe Rooms, second edition; FEMA 320 Taking
Shelter from the Storm: Building a Safe Room for Your Home or Small Business,
third edition; ICC 500 International Code Council (ICC) standard for design and
construction of storm shelters.
(Prior Code, § 9-11-1) (Ord. 2012-6, passed 6-5-2012)
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
§ 150.205 ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   A certain document, four copies of which are on file, one each, in the
offices of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, building inspector and public library of
the city, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building
Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), be
and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the city for regulating
and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and
relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the offices of
the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in §
150.206 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-12-1) (Ord. 2015-20, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.206 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Pryor Creek.
   Section 1301.2. Insert: April 1, 2015.
(Prior Code, § 9-12-2) (Ord. 2015-20, passed 12-1-2015)
§ 150.999 PENALTY
   (A)   Violations; penalty; generally. Any person who shall engage in any
business, trade or vocation for which a license, permit, certificate or
registration is required by this
Chapter 150, without having a valid license, permit, certificate or certificate
of registration as required, or who shall fail to do anything required by this
Chapter 150 or by any code adopted by this
Chapter 150, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of the subchapters in
this
Chapter 150 or of any code adopted by this
Chapter 150, or who shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of
the officers provided for in this
Chapter 150, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 9-10-1)
   (B)   Relief in courts. No penalty imposed by and pursuant to
Chapter 150 shall interfere with the right of the city also to apply to the
proper courts of the state for a writ of mandamus, an injunction or other
appropriate action against such person.
(Prior Code, § 9-10-2)
   (C)   Building regulations; penalty. A person who violates a provision of §§
150.001 through
150.011 or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or removes, or has erected,
constructed, altered, repaired or moved a building or structure in violation of
a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit
or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, shall be fined in any sum as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, including costs. Each day upon which a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-10)
   (D)   Street address placement. Any person that violates §
150.009 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $200. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-1A-9)
   (E)   Utility construction; penalty. It shall be a violation of §§
150.025 through
150.030 for any person to undertake construction of facilities as provided for
herein, without first securing a building permit as required herein, or violate
any other terms or provisions hereof, and shall be punishable by a fine of not
to exceed $35. Each day any such construction work is undertaken and each day
any such facilities remain in place after construction without first securing
the necessary permit shall be deemed a separate offense. The building official
or the designated representative of the Municipal Utility Department shall be
authorized to issue a stop work order to any person undertaking work
contemplated by §§
150.025 through
150.030 without first securing the necessary building permit, and shall be
entitled to seek injunctive relief to enforce the provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-1B-6)
   (F)   Sewage disposal; penalty.
      (1)   Misdemeanor. A person who violates the terms of §§
150.165 through
150.178 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as
provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
      (2)   Criminal, civil remedies. In addition to proceeding under authority
of division (E)(1) of this section, the Municipal Utility Board is entitled to
pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under
authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person making prohibited
discharges.
      (3)   Termination of service. The Municipal Utility Board reserves the
right to terminate all utility services to any customer that fails to pay bills
when due, or discharges any prohibited wastes into the sewer system, or
violates the terms of §§
150.165 through
150.178.
(Prior Code, § 9-9-15)
(Ord. 96-1, passed 2-6-1996; Ord. 2003-10, passed 9-16-2003; Ord. 2004-9,
passed 2-3-2004; Ord. 2017-4, passed 5-16-2017)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
Use and Obstruction of Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways
   
151.01   Trees and shrubs
   
151.02   Obstructions
   
151.03   Depositing trash
   
151.04   Playing on streets
   
151.05   Washing vehicles
   
151.06   Water, mud draining onto streets
   
151.07   Filling stations and other businesses; water
   
151.08   Hazardous sidewalk areas
   
151.09   Cleaning sidewalks
   
151.10   Damage to streets; vehicle owner responsible
   
151.11   Driving on newly paved areas
   
151.12   Complete streets
Excavations
   
151.25   Permit required
   
151.26   Cash deposit
   
151.27   Replacing street surface
   
151.28   Guardrails
   
151.29   Bridge for pedestrians
   
151.30   Yellow lights on ditch areas
   
151.31   Supervision; inspection
Drainage Ditches
   
151.45   Obstacle impeding drainage declared nuisance
   
151.46   Abatement
   
151.47   Notice requirements
   
151.48   Drainage tiles
Closing of Public Ways and Easements
   
151.60   Definitions
   
151.61   Application for closing easements or public ways
   
151.62   Processing applications
   
151.63   City action on application
   
151.64   Reservation of rights upon closing
   
151.65   Fees
 
   
151.99   Penalty
USE AND OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS
AND PUBLIC WAYS
§ 151.01 TREES AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership or non-municipal
corporation owning property abutting a public right-of-way.
      ARTERIAL STREET. A street with direct access to abutting property
designed to accommodate medium to heavy traffic moving between areas in the
city or across the city.
      CITY. The City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation.
      CODE OFFICIAL. The person or persons designated by the Mayor to implement
the provisions of this section.
      COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
      EXPRESSWAY. A divided highway for through traffic with full or partial
control of access.
      FREEWAY. An expressway with full control of access.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma, or his or her
designated representative.
      PARK TREES. Trees in designated public parks or in any area owned by the
city to which the public has free access.
      PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership or nonmunicipal
corporation.
      PUBLIC LAND. Any real property within the corporate limits of the city in
which the city has any ownership interest.
      SHRUB. A low, woody plant, usually multistemmed.
      SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE. The area within an imaginary triangle formed at
a street corner as follows: extend the curb lines (or the edge of the pavement
where no curbs exist) into the street to a point where those lines intersect;
from that point of intersection measure along both curb lines (or edges of
pavement) to two points, each of which is 35 feet from the point of
intersection; the connecting of these three points shall form the sight
distance triangle.
      STREET TREES. Trees within the entire width of every public way or right-
of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for the purpose
of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
      TREE. A woody perennial plant having a well defined stem or trunk and a
definite crown, which attains a mature height of at least eight feet.
   (B)   Street trees/shrubs.
      (1)   Approved street trees. The Mayor shall adopt, subject to the
approval of the Council, and file with the City Clerk an official list of
approved street trees/shrubs designating small trees, medium trees and large
trees. No species other than those included on the official list of approved
street trees/shrubs may be planted as street trees/shrubs unless permission to
do so is given by the Mayor.
      (2)   Spacing and clearance. Spacing requirements for street trees are as
follows:
         (a)   No tree on an arterial street shall be planted closer than seven
feet from the face of the street curb or closer than four feet from a sidewalk,
except that in the Central Business District, street trees may be planted two
feet from the curb; provided, that where no curb exists, the measurement shall
be taken from the edge of the paving;
         (b)   At the intersection of any arterial street with any other
street, no abutting property owner shall allow any tree or shrub to exceed a
height of 30 inches above street grade within the “sight distance triangle” as
defined herein;
         (c)   No tree or shrub planted closer than 50 feet from the end of any
arterial street median shall be allowed to exceed a height of 30 inches above
street grade; trees on arterial street medians should be spaced no closer than
30 feet from each other;
         (d)   At the intersection of any arterial street with any other
street, no abutting property owner shall allow any tree within 50 feet of the
intersection, measured from the point of intersecting curbs or curb lines or
from the edge of the paving where no curbs exist, to have any branches within
five feet of the street grade;
         (e)   Tree plantings on freeways and expressways shall be no closer
than 30 feet from the edge of the outside driving lanes and 20 feet from any
fencing and spaced no closer than 25 feet apart; provided, however, that trees
may be planted in a cluster and mulched so that mowing between the clustered
trees is not required; and
         (f)   No tree or shrub shall be planted within 15 feet of any fire
hydrant so as to obstruct the fire hydrant when viewed from the street.
   (C)   Trees in public utility easements. No trees or shrubs may be planted
under or within 30 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within
ten lateral feet of any underground public utility line, meter or utility
boxes.
   (D)   Care of trees/shrubs on public land.
      (1)   The city shall have the right to prune and remove trees, plants and
shrubs within the right- of-way lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds and sidewalks as may be necessary to ensure public
safety, to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public area, or
to protect public utility facilities thereon. Such trees and shrubbery shall be
trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than 15 feet
above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than ten feet above the
sidewalk and shall comply with the sight distance triangle.
      (2)   The city may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or
part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature
is injurious to public, emergency, or maintenance vehicles, sewers, electric
power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is
infected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
      (3)   This section shall not prohibit the planting of street trees by
abutting property owners, providing that the selection and location of such
trees is in accordance with the provisions hereof.
   (E)   Removal of trees which obstruct light or view.
      (1)   Owner’s responsibility. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, the owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall neither obstruct
the light from any street lamp nor the view of any street intersection.
      (2)   City right to prune. The city shall have the right to prune any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any
traffic-control device or street sign or public, emergency, or maintenance
vehicles.
   (F)   Dead or diseased trees. The code official shall have the right to
cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
city.
   (G)   Interference with city personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person
to prevent, delay, or interfere with city personnel while they are engaged in
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing any street
trees, park trees or trees on private grounds as authorized by this section.
   (H)   Review by the Council.
      (1)   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts
and decisions of the code official.
      (2)   Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the code official
by filing a written complaint with the City Clerk. The City Council shall hear
the appeal at its earliest available meeting.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1) (Ord. 2008-1, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Merchandise. It is unlawful for any person to place upon or permit to
be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the city any
goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and leave same
thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade.
   (B)   Improper use. It is unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the
sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian
traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the free use of streets, alleys and
public ways of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful
traffic and parking thereon.
   (C)   Water flow. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street,
sidewalk or alley by placing upon any driveway or other approach any
obstruction or substance whatever that will obstruct or prevent the natural
flow of water into the storm sewers or drains, or dam the same so as to back
any water upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or gutter. Any such obstruction
is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated at any time by the
city with or without notice to the owner or occupant, or abutting property
owners.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-2) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 DEPOSITING TRASH.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon the
streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the city any paper, rubbish, grass,
weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-3) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 PLAYING ON STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to play on the main traveled portion of the
streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-4) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 WASHING VEHICLES.
   The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the city is
hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-5) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 WATER, MUD DRAINING ONTO STREETS.
   No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city
where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during
the washing thereof shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-6) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 FILLING STATIONS AND OTHER BUSINESSES; WATER.
   It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place
of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease
or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk,
parking, street, alley or other public way.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-7) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 HAZARDOUS SIDEWALK AREAS.
   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a
sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property
to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-8) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 CLEANING SIDEWALKS.
   If any property owner, occupant or agent of such property shall fail or
refuse to clean off the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the property owned or
occupied by him or her within 72 hours after notice served on him or her by any
police officer, sanitary officer or any other agent of the city, the property
owner or occupant or agent so failing or refusing after notice so to do, to
clean off such sidewalk, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-9) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 DAMAGE TO STREETS; VEHICLE OWNER RESPONSIBLE.
   The owner, driver, operator or mover of any vehicle over any street or alley
of the city, and specifically vehicles of a load weight in excess of passenger
automobiles and light delivery trucks, shall be responsible for all damages
which streets or alleys may sustain as a result of the use thereof by such
vehicles. This shall not be applicable to deterioration caused by normal
vehicular use of such streets and alleys. The amount of such damage may be
recovered in an action in the court of proper jurisdiction in the name of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-10) Penalty, see §
151.99
Cross-reference:
   Truck driving and routes, see §
72.047
§ 151.11 DRIVING ON NEWLY PAVED AREAS.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive any animal, or to drive any
vehicle, over any newly paved street, avenue or alley in this city before such
paving shall have been accepted by this city, and before the same shall have
been formally opened by this city for public travel thereon. The contractor or
other person having charge of the paving shall erect and maintain barriers at
the end of the streets, avenues, alleys or walks on which such paving is being
done, as well as at all street intersections thereon.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-11) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.12 COMPLETE STREETS.
   (A)   Complete streets commitments.
      (1)   Complete streets serving all users. The city expresses its
commitment to creating and maintaining complete streets that provide safe,
comfortable, and convenient travel along and across streets (including streets,
roads, highways, bridges, and other portions of the transportation system)
through a comprehensive, integrated transportation network that serves all
categories of users, including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists,
persons with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, users and
operators of public transportation, emergency vehicles, seniors, children,
youth, and families.
      (2)   Complete streets infrastructure. The city recognizes the importance
of complete streets infrastructure and modifications that enable safe,
convenient and comfortable travel for all categories of users, including, but
not limited to, sidewalks, shared use paths, bicycle lanes, bicycle routes,
paved shoulders, street trees and landscaping, planting strips, accessible curb
ramps, crosswalks, pedestrian islands, pedestrian signals, signs, street
furniture, bicycle racks, public transit stops, traffic signals, and other
features assisting the safe travel for all users, such as traffic circles,
raised medians, dedicated transit lanes, and transit bump outs.
      (3)   Context sensitivity. In planning and implementing street projects,
the city shall maintain sensitivity to local conditions in residential,
commercial, and rural districts and shall work with residents, merchants and
other stakeholders to ensure that a strong sense of place continues.
   (B)   Safe travel requirements.
      (1)   Complete streets routinely addressed by relevant departments. The
Street Department, Maintenance Department and Planning and Development
Department of the city shall work toward making complete streets practices a
routine part of everyday operations, approach every relevant project, program,
and practice as an opportunity to improve streets and the transportation
network for all categories of users, and work in coordination with other
departments, agencies, and city’s Municipal Utility Board to maximize
opportunities for complete streets, connectivity and cooperation.
      (2)   Complete streets required.
         (a)   All projects and phases. Complete streets infrastructure
sufficient to enable reasonably safe travel along and across the right-of-way
for each category of users shall be incorporated into all planning, funding,
design, approval and implementation processes for any new construction,
reconstruction, retrofit, maintenance operations, alteration or repair of
streets (including streets, roads, highways, bridges and other portions of the
transportation system), except that specific infrastructure for a given
category of users may be excluded if an exemption is approved via the process
set forth in division (B)(3) of this section.
         (b)   Community Development Department consultation. Transportation
projects shall be reviewed by the Community Development Department early in the
planning and design stage prior to seeking funding or commencing environmental
review, to provide an opportunity to allow comments and recommendations
regarding complete streets features to be incorporated into the project.
         (c)   Complete streets in routine work and projects. The Street
Department, Parks Department and city’s Municipal Utility Board shall improve
complete streets and street functionality for all categories of users as part
of routine work or projects involving pavement resurfacing, restriping,
accessing or relocating utilities, signalization operations, or maintenance of
landscaping or other features, unless an exemption is approved via the process
set forth in division (B)(3) of this section.
         (d)   Plan consultation and consistency. Maintenance, planning and
design of projects affecting the transportation system shall be consistent with
local bicycle, pedestrian, transit, multimodal, comprehensive and other
relevant plans, except as approved via the process set forth in division (B)(3)
of this section.
      (3)   Leadership approval for exemptions. Specific infrastructure for a
given category of users may be excluded where all of the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   Supporting data and documentation are assembled indicating one
of the following bases for the exemption:
            1.   Use by a specific category of users is prohibited by law;
            2.   The project is a maintenance activity that does not involve
resurfacing, restriping or reconfiguring the street. Examples of exempt
projects include patching, sidewalk repair or cleaning;
            3.   The project is limited by available publicly owned right-of-
way;
            4.   The project is located on state or federal right-of-way, the
city has made an effort to obtain permission, and the agency with control of
the right-of-way has indicated they will not grant permission;
            5.   The cost for specific infrastructure would be excessively
disproportionate to the need and probable future use over the long term (costs
in excess of 20% of project total may be regarded as evidence that cost is
excessively disproportionate, as set forth by the United States Department of
Transportation in its policy statement on accommodating bicycle and pedestrian
travel);
            6.   There is an absence not only of current need, but also of
future need (absence of future need may be shown via demographic, school,
employment and public transportation route data that demonstrate a low
likelihood of bicycle, pedestrian, or transit activity in an area over the next
ten to 20 years); or
            7.   Significant adverse impacts outweigh the positive effects of
the infrastructure.
         (b)   The proposed exemption, as well as the supporting data and
documentation, shall be made publicly available prior to approval by the City
Council; and
         (c)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the proposed
exemption, as well as the supporting data and documentation, during the
planning and design phase of the project and make a recommendation to the City
Council on whether or not the exemption is appropriate, the City Council shall
make the final decision whether the exemption will be approved after hearing
the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (4)   Street network and connectivity. As feasible, the city shall
incorporate complete streets infrastructure into existing streets to improve
the safety and convenience of users and to create employment, with the
particular goal of creating a connected network of facilities accommodating
each category of users, and increasing connectivity across jurisdictional
boundaries for existing and anticipated development.
      (5)   Deficiency. Deficiency projects are those required to correct
inadequate service and bring system capacity to adopted levels of service
standards. Deficiency expenditures shall enhance the capacity, safety and
efficiency of all modes of travel within the roadway network. New roads and
improvements to existing roadway facilities shall include improvements for all
transportation and mobility modes, including motor vehicles, transit
operations, pedestrians and bicyclists. Deficiency projects shall improve
connections between the various transportation and mobility modes and complete
missing links within the arterial roadway network. Deficiency projects shall
follow complete streets policies as prescribed in divisions (C) and (D) of this
section. Deficiency projects shall also include the continued development of
intelligent transportation system (ITS) management tools, managed lanes (using
existing lanes for different travel directions depending on demand and time of
day), queue jump lanes (providing transit priority) and other traffic
management strategies that increase the efficiency of existing and newly
constructed roadways for all transportation and mobility modes.
   (C)   Policies, plans and studies.
      (1)   Revising policies and plans. The Street Department and Community
Development Department are hereby directed to assess additional steps and
potential obstacles to implementing complete streets in the city and to
recommend proposed revisions to all appropriate ordinances, zoning and land use
development codes, policies, procedures, regulations, guidelines, programs,
templates and design manuals, in order to integrate, accommodate and balance
the needs of all users in all projects.
      (2)   Studies. All initial planning and design studies, health impact
assessments, environmental reviews, and other reviews for projects requiring
funding or approval by the city shall:
         (a)   Evaluate the effect of the proposed project on safe, comfortable
and convenient travel by all categories of users; and
         (b)   Identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on such travel
that are detected.
   (D)   Performance standards, evaluation and reporting. The following steps
shall be taken to support implementation of complete streets goals.
      (1)   Performance standards. The Community Development Department, with
the assistance of the Street Department, shall put into place performance
standards with measurable outcomes to assess safety, comfort, actual use and
functionality, particularly with regard to the development of a bicycle and
pedestrian network, for each category of users.
      (2)   Evaluation. The Community Development Department shall perform
evaluations of how well the streets and transportation network of the city are
serving each category of users by collecting baseline data over the next four
years and collecting follow up data on a two year basis, including data that:
         (a)   Tracks performance standards, including new miles of bicycle
lanes, sidewalks, and street trees or plantings, number of new curb ramps,
improved crossings and signage;
         (b)   Measure latent demand and existing levels of service for
different modes of transport and categories of users, including public
transportation ridership;
         (c)   Tracks collision statistics by neighborhood and mode of
transportation, and bicycle and pedestrian injuries and fatalities;
         (d)   Assess the safety, functionality, and actual use of the
neighborhoods and areas within the corporate limits of the city by each
category of users; and
         (e)   Assess the number of bicycle, pedestrian and transit users and
how this changes over time as more infrastructure is developed.
      (3)   Reporting. The director of the Community Development Department and
the Street Department shall provide an annual report to the City Council
summarizing how well the city is implementing complete streets, with the report
including: the performance standards and goals from division (D)(1) of this
section; the evaluations from division (D)(2) of this section, with an
assessment of the evaluation data; and a list and map of street projects
undertaken in the past year, with a brief summary of the complete streets
infrastructure used in those projects and, if applicable, the basis for
excluding complete streets infrastructure from any projects.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-13) (Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-1-2016)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 151.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall excavate, dig in, alter or change or interfere with any
street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, pavement, curbing or other public ground or
the surface thereof, within the limits of this city, for any purpose
whatsoever, unless the provisions of this subchapter have been complied with.
Such person shall obtain a permit from the City Clerk with the approval of the
city for such work to be done.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 151.26 CASH DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Required; amount. Before the issuance of a permit for doing any of
such work as described in §
151.25 of this subchapter, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk, in
cash, a sum to cover the cost of replacement and repair of any such street,
avenue, alley, sidewalk, pavement or other public ground and the surface
thereof by the city in the same condition as the same was prior to the time of
doing any work as described in §
151.25 of this subchapter. The amount of the cash deposit shall be as set by
the city based on the linear feet of excavation and the type of surface:
asphalt; concrete; gravel; or earthen.
   (B)   Adjustments. The amount of the cash deposit above required is for
normal or ordinary excavations and the city may make adjustments in the amount
of such cash deposit when conditions, including when the width or area of
excavation are such that the cost of making repairs and replacements of such
excavation or alterations, including surfaces, shall be less than or greater
than the cost for the usual, normal or ordinary excavations or alterations.
(See
Appendix A of this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 7-2-2)
§ 151.27 REPLACING STREET SURFACE.
   When the purposes for which such excavations or alterations have been
accomplished by the person obtaining the permit therefor, all such excavations
made or trenches or ditches dug or other alterations made shall be filled up,
firmly tamped and the surface of any street, avenue or alley affected placed in
a durable, smooth and serviceable condition and in as good a condition as it
was before such work was done, under the supervision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-3)
§ 151.28 GUARDRAILS.
   It is hereby made the duty of any person, during any excavation, to safely
guard the public against any and all accidents liable to occur as a result of
the same, by providing suitable and adequate warning signs, lights, safeguards,
railings and guard devices around any such excavations, ditches or trenches.
From sunset to sunrise, he or she shall place a sufficient number of warning
lights or torches on each side of such excavations, trenches or ditches as is
necessary to give adequate and suitable warning of danger.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-4)
§ 151.29 BRIDGE FOR PEDESTRIANS.
   Any person authorized to do any work described in this subchapter must, at
the time of the excavation and until the place is restored to its original
condition, construct and maintain an appropriate bridge across said work for
the passage of pedestrians at all times. At night, such persons shall place and
maintain a red light on each side of said bridge to warn the public, and said
bridge shall have banisters or guardrails, if any ditch is left open on either
side. Torches may be used in place of the red lights herein required.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-5)
§ 151.30 YELLOW LIGHTS ON DITCH AREAS.
   In all cases where the ditch or excavation runs parallel with the street,
either on the sidewalk, in the street or a driveway, yellow lights shall be
placed not less than 25 feet apart all along the ditch. The lights shall be
maintained from sunset until sunrise.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-6)
§ 151.31 SUPERVISION; INSPECTION.
   All such work shall be done under the supervision of the city. The cash or
bond shall be returned, upon satisfactory performance of the work as herein
required, within a reasonable time. The city shall utilize such portion of the
cash deposit or bond as may be necessary for the purpose of restoring the
places to their former condition.
(Prior Code, § 7-2-7)
DRAINAGE DITCHES
§ 151.45 OBSTACLE IMPEDING DRAINAGE DECLARED NUISANCE.
   Any culvert, driveway, pipe or other obstacle upon or in the dedicated
streets, alleys or ways of the city which impedes the flow of water through
drainage ditches now constructed or which might hereafter be constructed by the
city for the purpose of proper drainage of water falling from any rainfalls
which might reasonably be anticipated, shall be and are hereby declared to be
public nuisances, endangering and interfering with travel upon and the repair
and maintenance of city streets and annoying, injuring and endangering the
comfort, repose, health and safety of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)
§ 151.46 ABATEMENT.
   All public nuisances existing contrary to the provisions of this subchapter
not abated by the owners or occupants of adjoining premises or their agents
within ten days after they shall be given notice as provided herein, shall be
abated by an officer of the city, by digging up, breaking, if necessary or not
reasonably avoidable, and removing such culvert, driveway, pipe or other
obstacle and opening up such drainage ditch, and leaving the same open.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-2)
§ 151.47 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The notice herein mentioned shall be in writing, directing the owner or
occupant of premises adjoining such nuisance to abate the same by removing such
obstacle impeding drainage, and shall be given by mailing to the owner or
occupant of such adjoining premises at his, her or their last known post office
address, or to both, if their names and post office addresses can be
ascertained with reasonable diligence, by registered or certified mail or by
delivery of such notice to such owner or occupant personally by any officer,
employee or agent of the city or by posting such notice at some conspicuous
place upon such premises if the name or mailing address of the owner or
occupant of said premises cannot be ascertained with reasonable diligence.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-3)
§ 151.48 DRAINAGE TILES.
   (A)   Size; permit required. No person shall install or lay any drainage
pipe or culvert of less than 12-inch diameter in the construction, repair or
alteration of any driveway, sidewalk or other private way, which said drainage
pipe or culvert, when installed, will be upon public property with the
exception that ten inch steel or equivalent material pipe or culverts may be
used in flat areas of the city where adjoining drainage ditches are not
sufficiently deep that any advantage could be gained from larger pipe or
culverts. All drainage pipes or culverts so installed in the city shall be
either of steel or equivalent metal or concrete construction. Such person shall
first obtain a permit from the city for work to be done.
   (B)   Inspection. It shall be the duty of the city to inspect each and every
drainage tile installed within the corporate limits of the city and to enforce
the provisions of this section. (Refer to
Appendix A following this code of ordinances.)
(Prior Code, § 7-3-4)
CLOSING OF PUBLIC WAYS AND EASEMENTS
§ 151.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLOSE. A legislative act of the city discontinuing the public use of a
public way or easement without affecting title to such real property.
   EASEMENT. A right in real property as established by the laws of the state
which is not a “public way” as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC WAY. A street, avenue, boulevard, alley, lane or thoroughfare
established or open for public use.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-1) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 151.61 APPLICATION FOR CLOSING EASEMENTS OR PUBLIC WAYS.
   All applications for closing easements or public ways located within the
corporate limits of the city shall be filed with the Planning Commission; and
the applicant shall furnish the following information with the application at
the time of filing:
   (A)   A plot, plan or other representative sketch or drawing depicting
distances and points of the compass and showing the location and area of the
public way or easement;
   (B)   The legal description of the public way or easement to be closed;
   (C)   If an easement is being closed, the purpose for which the easement was
originally given;
   (D)   If the easement or public way was established by any instrument (other
than a subdivision plat) filed in the office of the County Clerk, a copy of
such instrument duly certified by the County Clerk;
   (E)   If the easement or public way was established by statutory dedication
pursuant to a recorded subdivision plat, the name of the subdivision and plat
number;
   (F)   If the applicant seeks to close a public way, the application shall
state whether or not such public way has been open for public use within the
five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of such
application; if such public way has been open for public use within that period
of time, the applicant shall furnish a list, certified by a bonded abstractor,
containing the names and addresses of all owners of record, as shown by the
current year’s tax rolls in the office of the County Treasurer, of property
abutting the public way and such other owners of record whose property is
within 300 feet in any direction from the public way sought to be closed; and
   (G)   Such additional information as may be determined by the Planning
Commission to be necessary for evaluating the application.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-2) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 151.62 PROCESSING APPLICATIONS.
   Upon receipt of a properly completed application and the payment of all
required fees, the application for the closing of easements or public ways
shall be processed as set forth herein.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall give written notice of the pending
application to all city departments who use public ways or easements and to all
franchise holders whose franchises with the city entitle them to the use of
public ways or easements and others determined by the governing body to have a
special right or privilege granted by ordinance or legislative enactment to use
the public way or easement, as applicable to such application. Such notice
shall require that all comments on the application be made in writing to the
Planning Commission within 30 days from the date of the written notice. Notice
shall be deemed effectively given when mailed to the last known address of the
franchise holder as shown upon the books of the city.
   (B)   Within a reasonable period of time after the expiration of the 30-day
notice period, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the governing body of
the city action to be taken upon the application.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-3) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 151.63 CITY ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the governing body of the city may, without giving further notice
to any third party, approve or deny, either in whole or in part, any
application seeking to close an easement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the governing body of the city may, without giving further notice
to any third party, approve or deny, either in whole or in part, any
application seeking to close a public way which has not been open for public
use for more than five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
such application.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission, and if the application seeks to close a public way which has been
open for public use within the five year period immediately preceding the date
of the filing such application, the governing body of the city shall set a date
for public hearing thereon and give notice by certified mail to all property
owners whose property is within 300 feet in any direction from the public way
sought to be closed as shown on the list furnished by the applicant. Such
notice shall be given at least ten-calendar days prior to the scheduled public
hearing, shall identify the nature of the pending proceeding and shall direct
that any person having an objection to the pending application must appear at
the public hearing to advise the governing body of the city of the nature of
his or her objection. On the date of the scheduled public hearing, the
governing body of the city shall inquire into the merits of the application
and, upon determination of all issues, shall approve or deny, either in whole
or in part, the proposed closing.
   (D)   Upon approval of any application, the City Attorney shall be directed
to prepare a proper ordinance closing the public way or easement; upon its
adoption, the costs for publication of such ordinance shall be determined and,
upon the payment of such costs to the city by the applicant, the city shall
have the ordinance published.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-4) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 151.64 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS UPON CLOSING.
   The city shall retain the absolute right to reopen any closed public way or
easement without expense to the city. The closing of any public way or easement
shall not affect the right to maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate or remove
utility, public service corporation or transmission company facilities existing
therein, nor shall such closing affect private ways existing by operation of
law unless released in writing executed by the owners thereof in recordable
form.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-5) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 151.65 FEES.
   A nonrefundable filing fee in such amount as set forth in Appendix A of this
code of ordinances on file in the city shall accompany each application to
vacate a public way or easement. In addition to such filing fee, if the
application seeks to close a public way which has been open to public use
within the five years preceding the date of the application, the applicant at
time of filing shall pay an additional mailing fee in the amount of the actual
cost of certified U.S. mailing for each property owner who is entitled to
receive notice of the proceeding. In the event the application is withdrawn
prior to the mailing of notices, the mailing fee shall be refunded to the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 7-9-6) (Ord. 2015-13, passed 8-18-2015)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-12)
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
151.01 shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $500 plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 152: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Authority
   
152.003   Effective date
   
152.004   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
152.005   Purposes
   
152.006   Minimum requirements
   
152.007   Compliance required
   
152.008   Conflicting provisions
   
152.009   Rules of language and construction
   
152.010   Zoning map
   
152.011   Transitional provisions
   
152.012   Safe harbor authorization
   
152.013   Severability
Residential Districts
   
152.025   The districts
   
152.026   Purposes
   
152.027   Uses
   
152.028   Lot and building regulations
   
152.029   Other relevant regulations
Commercial and Industrial Districts
   
152.040   The districts
   
152.041   Uses
   
152.042   Lot and building regulations
   
152.043   Other relevant regulations
Overlay Districts
   
152.055   General
   
152.056   PUD, Planned Unit Development (Legacy) District
   
152.057   DMX, Downtown Mixed-Use Overlay
Special Districts
   
152.070   General
   
152.071   AG, Agricultural District
   
152.072   PD, Planned Development District
Uses and Building Types
   
152.085   Use regulations
   
152.086   Use categories generally
   
152.087   Residential use category
   
152.088   Public, civic and institutional use category
   
152.089   Commercial use category
   
152.090   Wholesale, distribution and storage use category
   
152.091   Industrial use category
   
152.092   Recycling use category
   
152.093   Agricultural use category
   
152.094   Other use category
Supplemental Use and Building Regulations
   
152.105   General
   
152.106   Bed and breakfast inns
   
152.107   Community garden
   
152.108   Community group homes
   
152.109   Industrial uses
   
152.110   Junk or salvage yards
   
152.111   Manufactured housing subdivisions
   
152.112   Mobile home parks
   
152.113   Multi-unit houses
   
152.114   Patio houses
   
152.115   Self-service storage facilities
   
152.116   Townhouses
   
152.117   Transitional living facilities and halfway houses
   
152.118   Wireless telecommunication facilities
   
152.119   Use of liquified petroleum gas tanks/containers
Accessory Uses and Structures
   
152.130   Generally applicable regulations
   
152.131   Accessory antennas
   
152.132   Compressed natural gas (CNG) refueling appliances
   
152.133   Electric vehicle charging stations
   
152.134   Family child care homes
   
152.135   Geothermal heat exchange systems
   
152.136   Home occupations
   
152.137   Intoxicating beverage and beer sales and service
   
152.138   Satellite dish antennas
   
152.139   Solar energy systems
   
152.140   Small wind energy conversion systems
Temporary Uses
   
152.155   Description and purpose
   
152.156   Authority to approve
   
152.157   Authorized uses
   
152.158   General procedure
   
152.159   Exemptions
Parking
   
152.170   Purpose
   
152.171   Motor vehicle parking
   
152.172   Bicycle parking
   
152.173   Use of off-street parking areas
   
152.174   Parking location
   
152.175   Parking area design
   
152.176   Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities
   
152.177   Accessible parking for people with disabilities
   
152.178   Loading
   
152.179   Pedestrian circulation
Landscaping and Screening
   
152.190   Purposes
   
152.191   Applicability
   
152.192   Street trees
   
152.193   Parking lot buffers
   
152.194   Screening
   
152.195   Landscape and screening material
   
152.196   Landscape installation, irrigation and maintenance
   
152.197   Landscape plans
Signs
   
152.210   General
   
152.211   Prohibited signs and sign characteristics
   
152.212   Sign exceptions
   
152.213   Sign regulations of general applicability
   
152.214   Signs in R and AG Zoning Districts
   
152.215   Signs in CO Zoning District
   
152.216   Signs in commercial and industrial zoning districts
   
152.217   Signs in special districts
   
152.218   Dynamic displays
   
152.219   Administration
   
152.220   Nonconforming signs
   
152.221   Rules of measurement
   
152.222   Definitions
Subdivision Design and Improvements
   
152.235   Applicability
   
152.236   Required infrastructure and public improvements
   
152.237   Blocks
   
152.238   Lots
   
152.239   Streets
   
152.240   Sidewalks
   
152.241   Flood protection and topography
   
152.242   Stormwater management
   
152.243   Water supply
   
152.244   Sewage disposal
   
152.245   Utilities
   
152.246   Easements
   
152.247   Street lights
   
152.248   Street signs and traffic-control devices
   
152.249   Performance guarantees and security
   
152.250   Perpetual maintenance of common areas and improvements
   
152.251   Surveys and monuments
Flood Protection
   
152.265   General
   
152.266   Administration
   
152.267   Provisions for flood hazard reduction
   
152.268   EPA waiver
Review and Approval Procedures
   
152.280   Common provisions
   
152.281   Development ordinance text amendments
   
152.282   Zoning map amendments (rezonings)
   
152.283   Subdivisions
   
152.284   Lot splits and adjustments
   
152.285   Subdivision modifications
   
152.286   Development plans
   
152.287   Site plans
   
152.288   Zoning clearance permits
   
152.289   Zoning interpretations
   
152.290   Administrative adjustments
   
152.291   Special exceptions
   
152.292   Variances
   
152.293   Appeals of administrative decisions
Administration
   
152.305   Planning Commission
   
152.306   Board of Adjustment
   
152.307   Community Development Director
Nonconformities
   
152.320   General
   
152.321   Nonconforming lots
   
152.322   Nonconforming structures
   
152.323   Nonconforming uses
   
152.324   Nonconforming development features
Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
   
152.335   Responsibility for enforcement
   
152.336   Violations
   
152.337   Continuing violations
   
152.338   Remedies and enforcement powers
   
152.339   Remedies cumulative
   
152.340   Persons subject to penalties
   
152.341   Enforcement procedures
   
152.342   Appeals
Measurements
   
152.355   Fractions and rounding
   
152.356   Lot area
   
152.357   Lot area per unit
   
152.358   Floor area
   
152.359   Lot width
   
152.360   Frontage or street frontage
   
152.361   Setbacks
   
152.362   Parking setbacks
   
152.363   Build-to-zone
   
152.364   Building coverage
   
152.365   Ceiling height
   
152.366   Transparency
   
152.367   Street-facing building entrances
   
152.368   Building height
   
152.369   Other height measurements
   
152.370   Occupancy
Definitions
   
152.385   General
   
152.386   Use definitions
   
152.387   Measurement-related terms
   
152.388   Defined terms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter is known and may be cited as the “Pryor Creek Unified
Development Ordinance”. For convenience, it is referred to herein as the “UDO”.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.002 AUTHORITY.
   This UDO is adopted pursuant to the City Charter and the general authority
granted by the Constitution and laws of the state, including that contained in
11 O.S. and 82 O.S.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.003 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this UDO become effective on December 4, 2018, except as
otherwise expressly stated.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.004 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this UDO apply to all public and private use and
development of properties within the corporate limits of the City of Pryor
Creek, except as provided by state or federal law or as otherwise expressly
stated in this UDO.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.005 PURPOSES.
   This UDO is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   Protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general
welfare; and
   (B)   Implementing the policies and goals of the comprehensive plan and
other relevant, officially adopted plans of the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.006 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The provisions of this UDO are the minimum requirements deemed
necessary to carry out the UDO’s stated purposes.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of this UDO, all uses, buildings and
structures must comply with all other applicable ordinances, laws and
regulations.
   (C)   All references in this UDO to other governmental regulations are for
informational purposes only and do not constitute a complete list of such
regulations. These references do not imply any responsibility for the city to
enforce regulations imposed by other government authorities.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.007 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Land may not be used for any purpose other than one that is allowed by
the provisions of this UDO.
   (B)   A building or structure may not be erected, located, moved,
reconstructed, extended or structurally altered except as allowed by this UDO.
   (C)   Buildings, structures and land may be used and occupied only in
compliance with the provisions of this UDO.
   (D)   All lots created or modified must comply with all applicable
provisions of this UDO.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.008 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
UDO are inconsistent with state or federal law, the more restrictive provision
governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the
one that imposes more stringent controls.
   (B)   Conflict with other city regulations. If the provisions of this UDO
are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions found in
other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the more restrictive
provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more restrictive
provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
   (C)   Conflict with private agreements and covenants. This UDO does not
interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or
other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this UDO impose a
greater restriction than imposed by an agreement or covenant among private
parties, the provisions of this UDO govern. The city is not responsible for
monitoring or enforcing agreements or covenants among private parties.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.009 RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Meanings and intent. Words and terms expressly defined in this UDO
including those defined in §§
152.385 through
152.388 of this chapter have the specific meanings assigned unless the context
indicates another meaning. Words that are not expressly defined in this UDO
have their ordinary dictionary meaning.
   (B)   Computation of time.
      (1)   References to DAYS are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly
stated. References to BUSINESS DAYS are references to regular city government
working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by city
government.
      (2)   The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by city government, that day is excluded.
      (3)   A day concludes at the close of business and any materials received
after that time will be considered to have been received the following day.
   (C)   Tenses and usage.
      (1)   Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also
true.
      (2)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
      (3)   The words “must”, “will”, “shall” and “may not” are mandatory.
      (4)   The word “may” is permissive, not mandatory or required.
      (5)   When used with numbers, “up to x”, “not more than x” and “a maximum
of x” all include “x”.
      (6)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, limited liability company, trust, or corporation, as well as an
individual.
      (7)   The words “used” and “occupied” include “intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied”.
   (D)   Conjunctions. Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates,
conjunctions have the following meanings:
      (1)   “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly or in combination.
   (E)   Headings and illustrations. Headings and illustrations are provided
for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this UDO. In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this UDO and any heading, drawing, table, figure or
illustration, the text governs.
   (F)   Versions and citations. All references in this UDO to other city,
state or federal regulations are to be construed as referring to the most up-
to-date version and citation for those regulations, unless otherwise expressly
indicated. When the referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced
by other regulations, UDO requirements for compliance are no longer in effect.
   (G)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use “including”, “such as” or similar terms are intended
to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of
all possibilities.
   (H)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an
act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department
head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have
authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this
UDO expressly prohibit such delegation.
   (I)   Public officials and agencies.
      (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, all employees, public officials,
bodies and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Pryor
Creek or individuals or agencies legally authorized to act on behalf of the
City of Pryor Creek.
      (2)   References in this UDO to the “city” are references to the City of
Pryor Creek.
      (3)   References in this UDO to the “City Council” are references to the
Pryor Creek City Council.
      (4)   References in this UDO to the “Planning Commission” are references
to the Pryor Creek Planning Commission.
      (5)   References in this UDO to the “Board of Adjustment” are references
to the City of Pryor Creek Board of Adjustment.
      (6)   References in this UDO to the “Community Development Director” are
references to the Community Development Director of the City of Pryor Creek.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.010 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Establishment. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
defined in this UDO must be established by ordinance and shown on the city’s
official zoning map, which must be maintained under the direction of the
Community Development Director.
   (B)   Maintenance and updates. The Community Development Director is
responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its
amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of zoning map amendments
(rezonings).
   (C)   District boundaries. Zoning district boundary lines must be described
by legal description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing
the district or amending the district boundaries. When a legal description is
used, the zoning district boundary is deemed to extend to the centerline of
abutting streets. When a map is used, district boundary lines must be
established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines or the centerline
of abutting streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way, as those features were
of record at the time of adoption.
   (D)   Map interpretations. Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning
boundary that was established by legal description, the legal description
accompanying the amending ordinance governs. In other cases, the Community
Development Director is authorized to make an interpretation in accordance with
the procedures of §
152.289 of this chapter. The following rules apply to all map interpretations.
      (1)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
shoreline or centerline of a river, stream, lake or other watercourse will be
construed as following the actual shoreline or centerline of the watercourse.
If, subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the shoreline or
centerline of the watercourse should move as a result of natural processes
(flooding, erosion, sedimentation and the like), the boundary will be construed
as moving with the shoreline or centerline of the watercourse.
      (2)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
ridge line or topographic contour line will be construed as following the
actual ridge line or contour line. If, subsequent to the establishment of the
boundary, the ridge line or contour line should move as a result of natural
processes (erosion, slippage, subsidence and the like), the boundary will be
construed as moving with the ridge line or contour line.
      (3)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following lot
lines or other lot boundaries will be construed as following such lot lines or
lot boundaries.
      (4)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a
street or railroad right-of-way line will be construed as following the
centerline of the street or railroad right-of-way.
      (5)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following the
boundary of an adjacent municipality will be construed as following that
boundary.
      (6)   A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately parallel to, or
as an apparent extension of, a feature described above will be construed as
being actually parallel to, or an extension of, the feature.
   (E)   Zoning of annexed land. When land is annexed or otherwise brought into
the zoning jurisdiction of the city, it may be classified in the RS District or
assigned another zoning classification based on the comprehensive plan,
existing land uses, any applicable annexation agreement and other relevant
considerations.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.011 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this section address the transition to this UDO from the
zoning, subdivision and flood protection regulations in effect immediately
preceding the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter. These regulations were previously codified as Titles
10, 11 and 12 of this code of ordinances, respectively.
   (A)   Applications, permits and approvals.
      (1)   Any building, development or structure for which a building permit
was issued or a complete building permit application had been accepted for
processing before the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter may be completed in conformance with the issued
building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such
building, development or structure does not comply with provisions of this UDO.
If the building, development or structure is not commenced and completed within
the time allowed under the original building permit and any authorized permit
extension, the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed
and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this UDO.
      (2)   Complete applications for PUDs, development plans, subdivision
plats, floodplain development permits, special exceptions, variances and other
zoning-, subdivision- or flood protection-related approvals that are pending
approval on the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the
applicable regulations in effect immediately preceding the effective date
specified in §
152.003 of this chapter. Building permits for construction and development
approved under such zoning approvals may be issued in accordance with division
(A)(3) of this section.
      (3)   (a)   The Community Development Director is authorized to issue
building permits for construction or development approved before the effective
date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter and for developments pending approval under division
(A)(2) of this section, even if such building, development or structure does
not fully comply with provisions of this UDO.
         (b)   If building is not commenced and completed within the time
allowed under the building permit and any authorized permit extension, then the
building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied
only if it complies with the regulations of this UDO.
      (4)   (a)   When a use classified as a special exception under this UDO
exists as an approved special exception or permitted use on the effective date
specified in §
152.003 of this chapter, that use will be considered a lawfully established
special exception under this UDO.
         (b)   When any amendment to this UDO changes the classification of a
permitted use to a special exception, any use lawfully established before such
amendment will be considered a lawfully established special exception after the
effective date of the amendment.
         (c)   A lawfully established existing use that is not allowed as a
special exception or permitted use in the district in which the use is now
located will be considered a nonconforming use and will be subject to all
applicable regulations of §§
152.320 through
152.324 of this chapter.
   (B)   Zoning district name conversions. The zoning district names in effect
before the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter are converted in this UDO as indicated in Table 1 of
this section.
Table 1
Zoning District Name Conversions
Map Symbol Previous Zoning District Name Map Symbol New Zoning District Name
Table 1
Zoning District Name Conversions
       Previous
Map    Zoning       Map Symbol New Zoning District Name
Symbol District
       Name
Residential (see §§
152.025 through
152.029 of this chapter):
       Single-
RS     Family       RS-70      Residential Single-Family 70
       Residential
                   RS-50      Residential Single-Family 50
                   RS-35      Residential Single-Family 35
RD     Two-Family   RD         Residential Two-Family (Duplex)
       Residential
                   RT         Residential Townhouse
RG     General      RM         Residential Multi-Family
       Residential
RG-S   Supplemental RM         Residential Multi-Family
       Residential
RMH    Mobile/      RMH        Residential Mobile Home
       Modular Home
Office, Commercial and Industrial (see §§
152.040 through
152.043 of this chapter):
CO     Office       CO         Commercial Office
CC     Convenience  CC         Convenience Commercial
       Commercial
CR     Restricted   CR         Commercial Restricted
       Commercial
       Automotive
CA/R   and          CAR        Commercial Automotive and Recreation
       Commercial
       Recreation
CG     General      CG         Commercial General
       Commercial
IL     Light        IL         Industrial Light
       Industrial
IH     Heavy        IH         Industrial Heavy
       Industrial
Overlay and Special Districts (see §§
152.055 through
152.057 and
152.070 through
152.072 of this chapter):
AG     Agricultural AG         Agricultural
       Planned Unit
PUD    Development  No longer available (“Legacy District”); replaced with PD
       Overlay
                  PD         Planned Development
                  DMX        Downtown Mixed-Use Overlay
 
   (C)   Violations. The adoption of this UDO does not affect any pending or
future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous UDO that
occurred before the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.012 SAFE HARBOR AUTHORIZATION.
   The City Council is expressly authorized to avoid the preemptive force of
any provision of the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act
(RLUIPA) by any one or more of the following actions:
   (A)   Changing the policy or practice that results in a substantial burden
on religious exercise;
   (B)   Retaining the policy or practice and exempting the substantially
burdened religious exercise;
   (C)   Providing exemptions from the policy or practice for applications that
substantially burden religious exercise; or
   (D)   Any other means that eliminates the substantial burden on religious
exercise.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-12) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.013 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this UDO is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, that portion is to be deemed severed from the
UDO and in no way affects or diminishes the validity of the remainder of the
UDO.
(Prior Code, § 10-1-13) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 152.025 THE DISTRICTS.
   The Residential Zoning Districts are listed in Table 2 of this section. When
this UDO refers to “Residential” Zoning Districts or R Districts, it is
referring to these districts.
Table 2
Residential (R) Zoning Districts
Map Symbol District Name Relative Intensity Scale
Table 2
Residential (R) Zoning Districts
Map Symbol District Name             Relative Intensity Scale
RS-70      Residential Single-Family RS-70 is the least intensive R District
           70
RS-50      Residential Single-Family
           50
RS-35      Residential Single-Family [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
           35                        968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
RD         Residential Two-Family    IMAGES/0-0-0-2503.jpg]
           (Duplex)
RT         Residential Townhouse
RM         Residential Multi-Family  RM is the most intensive R District (RMH
                                     not included in intensity scale)
RMH        Residential Mobile Home    
 
(Prior Code, § 10-2-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.026 PURPOSES.
   Residential zoning districts are primarily intended to create, maintain and
promote a variety of housing opportunities for individual households and to
maintain and promote the desired physical character of existing and developing
neighborhoods. While the districts primarily accommodate residential uses, some
nonresidential uses are also allowed. The various R Districts are primarily
differentiated on the basis of allowed building types, density and lot and
building regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.027 USES.
   Uses are allowed in R Districts in accordance with the use regulations of §
152.085 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.028 LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Table of regulations. The lot and building regulations of Table 3 of
this section apply to all principal uses and structures in R Districts, except
as otherwise expressly stated in this UDO. General exceptions to these
regulations and rules for measuring compliance can be found in §§
152.355 through
152.370 of this chapter. Regulations governing accessory uses and structures
can be found in §§
152.130 through
152.140 of this chapter.
Table 3
R District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations RS-70 RS-50 RS-35 RD RT RM RMH
Table 3
R District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations                           RS-70  RS-50  RS-35  RD     RT     RM     RMH
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.):                                                
   Detached house                  8,400  6,000  4,000  6,000  6,000  6,000  5,500
   Patio house (see also §        n/a    n/a    4,000  6,000  4,000  4,000  5,500
152.114)
   Townhouse (see also §          n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    2,200  2,200  n/a
152.116)
   Duplex                          n/a    n/a    n/a    6,000  6,000  6,000  n/a
   Multi-unit house (see also §   n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    8,000  8,000  n/a
152.113)
   Apartment/condo                 n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    10,000 n/a
   Mobile home/mobile home park    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    See §
                                                                                152.112
   Other allowed buildings/uses    12,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000
Minimum lot area per unit (sq. ft.):                                       
   Detached house                  8,400  6,000  4,000  6,000  6,000  6,000  4,000
   Patio house
(see also §                          n/a    n/a    4,000  6,000  4,000  4,000  4,000
152.114)
   Townhouse
(see also §                          n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    2,200  2,200  n/a
152.116)
   Duplex                          n/a    n/a    n/a    3,000  3,000  3,000  n/a
   Multi-unit house
(see also §                          n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    2,000  2,000  n/a
152.113)
   Apartment/condo                 n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    2,800  n/a
Minimum lot width (feet):                                                  
   Detached house                  70     50     35     50     50     50     50
   Patio house
(see also §                          n/a    n/a    35     35     35     35     50
152.114)
   Townhouse
(see also §                          n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    20     20     n/a
152.116)
   Duplex                          n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    70     50     n/a
   Multi-unit house
(see also §                          n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    70     50     n/a
152.113)
   Apartment/condo                 n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    100    n/a
   Other allowed buildings/uses    110    100    100    100    100    100    100
Minimum building setbacks:                                                 
   Front (feet)                    25     25     25     25     25     25     25
   Street side (feet)              15     15     15     15     15     15     15
   Interior side (feet)            10/151 101, 2 101,   101, 2 101, 2 101, 2 101, 2
                                                    2 3          3, 4
   Rear (% of lot depth)           20     20     20     20     20     20     20
   Maximum building coverage (% of 30     35     35     35     35     50     30
lot)
   Maximum building height (feet)  35     35     35     35     35     35     35
Notes:
1.    The minimum required interior side setback for principal buildings occupied by
nonresidential uses is 15 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater.
2.    Minimum interior side setback is reduced to 5 feet for single-story residential
dwellings.
3.    See §
152.114 for setback regulations applicable to patio houses.
4.    No side setback is required for interior units in townhouse developments. Side
setback applies to end units (see Figure 1 of this section).
 
   Figure 1: Side Setbacks for Townhouses
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2345.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 10-2-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.029 OTHER RELEVANT REGULATIONS.
   Uses and structures in residential zoning districts may be subject to other
regulations and standards, including the following.
   (A)   Nonconformities. See §§
152.320 through
152.324 of this chapter.
   (B)   Accessory uses and structures. See §§
152.130 through
152.140 of this chapter.
   (C)   Temporary uses. See §§
152.155 through
152.159 of this chapter.
   (D)   Parking. See §§
152.170 through
152.179 of this chapter.
   (E)   Landscaping and screening. See §§
152.190 through
152.197 of this chapter.
   (F)   Signs. See §§
152.210 through
152.222 of this chapter.
   (G)   Parking and storage of trucks and heavy equipment.
      (1)   The parking or storage of farm tractors, bulldozers, backhoes,
semi-tractor/trailer combinations or semi-trailers or other heavy, motorized
dirt-moving, construction or similar equipment is prohibited in all residential
zoning districts, whether located on private property or within the public
right-of-way.
      (2)   This prohibition on parking and storage of trucks and heavy
equipment is not intended to apply to:
         (a)   Licensed, operable automobiles, pickup trucks or semi-tractors
(attached trailers) if operated by members of the household living at the
premises in question or belonging to or being then operated by persons then
having business or visiting such premises;
         (b)   Trucks or equipment being actively used for purpose for which it
was manufactured in the performance of services to the owners or occupants of
subject property; and
         (c)   Trucks or heavy equipment parked or stored within a garage or
other building or completely screened from the view of the public right-of-way
or R-zoned lots by a fence, wall or vegetative screen.
(Prior Code, § 10-2-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 152.040 THE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Generally. The Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts are listed
in Table 4 of this section. When this UDO refers to “Commercial” or
“Industrial” Zoning Districts or to C or I Districts, respectively, it is
referring to these districts.
Table 4
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
Map Symbol District Name Relative Intensity Scale
Table 4
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
Map Symbol District Name             Relative Intensity Scale
CO         Commercial Office         Least intensive C or I District
CC         Convenience Commercial
CR         Commercial Restricted     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
CAR        Commercial Automotive and 968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
           Recreation                IMAGES/0-0-0-2503.jpg]
CG         Commercial General
IL         Industrial Light
IH         Industrial Heavy          Most intensive C or I District
 
   (B)   Purposes.
      (1)   General. Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts are intended to
accommodate and promote neighborhood, community- and region-serving commercial
uses, as well as industrial and employment uses.
      (2)   CO District. The CO (Commercial Office) District is primarily
intended to accommodate low- to moderate-intensity office and service uses. The
CO District is also an appropriate transition between residential neighborhoods
and higher intensity commercial areas.
      (3)   CC District. The CC (Convenience Commercial) District is primarily
intended to accommodate low-intensity, neighborhood-serving retail and personal
service uses.
      (4)   CR District. The CR (Commercial Restricted) District is primarily
intended to accommodate community-serving commercial and personal service uses.
      (5)   CAR District. The CAR (Commercial Automotive and Recreation)
District is primarily intended to accommodate higher intensity commercial uses
that are oriented to motorists or that require access to major streets and
highways.
      (6)   CG District. The CG (Commercial General) District is primarily
intended to accommodate retail, service, entertainment and mixed-use
developments within the Downtown or Central Business District area.
      (7)   IL District. The IL (Industrial Light) District is primarily
intended to accommodate manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, and other
industrial activities that have few if any adverse land use or environmental
impacts.
      (8)   IH District. The IH (Industrial Heavy) District is primarily
intended to accommodate industrial uses that may produce some moderate adverse
land use or environmental impacts in terms of their operation and appearance.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.041 USES.
   Uses are allowed in Commercial and Industrial Districts in accordance with
the use regulations of §
152.085 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.042 LOT AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Table of regulations.
      (1)   The lot and building regulations of Table 5 of this section apply
to all principal uses and structures in Commercial and Industrial Districts,
except as otherwise expressly stated in this UDO. General exceptions to lot and
building regulations and rules for measuring compliance can be found in §§
152.355 through
152.370 of this chapter.
      (2)   Additional regulations governing accessory uses and structures can
be found in §§
152.130 through
152.140 of this chapter.
Table 5
C and I District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations CO CC CR CAR CG IL IH
Table 5
C and I District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations                             CO     CC      CR     CAR    CG IL  IH
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)              12,000 12,0001 12,000 12,000 —— —
Minimum street frontage (feet)          100    100     100    100    —— —
Building setbacks (feet):
   Street                            50     50      50     50     —50  50
   Interior side (from R District)   15     15      15     15     —50  50
   Interior side (from C or I Distric—    —     —    —    —— —
   Rear                              10     10      10     20     —502 502
Maximum building coverage (% of lot)    30     40      50     30     —40  50
Maximum building height (feet)          35     35      353    35     —— —
Notes:
1. Lot area of CC-zoned parcels may not exceed 20,000 square feet.
2. Required only when abutting R-zoned lot.
3. Greater building heights may be approved through the special exception
process.
 
(Prior Code, § 10-3-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.043 OTHER RELEVANT REGULATIONS.
   Uses and development in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts may be
subject to other regulations and standards, including the following:
   (A)   Nonconformities. See §§
152.320 through
152.324 of this chapter.
   (B)   Accessory uses and structures. See §§
152.130 through
152.140 of this chapter.
   (C)   Temporary uses. See §§
152.155 through
152.159 of this chapter.
   (D)   Parking. See §§
152.170 through
152.179 of this chapter.
   (E)   Landscaping and screening. See §§
152.190 through
152.197 of this chapter.
   (F)   Signs. See §§
152.210 through
152.222 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-3-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
§ 152.055 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. As the name implies, Overlay Districts “over-lay”
applicable base zoning district classifications to alter some or all of the
base zoning district regulations that apply to particular sites. Overlay Zoning
Districts work to modify or supplement the regulations imposed by base zoning
districts when necessary to address special situations or accomplish specific
city goals. Overlay zoning is intended to be used when the base zoning district
applied to an area remains generally appropriate, but when an additional,
modified or eliminated requirement could help implement the city’s planning
goals or address an area-specific planning, design or land use regulation
issue.
   (B)   Interpretation.
      (1)   All applicable regulations of the underlying base zoning district
apply to property in an Overlay District unless otherwise expressly stated in
the Overlay District regulations.
      (2)   When overlay regulations conflict with regulations that otherwise
apply in the underlying base zoning district, the regulations of the applicable
overlay govern. If property is classified in multiple Overlay Districts and the
regulations of one Overlay District conflict with the regulations of another
Overlay District, the more restrictive regulations govern.
   (C)   Procedure. The boundaries of Overlay Zoning Districts must be shown on
the official zoning map. The following procedures apply to the establishment,
amendment or termination of all Overlay Districts unless otherwise expressly
stated.
      (1)   Overlay District regulations must be established, amended or
terminated in accordance with the zoning text amendment procedures of §
152.281 of this chapter.
      (2)   Except as otherwise expressly stated, zoning map amendments
establishing, expanding or reducing the boundaries of an Overlay District or
terminating all or part of an Overlay District must be processed in accordance
with the zoning map amendment procedures of §
152.282 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.056 PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (LEGACY) DISTRICT.
   (A)   Land classified in a PUD Overlay Zoning District on the effective date
specified in §
152.003 of this chapter will continue to be classified in the PUD Overlay
District.
   (B)   No applications to establish new PUD Zoning Districts or to expand the
boundaries of existing PUD Zoning Districts may be accepted for processing
after the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter. Amendments to existing PUDs may be processed in
accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of §
152.282 of this chapter.
   (C)   The PUD Zoning District regulations in effect immediately before the
effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter and all applicable conditions of approval of an
approved PUD govern the use and development of Legacy PUD-zoned areas unless
and until the subject PUD is abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.057 DMX, DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The DMX (Downtown Mixed-Use Overlay) District is intended to
implement the comprehensive plan by helping preserve and enhance walkable,
mixed-use development patterns within the downtown area.
   (B)   Applicability. Except as otherwise expressly stated in this UDO, the
DMX regulations of this section apply within the boundaries of the DMX Overlay
District to all new uses and structures and all building alterations and site
modifications that require a building permit. The DMX regulations govern in the
event of conflict with the regulations of the underlying base zoning district.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Existing detached houses and duplexes and additions to existing
detached houses and duplexes are exempt from compliance with all DMX
regulations of this section.
      (2)   Uses and structures that are accessory to existing or new detached
houses or duplexes are exempt from compliance with all DMX regulations of this
section.
      (3)   Buildings occupied exclusively by public, civic use and
institutional use types (see §
152.088 of this chapter) are exempt from compliance with all DMX regulations of
this section.
   (D)   Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities are expressly
prohibited on lots with frontage on Graham Avenue.
   (E)   Driveways. Curb cuts and driveways taking access to Graham Avenue are
expressly prohibited.
   (F)   Frontage classifications. Street frontages in the downtown area are
classified according to their existing and proposed future character. Three
frontage types are described below and shown on the zoning map:
      (1)   Primary. The “primary” frontage designation is applied along Graham
Avenue, where the highest level of walkability is expected and desired. The
regulations that apply to primary frontages are intended to help ensure that
buildings are pulled up to the front property line and that buildings are
“activated” to promote pedestrian interest, comfort and safety.
      (2)   Secondary. The “secondary” frontage designation is applied along
side streets off of Graham Avenue. Although it is important to maintain the
traditional main street character of these frontages, the regulations allow
greater flexibility in terms of building location and site design.
      (3)   Changing classifications. A change in frontage classification is
considered a rezoning and is subject to the zoning map amendment procedures of
§
152.282 of this chapter.
   (G)   Primary frontage regulations. The following regulations apply to all
primary frontages. Exceptions and rules of measurement are established in
division (I) of this section.
Figure
Symbol
Figure
Symbol
        Build-to-zone:                                   
A           Minimum/maximum                           0 ft./10 ft.
B and B1    Minimum percent of building in build-to-zo80%
         Parking setback:
C           Minimum                                   30 ft.
         Transparency:
D           Minimum ground-story                      65%
E           Minimum upper-story                       20%
F           Maximum blank wall length                 20 ft.
         Pedestrian access:
G           Street-facing building entrance required? Yes
 
   Figure 2: Primary Frontage Regulations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2347.png]
   (H)   Secondary frontage regulations. The following regulations apply to all
secondary frontages. Exceptions and rules of measurement are established in
division (I) of this section.
Figure
Symbol
Figure
Symbol
        Build-to-zone:                                   
A           Minimum/maximum                           0 ft./15 ft.
B and B1    Minimum percent of building in build-to-zo60%
         Parking setback:
C           Minimum                                   30 ft.
         Transparency:
D           Minimum ground-story                      40%
E           Minimum upper-story                       20%
F           Maximum blank wall length                 35 ft.
         Pedestrian access:
G           Street-facing building entrance required? Yes
 
   Figure 3: Secondary Frontage Regulations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2349.png]
   (I)   Measurements and exceptions.
      (1)   Build-to-zone.
         (a)   The build-to zone is the area on the lot where the front
building facade must be located, measured as a minimum and maximum yard
(setbacks) ranges from the edge of the street right-of-way.
         (b)   The required percentage specifies the amount of the front
building facade that must be located within the build-to zone, based on the
width of the front building facade divided by the width of the lot.
         (c)   Outdoor open space, plazas and outdoor dining areas are counted
as part of the building for the purpose of measuring compliance with build-to
zone requirements, provided that:
            1.   The area does not exceed one-third the length of the building
face or 35 feet, whichever is less;
            2.   The area is no more than 35 feet in depth; and
            3.   No more than one such feature may be counted per frontage.
         (d)   On corner lots a building facade must be placed in the build-to
zone for the first 30 feet along each street extending from the corner (the
intersection of the build-to-zones).
      (2)   Transparency.
         (a)   Transparency regulations govern the percentage of a street-
facing building facade that must be covered by glazing (e.g., transparent
windows and doors).
         (b)   The transparency of a ground-story facade is measured between
two feet and ten feet above the abutting sidewalk.
         (c)   The transparency of an upper-story facade is measured from top
of the finished floor to the top of the finished floor above. When there is no
floor above, upper-story transparency is measured from the top of the finished
floor to the top of the wall plate.
         (d)   Glazed elements must be clear and non-reflective and not be
painted or tinted (transparent, low-emissivity glass is permitted).
      (3)   Blank wall area.
         (a)   BLANK WALLS are areas on the exterior facade of a building that
do not include a substantial material change; windows or doors; columns,
pilasters or other articulation greater than 12 inches in depth.
         (b)   Blank wall area regulations apply in both a vertical and
horizontal direction to ground- and upper-story street-facing facades.
      (4)   Street-facing building entrances.
         (a)   Required street-facing building entrances must provide ingress
and egress for residents and customers. Additional entrances are also
permitted.
         (b)   An angled entrance may be provided at either corner of a
building along the street to meet the street-facing entrance requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10-4-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
§ 152.070 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose. As is the case with Overlay Zoning Districts, Special Purpose
Zoning Districts are tools for dealing with unique neighborhoods or settings or
accomplishing special planning and zoning goals. Unlike Overlay Districts,
however, Special Districts are base zoning classifications; they do not “over-
lay” other base zoning districts.
   (B)   Establishment. Except as otherwise expressly stated, Special Districts
may be established, amended or removed only in accordance with the zoning map
amendment procedures of §
152.282 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.071 AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The AG, Agricultural District is primarily intended to:
      (1)   Accommodate agricultural, mining and very-low density residential
uses in rural and semi-rural areas;
      (2)   Serve as a holding zone pending an orderly transition to more urban
development that can be efficiently served by public facilities and services;
and
      (3)   Protect open space and natural resource areas, including flood-
prone lands.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the AG District in accordance
with the use regulations of §
152.085 of this chapter.
   (C)   Lot and building regulations. The lot and building regulations of
Table 6 of this section apply to all principal uses and structures in AG
Districts, except as otherwise expressly stated in this UDO. General exceptions
to lot and building regulations and rules for measuring compliance can be found
in §§
152.355 through
152.370 of this chapter. Additional regulations governing accessory uses and
structures can be found in §§
152.130 through
152.140 of this chapter.
Table 6
AG District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations AG
Table 6
AG District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations               AG
Minimum lot area          5 acres
Minimum lot width/        330 ft.
frontage
Minimum lot frontage      330 ft.
Minimum building
setbacks:
   Street              50 ft.
   Side                30 ft.
   Rear                50 ft.
Maximum building coverage 10%
Maximum building height   35 ft.1
Note:
1.    Greater building heights may be approved in accordance with the special
exception procedures.
 
(Prior Code, § 10-5-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.072 PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The PD, Planned Development District is
established to accommodate development that would be difficult or impossible to
carry out under otherwise applicable UDO regulations. Different types of PDs
will promote different planning goals. In general, however, all PDs are
intended to result in development that is consistent with the city’s adopted
plans and that provides greater public benefits than could be achieved using
conventional UDO regulations. PDs are also generally intended to promote one or
more of the following:
      (1)   Variety in housing types and sizes to accommodate households of all
ages, sizes, incomes and lifestyle choices;
      (2)   Compact, mixed-use development patterns where residential,
commercial, employment, civic and open space areas are located in close
proximity to one another;
      (3)   A transportation network designed to accommodate safe and efficient
motorized and non-motorized travel;
      (4)   Direct, safe and convenient non-motorized travel routes within the
boundaries of the development site, as well as connections to abutting
properties;
      (5)   Buildings and other improvements that by their arrangement,
massing, design, character and site design elements establish a quality,
livable environment;
      (6)   Sustainable development practices;
      (7)   Incorporation of open space amenities and natural resource features
into the development design;
      (8)   Low-impact development (LID) and best management practices for
managing stormwater; and
      (9)   Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social,
economic and market conditions.
   (B)   Initiation of amendment. Applications to establish a PD District or
expand the boundaries of an existing PD District may be initiated only by the
owner of the subject property.
   (C)   Statement of intent. Each PD application must include a written
explanation describing how the proposed development meets the purpose and
intent described in division (A) of this section and the supplemental review
and approval criteria of division (D)(2) of this section.
   (D)   PD approval procedures.
      (1)   Overview of required approval process.
         (a)   A property owner request for rezoning to the PD Zoning District
requires review and approval of a zoning map amendment (see §
152.282 of this chapter), which is processed concurrently with a development
plan (see §
152.286 of this chapter).
         (b)   After approval of the zoning map amendment and development plan,
site plan review and approval is required in accordance with the procedures of
§
152.287 of this chapter.
         (c)   No building permit may be issued and no building or development
may occur in a PD Zoning District until a subdivision plat incorporating the
provisions of the approved development plan has been approved and filed of
record in the County Clerk’s office.
      (2)   Supplemental review and approval criteria. In making
recommendations and decisions on PD District zoning map amendments, review and
decision-making bodies must consider the zoning map amendment criteria of §
152.282(H) of this chapter and the following factors:
         (a)   Whether the proposed planned development is consistent with the
comprehensive plan and any other adopted plans for the subject area;
         (b)   Whether the development plan complies with the PD District
provisions of this section;
         (c)   Whether the development will result in public benefits that are
equal to or greater than those that would have resulted from development under
conventional zoning (non-PD) regulations; and
         (d)   Whether appropriate terms and conditions have been imposed on
the approval to protect the interests of surrounding property owners and
residents, existing and future residents of the PD and the general public.
      (3)   Subdivision plats.
         (a)   The subdivision plat must be filed with the Planning Commission
and processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations.
         (b)   In addition to the information and submittals required pursuant
to the subdivision regulations, a PD District subdivision plat must include all
covenants necessary to reasonably ensure continued compliance with the approved
development plan. In order that the public interest may be protected, the city
must be made beneficiary of the covenants pertaining to such matters as
location of uses, height of structure, setbacks, screening, and access. Such
covenants must provide that the city may enforce compliance of the covenants,
and further provide that amendment of the covenants requires Planning
Commission approval and the filing of record of a written amendment to
covenants, endorsed by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Issuance of building permits. Building permits may be issued only
after the required subdivision plat is approved and filed of record in the
County Clerk’s office. Any permits issued must be in accordance with the
approved plat incorporating the provisions of the approved development plan.
   (E)   Abandonment. Abandonment of an approved PD requires that the property
be rezoned to another zoning district in accordance with the zoning map
amendment procedures of §
152.282 of this chapter or that a new PD be approved following the procedures
of division (D) of this section.
   (F)   Use regulations and lot and building standards. The use regulations
and lot and building standards that apply within a PD Zoning District must be
established at the time of development plan approval by the City Council.
   (G)   Other development standards. Unless otherwise expressly provided in
the approved development plan, properties within the PD District are subject to
all other applicable provisions of this UDO and the subdivision regulations.
The PD District is expressly intended to accommodate the use of alternative
standards for streets and other public improvements based on the approved
development plans. The development plan must specify the deviations proposed
from otherwise applicable public improvement standards if deviations from
otherwise applicable standards are proposed.
(Prior Code, § 10-5-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
USES AND BUILDING TYPES
§ 152.085 USE REGULATIONS.
   Principal uses are allowed in R Districts in accordance with
Table 7 of this section.
   (A)   Use classification system. Uses are listed in the first column of
Table 7 of this section. This UDO classifies uses into categories and
subcategories, which are defined in this chapter. In some cases, specific use
types and building types are listed in addition to the use categories and
subcategories. Building types are also defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Uses identified with a “P” are permitted as-of-right
in the subject zoning district, subject to compliance with any supplemental
regulations identified in the final column of
Table 7 of this section and with all other applicable regulations of this UDO.
   (C)   Special exception uses. Uses identified with an “S” may be allowed if
reviewed and approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter. Special exception uses are subject to compliance with
any supplemental regulations identified in the final column of
Table 7 of this section and with all other applicable regulations of this UDO.
   (D)   Prohibited uses. Uses identified with a “—” are expressly prohibited.
Uses that are not listed in the table and that cannot be reasonably interpreted
(as stated in §
152.086(D) of this chapter) to fall within any defined use category are also
prohibited.
   (E)   Supplemental regulations. The “supplemental regulations” column of
Table 7 of this section identifies additional regulations that apply to some
uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, compliance with these regulations is
required regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires
special exception approval.
   (F)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses, such as home occupations, are not
regulated by
Table 7 of this section. Customary accessory uses are allowed in conjunction
with principal uses permitted by right or by special exception, subject to
compliance with all applicable accessory use regulations of §§
152.130 through
152.140 of this chapter.
Table 7
Use Regulations
P = Use permitted as of right            S = Special exception approval
required               — = Prohibited use
Use Zoning Districts                         Supplemental Regulations (Code
                                             Section)
    RS RD RT RM RMH CO CC CR CAR CG IL IH AG
Table 7
Use Regulations
P = Use permitted as of right            S = Special exception approval required               — =
Prohibited use
                                                                                          Supplemental
Use                                              Zoning Districts                         Regulations
                                                                                          (Code
                                                                                          Section)
                                                 RS RD RT RM RMH CO CC CR CAR CG IL IH AG
Residential:
Household living:
   Single household on a lot:
      Detached house                       P  P  P  P  P   ———— ———P
      Patio house                          S  P  P  P  S   ———— ————152.114
      Townhouse                            ——P  P  — ———— ————152.116
      Manufactured housing unit            ————P   ———— ————
      Manufactured housing subdivision     ————P   ———— ————152.111
      Mixed-use building                   ————— ———— P  ———
      Mobile home/mobile home park         ————S   ———— ————152.112
   2 households on single lot:
      Duplex                               —P  P  P  — ———— ————
      Mixed-use building                   ————— ———— P  ———
   3 or more households on single lot:
      Multi-unit house                     ———P  — ———— ————152.113
      Apartment/condo                      ———P  — ———— ————
      Mixed-use building                   ————— ———— P  ———
      Mobile home park                     ————S   ———— ————152.112
   Group living:
      Community group home                 S  S  S  P  S   ———— ———S  152.108
      Re-entry facility                    ———S  — ———— ————
      Halfway house or transitional living ———S  — ———— ————152.117
facility
      Shelter, emergency and protective    P  P  P  P  P   ———— ———P
      Other group living uses              ———S  — ———— ————
Public, Civic and Institutional:
Airport                                          ————— ———— —S  S  S
Cemetery                                         ————— ———— ———P
College or university                            ————— ———P   P  ——P
Detention and correctional facility              ————— ———— —S  P  —
Governmental service                             S  S  S  S  S   S  S  S  S   S  P  P  P
Hospital                                         ————P3  P  P  P  P   P  ——P
Library or cultural exhibit                      S2 S2 S2 S2 S2  P  P  P  P   P  ——P
Natural resource preservation                    P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P
Parks and recreation                             P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P
Postal services                                  ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P
Safety service                                   ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P
School                                           S2 S2 S2 S2 S2  S  S  S  S   S  S  S  P
Utilities and public service facility:
   Minor                                      P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P
   Major                                      S  S  S  S  S   S  S  S  S   S  S  P  S
Commercial:
Animal service:
   Boarding or shelter                        ————— ———P   —P  P  —
   Grooming                                   ————— ———P   P  ———
   Veterinary                                 ————— ———P   P  ———
Assembly and entertainment:
   Indoor:
      Small, secular (up to 250-person capa————— ——P  P   P  ———
      Small, non-secular (up to 250 capacitS3 S3 S3 S3 S3  S3 S3 P  P   P  S3 S3 S3
      Large secular (>250-person capacity) ————— ——S  S   S  ———
      Large, non-secular (>250 capacity)   ————— ——S  S   S  ———
   Outdoor, secular or non-secular            S2 S2 S2 S2 S2  —S2 —S   —S2 ——
Broadcast or recording studio                    ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  —
Commercial service:
   Building service                           ————— ——P  P   P  P  P  —
   Business support service                   ————— ———P   P  P  P  —
   Consumer maintenance/repair service        ————— —P  P  P   P  P  P  —
   Personal improvement service               ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  —
   Research service                           ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  —
Day care:
   Family child care home                     P  P  P  P  P   ———— ———P  152.134
   Other                                      S1 S1 S1 S1 S1  ——P  P   P  ——S
Eating and drinking places:
   Bar or tavern                              ————— ———P   P  ———
   Restaurant                                 ————— —P  P  P   P  ———
Financial services (except as below):            ————— ——P  P   P  ———
   Personal credit establishment              ————— ———P   ————
Funeral or mortuary service                      ————— ——P  P   P  ———
Lodging:
   Bed and breakfast                          S  S  S  S  S   ———— ————152.106
   Campgrounds and RV parks                   ————— ———P   ————
   Hotel/motel                                ————— ———P   P  ———
   Rural retreat                              ————— ———— ———S
Office:
   Business or professional office            ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  —
   Medical, dental or health practitioner offi————— P  P  P  P   P  ———
Parking, non-accessory                           ————— ———P   P  ———
Retail sales:
   Building supplies and equipment            ————— ———P   —P  P  —
   Consumer shopping goods                    ————— ——P  P   P  ———
   Convenience goods                          ————— —P  P  P   P  ———
Self-service storage facility                    ————— ———P   —P  P  —152.115
Studio, artist or instructional service          ————— P  P  P  P   P  P  P  —
Trade school                                     ————— S  S  S  S   S  P  P  —
Vehicle sales and service:
   Commercial vehicle repair/maintenance      ————— ———— —P  P  —
   Commercial vehicle sales and rentals       ————— ———P   —P  P  —
   Fueling station                            ————— ——P  P   —P  P  —
   Personal vehicle repair and maintenance    ————— ———P   —P  P  —
   Personal vehicle sales and rentals         ————— ——P  P   —P  P  —
   Vehicle body and paint finishing shop      ————— ———— —P  P  —
   Vehicle part and supply sales              ————— ———P   —P  P  —
Wholesale, Distribution and Storage:
Equipment and materials storage, outdoor         ————— ———— —P  P  —
Trucking and transportation terminal             ————— ———— —P  P  —
Warehouse                                        ————— ———— —P  P  —
Wholesale sales and distribution                 ————— ———— —P  P  —
Industrial:
Manufacturing and industry:
   Low-impact                                 ————— ——S  S   S  P  P  —152.109
   Moderate-impact                            ————— ———— —P  P  —152.109
   High-impact                                ————— ———— ——P  —152.109
Junk or salvage yard                             ————— ———— ——P  —152.110
Mining or mineral processing                     ————— ———— ——P  —152.109
Recycling:
Construction or demolition debris                ————— ———— ——P  —
Consumer material drop-off station               ————— ———— —P  P  —
Consumer material processing                     ————— ———— —S  P  —
Agricultural:
Animal husbandry                                 ————— ———— ———P
Community garden                                 P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P   —P  P  P  152.107
Farm, market- or community-supported             ————— ———— ———P
Horticulture nursery                             ————— ———P   ———P
Other:
Drive-in or drive-through facility (as a         ————— ———P   S  P  P  —
component of an allowed principal use)
Liquified petroleum gases tank/container         S  S  S  S  S   S  S  S  S   S  S  S  S  152.119
Off-premises outdoor advertising sign            ————— ———P   —P  P  —152.216(F)
Wireless communication facility:
   Freestanding tower                         S  S  S  S  S   S  S  S  S   S  S  S  S  152.118
   Building or tower-mounted antenna          P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P   P  P  P  P  152.118
Notes:
1. Requires 10,000 square feet minimum lot area and vehicular access on an arterial or collector
street.
2. Requires frontage on arterial street.
3. Requires frontage on collector or arterial street.
 
(Prior Code, § 10-6-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2019-1, passed 3-
19-2019; Ord. 2019-2, passed 3-19-2019; Ord. 2021-15, passed 2-2-2021; Ord.
2021-16, passed 3-2-2021; Ord. 2023-3, passed 5-2-2023)
§ 152.086 USE CATEGORIES GENERALLY.
   This section establishes and describes the use categorization system used to
classify principal uses in this UDO.
   (A)   Use categories. This UDO classifies principal land uses into eight
major groupings (described in §§
152.087 through
152.094 of this chapter). These major groupings are referred to as “use
categories”. The use categories are as follows.
      (1)   Residential. See §
152.087 of this chapter.
      (2)   Public, civic and institutional. See §
152.088 of this chapter.
      (3)   Commercial. See §
152.089 of this chapter.
      (4)   Wholesale, distribution and storage. See §
152.090 of this chapter.
      (5)   Industrial. See §
152.091 of this chapter.
      (6)   Recycling. See §
152.092 of this chapter.
      (7)   Agricultural. See §
152.093 of this chapter.
      (8)   Other. See §
152.094 of this chapter.
   (B)   Use subcategories. Each use category is further divided into more
specific “subcategories”. Use subcategories classify principal land uses and
activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics,
such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents,
and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions.
   (C)   Specific use types. Some use subcategories are further broken down to
identify specific types of uses that are regulated differently than the
subcategory as a whole.
   (D)   Determination of use categories and subcategories.
      (1)   The Community Development Director has the authority to classify
uses on the basis of the use category, subcategory and specific use type
descriptions of this chapter.
      (2)   When a use cannot be reasonably classified into a use category,
subcategory or specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple categories,
subcategories or specific use types, the Community Development Director is
authorized to determine the most similar and thus most appropriate use
category, subcategory or specific use type based on the actual or projected
characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use
category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions provided in this
chapter. In making such determinations, the Community Development Director must
consider:
         (a)   The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the
use;
         (b)   The types of equipment and processes to be used;
         (c)   The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or
employees;
         (d)   Parking demands associated with the use; and
         (e)   Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
      (3)   If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories,
subcategories or specific use types, the Community Development Director is
authorized to categorize each use in the category, subcategory or specific use
type that provides the most exact, narrowest and appropriate “fit”.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.087 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes uses that provide living accommodations for one or
more persons. The residential use subcategories are as follows.
   (A)   Household living. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a
household. When dwelling units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-
month or longer basis. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period
are not considered residential; they are considered a form of lodging.
Household living uses must occupy a residential building type that is permitted
in the subject zoning districts, as indicated in §
152.085,
Table 7 of this chapter. The residential building types are as follows.
      (1)   Detached house. A detached house is a principal residential
building, other than a manufactured housing unit or mobile home, that contains
only one dwelling unit and that is located on a single lot that is not occupied
by other principal residential buildings. Detached houses are not attached to
and do not abut other dwelling units. Detached houses include conventional
(“stick-built”) construction and construction involving modular or system-built
components as long as such construction complies with applicable Building
Codes.
   Figure 4: Detached House
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2351.jpg]
      (2)   Patio house. A patio house is a principal residential building
occupied by one dwelling unit and that is located on a single lot that is not
occupied by other principal residential buildings. Patio houses are not
attached to and do not abut other dwelling units. The building is shifted to
one side of the lot so that there is a more usable side yard on one side of the
house and very little or no private yard on the other side. Patio houses are
subject to the same lot and building regulations that apply to detached houses
except as modified by the supplemental patio house regulations of §
152.114 of this chapter.
   Figure 5: Patio House
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2353.jpg]
      (3)   Townhouse. A townhouse building is a principal residential building
that is occupied by multiple dwelling units, each located on its own lot with a
common or abutting wall along the dwelling units’ shared lot lines. Each
dwelling unit has its own external entrance.
   Figure 6: Townhouse
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2355.jpg]
      (4)   Duplex. A duplex is a principal residential building occupied by
two dwelling units, both of which are located on a single lot that is not
occupied by other principal residential buildings. The two dwelling units are
attached and may be located on separate floors or side-by-side.
   Figure 7: Duplex
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2357.jpg]
      (5)   Multi-unit house. A multi-unit house is a principal residential
building that contains three or four dwelling units that share common walls
and/or common floors/ceilings. The building is located on a single lot that is
not occupied by other principal residential buildings. Multi-unit houses have
the appearance of large detached houses and have only one entrance visible from
the street.
   Figure 8: Multi-Unit House
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2359.jpg]
      (6)   Apartment/condo. An apartment/condo building is a principal
residential building on a single lot that is occupied by three or more dwelling
units (other than a multi-unit house) that share common walls and/or common
floors/ceilings.
   Figure 9: Apartment/Condo
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2361.jpg]
      (7)   Manufactured housing unit. A manufactured housing unit is a
principal residential building that complies with the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et
seq.). Manufactured housing units are subject to the same regulations that
apply to detached houses, except as modified by supplemental regulations of §
152.111 of this chapter.
      (8)   Manufactured housing subdivision. A manufactured housing
subdivision is a residential subdivision primarily comprising home sites for
manufactured housing units on individual lots. Manufactured housing
subdivisions are subject to the supplemental regulations of §
152.111 of this chapter.
      (9)   Mixed-use building. A mixed-use building is a principal building
occupied by one or more nonresidential uses on the ground floor and one or more
residential dwelling units on upper floors.
   Figure 10: Mixed-Use Building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2363.jpg]
      (10)   Mobile home. A mobile home is a principal residential building
that is built on a permanent chassis and that complies with Standard for Mobile
Homes, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 501, American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) 119.1, in effect at the time that the unit was
manufactured. Mobile homes are allowed only within mobile home parks, which are
subject to the regulations of §
152.112 of this chapter.
      (11)   Mobile home park. A mobile home park is a lot or multiple lots
upon which mobile homes or manufactured housing units are available for lease
or upon which spaces for mobile homes or manufactured housing units are
available for lease.
   (B)   Group living. Residential occupancy of a building or any portion of a
building by a group other than a household. Group living uses typically provide
communal kitchen/dining facilities. Examples of group living use types include
convents and monasteries, rooming/boarding houses, nursing homes, assisted
living facilities, community group homes, emergency and protective shelters,
re-entry facilities, and residential treatment centers.
      (1)   Community group home. A community-based group living use for
elderly persons or persons with disabilities that allows independent living and
that provides communal room and board, personal care, and habilitation services
in a household-like environment. Community group homes for eight or fewer
persons are considered household living uses and are permitted wherever
household living uses are allowed.
      (2)   Emergency and protective shelter. A residential use that provides
room and board for a continuous period of no more than 30 consecutive days for
adults or children who have been abused, displaced or are transient. Such uses
provide protection services and typically provide counseling and pre-placement
screening services as well.
      (3)   Halfway house. An approved treatment facility, as defined under the
Oklahoma Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services Act, that offers or provides temporary
residential accommodations, meals, supervision at all times residents are in
the facility or on facility premises, and services, including counseling, short
term supportive care, case management, mental health services or treatment
services.
      (4)   Re-entry facility.
         (a)   A facility operated by the city, the state, the federal
government or a private party under contract with the city, the state or the
federal government and used for rehabilitation and overnight accommodation of
individuals, including staff, who are:
            1.   Under the jurisdiction of a court, but not under confinement;
or
            2.   Individuals recently released from the jurisdiction of a
court.
         (b)   Re-entry facilities are operated for the purpose of providing
treatment or rehabilitation intended to assist such individuals with their re-
entry into the community.
      (5)   Transitional living facility. An approved treatment facility, as
defined under the Oklahoma Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services Act, that offers or
provides temporary residential accommodations, meals, supervision at all times
residents are in the facility or on facility premises, and services, including
counseling, short term supportive care, case management, mental health services
or treatment services.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.088 PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes public, quasi-public and private uses that provide
unique services that are of benefit to the public at-large. The public, civic
and institutional subcategories are as follows:
   (A)   Airport or ground transportation terminal. Facilities from which FAA-
certified aircraft take off, land and operate, including customary accessory
uses and structures. Also includes passenger ticketing, loading and unloading
facilities for buses (local or intercity) and trains;
   (B)   Cemetery. Land or structures used for burial or permanent storage of
the dead or their cremated remains. Typical uses include cemeteries and
mausoleums. Also includes pet cemeteries;
   (C)   College or university. Institutions of higher learning that offer
courses of general or specialized study and are authorized to grant academic
degrees. The college or university use subcategory includes classrooms and
instructional spaces, as well as on-campus residence halls, fraternity and
sorority houses, administrative buildings, auditoriums and other on-campus uses
and facilities that provide customary accessory and support functions for
college or university uses;
   (D)   Detention and correctional facility. An institution operated by the
city, the state, the federal government or a private party under contract with
the city, the state or the federal government for the confinement and
punishment and treatment or rehabilitation of offenders under the jurisdiction
of a court;
   (E)   Governmental service. Local, state or federal government services or
functions that are not otherwise classified;
   (F)   Hospital. Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and
offering inpatient (overnight) care;
   (G)   Library or cultural exhibit. Museum-like preservation and exhibition
of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works
of art or library collections of books, manuscripts and similar materials for
study and reading. Includes aquariums and planetariums;
   (H)   Natural resource preservation. Undeveloped land left in a natural
state for specific use as visual open space or environmental purposes. Typical
uses include wildlife or nature preserves, arboretums, flood management
projects and reservoirs;
   (I)   Parks and recreation. Recreational, social or multi-purpose uses
associated with public parks and open spaces, including playgrounds,
playfields, play courts, and other facilities typically associated with public
parks and open space areas. Also includes public and private golf courses and
tennis clubs;
   (J)   Postal service. Facilities operated by the U.S. Postal Service,
including post offices and mail sorting and distribution facilities;
   (K)   Religious assembly. See §
152.089(B)(1), non-secular assembly and entertainment, of this chapter;
   (L)   Safety service. Establishments that provide fire, police or life
protection, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary
vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations, police stations, ambulance
services and storm or civil defense shelters;
   (M)   School. Public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle
school or high school level that provide basic, compulsory education;
   (N)   Utilities and public service facility, minor. Infrastructure services
that need to be located in or close to the area where the service is provided.
Minor utilities and public service facilities generally do not have regular
employees at the site and typically have few if any impacts on surrounding
areas. Typical uses include water and sewer pump stations; gas regulating
stations; underground electric distribution substations; electric transformers;
water conveyance systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance systems;
telephone switching equipment and emergency communication warning/broadcast
facilities:
      (1)   The production, collection or distribution of renewable energy,
water, organic waste, or other similar resources at a neighborhood, district or
campus scale are classified as minor utilities and public service facilities.
This includes distributed energy facilities that produce or distribute energy
from renewable sources, neighborhood composting areas and neighborhood
stormwater facilities;
      (2)   District-, neighborhood- or campus-scale systems that produce or
distribute energy from the biological breakdown of organic matter produced
within the subject neighborhood or campus are also considered minor utilities
and public service facilities; and
      (3)   Energy production systems that generate energy from the byproducts
of the principal use are considered accessory uses, including net metered
installations and installations that generate power to sell back to the power
grid at a reasonable rate established by the utility provider.
   (O)   Utilities and public service facility, major. Infrastructure services
that typically have substantial visual or operational impacts on nearby areas.
Typical uses include but are not limited to water and wastewater treatment
facilities, high-voltage electric substations, utility-scale power generation
facilities (including wind, solar and other renewable and nonrenewable energy
sources), sanitary landfills and utility-scale water storage facilities, such
as water towers and reservoirs.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2019-3, passed 3-
19-2019; Ord. 2019-4, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 152.089 COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORY.
   The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or
involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general public.
The commercial use subcategories are as follows:
   (A)   Animal service. Uses that provide goods and services for care of
animals, including the following specific use types:
      (1)   Grooming. Grooming of dogs, cats and similar small animals,
including dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops;
      (2)   Boarding or shelter. Animal shelters, care services and kennel
services for dogs, cats and small animals, including boarding kennels, pet
resorts/hotels, pet adoption centers, dog training centers, animal rescue
shelters and zoos and animal sanctuaries; and
      (3)   Veterinary. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics.
   (B)   Assembly and entertainment. Uses that provide gathering places for
secular or non-secular assembly or entertainment events or for participants in
recreation or entertainment activities. Assembly and entertainment uses may
provide incidental food or beverage service:
      (1)   Non-secular assembly and entertainment. Non-secular assembly and
entertainment uses are those that are primarily centered on religious or
spiritual matters, such as customarily occur in churches, synagogues, temples,
mosques and other facilities used for religious worship. When outdoor seating
and assembly areas exceed 50% of the indoor floor area of the religious
assembly the entire use is regulated as an outdoor use; and
      (2)   Secular assembly and entertainment. Secular assembly and
entertainment uses are those that are not primarily centered on religious or
spiritual matters. Typical uses include health clubs, gymnasiums, riding
stables and academies, banquet halls, entertainment centers, event centers,
billiard centers, bowling centers, fraternal organizations, private (member-
based) clubs, community centers, cinemas, go-cart tracks, laser tag, paintball,
miniature golf courses, stadiums, arenas, video arcades, race tracks,
fairgrounds, rodeo grounds, water parks, amusement parks, food truck courts,
and live theaters. When outdoor seating, assembly and entertainment areas
exceed 50% of the indoor floor area of the subject principal use the entire use
is regulated as an outdoor use.
   (C)   Broadcast or recording studio. Uses that provide for audio or video
production, recording or broadcasting;
   (D)   Commercial service. Uses that provide for consumer or business
services and for the repair and maintenance of a wide variety of products.
Examples of commercial service use types include the following:
      (1)   Building service. Uses that provide maintenance and repair services
for all structural and mechanical elements of structures, as well as the
exterior spaces of premises. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape
maintenance, carpet cleaning, chimney sweeps, extermination, plumbing,
electrical, HVAC, roofing, window cleaning and similar services;
      (2)   Business support service. Uses that provide personnel services,
printing, copying, package (delivery) drop-off, photographic services or
communication services to businesses or consumers. Typical uses include
employment agencies, day labor hiring services, armored car services, copy and
print shops, delivery/courier service drop-off location for consumers,
caterers, telephone answering services and photo developing labs;
      (3)   Consumer maintenance and repair service. Uses that provide
maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods on a site other
than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring goods to the site of the
repair/maintenance business). Typical uses include laundry and dry cleaning
pick-up shops, tailors, taxidermists, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing
shops, gunsmiths, locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics repair shops and
similar establishments. Businesses that offer repair and maintenance service
for large equipment or technicians who visit customers’ homes or places of
business are classified as a “building service”;
      (4)   Personal improvement service. Uses that provide personal grooming,
cosmetic or health and well-being-related services. Typical uses include
barbers, hair and nail salons, tanning salons, day spas, body art services and
fortune telling services; and
      (5)   Research service. Uses engaged in scientific research and testing
services leading to the development of new products and processes. Such uses
resemble office buildings or campuses and do not involve the mass production,
distribution or sale of products. Research services do not produce odors, dust,
noise, vibration or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the
property lines of the subject property.
   (E)   Day care. Uses providing care and supervision for children or adults
for a fee on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24
hours per day. Examples of day care uses include adult day care centers, as
defined in the Oklahoma Adult Day Care Act; child care facilities, family child
care homes and large family child care homes, as defined in the Oklahoma Child
Care Facilities Licensing Act and O.A.C. 340:110-3-81; provided that uses
providing care and supervision for children or adults for 24 hours per day or
longer are classified as group living uses. Day camps are also classified as
day care uses:
      (1)   Family child care home. A day care use that is accessory to a
household living use and that provides care and supervision for seven or fewer
children for less than 24 hours per day. See §
152.134 of this chapter; and
      (2)   Day camps. As defined in the Oklahoma Child Care Facilities
Licensing Act, programs that serve only school-age children and operate during
regular school vacations for no more than 12 hours per day.
   (F)   Eating and drinking places.
      (1)   Bar or tavern. Uses that cater primarily to adults, 21 years of age
and older and that sell and serve intoxicating beverages and/or beer as their
principal business. Typical bar uses include bars, taverns, brewpubs,
nightclubs, pool halls, dance halls and similar establishments. See also the
definition of “accessory use bar” in §
152.388 of this chapter; and
      (2)   Restaurant. An establishment that serves food or beverages for on-
or off-premises consumption as its principal business. The preparation and
processing of food or beverages to be served or sold on-site directly to
consumers is permitted as an accessory use to a restaurant, including on-site
coffee roasting. Typical examples of restaurant uses include principal use
restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, ice cream/yogurt shops, donut shops and coffee
shops. A restaurant may include an accessory use bar if the restaurant employs
at least one full-time cook, has a menu, a fully equipped kitchen for cooking
and preparation of meals and in which dining, kitchen and non-service areas
occupy at least 75% of the floor area of the business. Any bar area that does
not meet the definition of an accessory use bar (§
152.388 of this chapter) is classified and regulated as a bar or tavern.
   (G)   Financial service. Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing
and safe-keeping of money. Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar
facilities that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not
classified as financial service uses if they meet the criteria for
classification as an accessory use (see §
152.130(B) of this chapter). Typical examples of financial service use types
are banks, credit unions, and the following types of personal credit
establishments:
      (1)   Check cashing. An establishment that:
         (a)   Is not a bank or financial lending institution subject to
federal or state regulation;
         (b)   Charges a fee to cash a check or have a check processed; and
         (c)   Provides such services to the public.
      (2)   Pawnshop. An establishment that is engaged to any extent in any of
the following business or activities:
         (a)   The lending of money on the deposit or pledge of personal
property, other than choses in action, securities or written evidence of
indebtedness;
         (b)   The purchase of personal property either from an individual,
another pawn business or any other business with an expressed or implied
agreement or understanding to offer the property for sale to the public, and if
that sale is unsuccessful, then to sell it back to the previous owner at a
subsequent time at a stipulated price or negotiated price;
         (c)   The purchase of precious metals with the intent to melt down,
provided that such activity is not clearly incidental to the principal use of
the establishment; or
         (d)   The lending of money upon personal property, goods, wares, or
merchandise pledged, stored or deposited as collateral security.
      (3)   Payday lender. An establishment that is substantially in the
business of negotiating, arranging, aiding, or assisting a consumer in
procuring payday loans; and
      (4)   Bail bond. A use that provides surety and pledged money or property
as bail for the appearance of persons accused in court.
   (H)   Funeral and mortuary service. Uses that provide services related to
the death of a human or domestic, household pet, including funeral homes and
mortuaries. Funeral and mortuary services may include crematoriums as an
accessory use. Other crematoriums and animal rendering uses are classified as
moderate-impact manufacturing and industry;
   (I)   Lodging. Uses that provide temporary lodging for less than 30 days
where rents are charged by the day or by the week. Lodging uses sometimes
provide food or entertainment, primarily to registered guests. Examples of
specific lodging use types include:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inn. A detached house in which the owner/operator
offers overnight accommodations and meal service to overnight guests for
compensation;
      (2)   Hotel/motel. An establishment, other than a bed and breakfast inn
or rural retreat, in which short-term lodging is offered for compensation. A
hotel/motel may include an accessory use bar;
      (3)   Recreational vehicle park/campground. An establishment that
provides temporary overnight accommodations for camping in recreational
vehicles or tents; and
      (4)   Rural retreat. An establishment that is part of a working farm or
ranch that provides temporary overnight accommodations for individuals or
groups engaged in supervised training or personal improvement activities.
Examples include corporate retreat facilities, educational retreat facilities
and dude ranches or working farm learning centers.
   (J)   Office. Uses in an enclosed building, customarily performed in an
office, that focus on providing executive, management, administrative,
professional or medical services. Examples of specific use types include:
      (1)   Business and professional office. Office uses for companies and
non-governmental organizations. Examples include corporate office, law offices,
architectural firms, insurance companies and other executive, management or
administrative offices for businesses and corporations. Also included are union
halls that offer only office and meeting space and insurance claims adjusters/
estimators with no more than one vehicle inspection bay and no on-site repair
facilities; and
      (2)   Medical, dental and health practitioner office. Office uses related
to diagnosis and treatment of human patients’ illnesses, injuries and physical
maladies that can be performed in an office setting with no overnight care.
Typical uses include offices of physicians, dentists, psychiatrists,
psychologists, chiropractors and practitioners of massage therapy. Surgical,
rehabilitation and other medical centers that do not involve overnight patient
stays are included in this use subcategory, as are medical and dental
laboratories, unless otherwise expressly indicated. Ancillary sales of
medications and medical products are allowed in association with a medical,
dental or health practitioner office.
   (K)   Parking, non-accessory. Parking that is not provided to comply with
minimum off-street parking requirements or that is not provided exclusively to
serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to
the public at-large. A parking facility that provides both accessory and non-
accessory parking will be classified as non-accessory parking if it leases 25%
or more of its spaces to non-occupants of or persons other than visitors to a
particular use;
   (L)   Retail sales. Uses involving the sale, lease or rental of new or used
goods to the ultimate consumer. Examples of specific retail use types include:
      (1)   Convenience goods.
         (a)   Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise provide:
            1.   Sundry goods;
            2.   Products for personal grooming and for the day-to-day
maintenance of personal health; or
            3.   Food or beverages for off-premises consumption, including
grocery stores, retail bakeries and similar uses that provide incidental and
accessory food and beverage service as part of their primary retail sales
business.
         (b)   Typical uses include convenience stores, drug stores, grocery
and specialty food stores, wine or liquor stores, gift shops, newsstands,
florists and tobacco stores.
      (2)   Consumer shopping goods. Retail sales uses that sell or otherwise
provide wearing apparel, fashion accessories, furniture, household appliances
and similar consumer goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for
use, entertainment, comfort or aesthetics. Typical uses include clothing
stores, department stores, appliance stores, TV and electronics stores, bike
shops, book stores, costume rental stores, stationery stores, art galleries,
hobby shops, furniture stores, pet stores and pet supply stores, shoe stores,
antique shops, secondhand stores, record stores, toy stores, sporting goods
stores, variety stores, video stores, musical instrument stores, medical
supplies, office supplies and office furnishing stores and wig shops; and
      (3)   Building supplies and equipment. Retail sales uses that sell or
otherwise provide goods to repair, maintain or visually enhance a structure or
premises. Typical uses include hardware stores, home improvement stores, paint
and wallpaper supply stores and garden supply stores.
   (M)   Self-service storage facility. An enclosed use that provides separate,
small-scale, self-service storage facilities leased or rented to individuals or
small businesses. Facilities are designed and used to accommodate only interior
access to storage lockers or drive-up access only from regular size passenger
vehicles and two-axle noncommercial vehicles;
   (N)   Studio, artist or instructional service. Uses in an enclosed building
that focus on providing individual or small group instruction or training in
fine arts, music, dance, drama, fitness, language or similar activities. Also
includes dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts
instruction, tutoring, artist studios and photography studios;
   (O)   Trade school. Uses in an enclosed building that focus on teaching the
skills needed to perform a particular job. Examples include schools of
cosmetology, modeling academies, computer training facilities, vocational
schools, administrative business training facilities and similar uses. Truck
driving schools are classified as “trucking and transportation terminals”
(wholesale, distribution and storage use category); and
   (P)   Vehicle sales and service. Uses that provide for the sale, rental,
maintenance or repair of new or used vehicles and vehicular equipment. The
vehicle sales and service subcategory includes the following specific use
types:
      (1)   Commercial vehicle repair and maintenance. Uses, excluding vehicle
paint finishing shops, that repair, install or maintain the mechanical
components or the bodies of large trucks, mass transit vehicles, large
construction or agricultural equipment, aircraft or similar large vehicles and
vehicular equipment. Includes truck stops and fleet vehicle fueling facilities,
which may dispense conventional vehicle fuels and/or alternative vehicle fuels;
      (2)   Commercial vehicle sales and rentals. Uses that provide for the
sale or rental of large trucks, moving equipment (e.g., U-Haul and Ryder),
construction or agricultural equipment, aircraft, or similar large vehicles and
vehicular equipment;
      (3)   Fueling station (for personal, consumer vehicles). Uses engaged in
retail sales of vehicle fuels for personal vehicles, other than fleet fueling
facilities and truck stops. (Note: Fleet vehicle fueling facilities and truck
stops are part of the “commercial vehicle repair and maintenance” specific use
type.) Fueling stations may dispense conventional vehicle fuels and/or
alternative vehicle fuels;
      (4)   Personal vehicle repair and maintenance. Uses that repair, install
or maintain the mechanical components of automobiles, small trucks or vans,
motorcycles, motor homes or recreational vehicles including recreational boats
or that wash, clean or otherwise protect the exterior or interior surfaces of
these vehicles;
      (5)   Personal vehicle sales and rentals. Uses that provide for the sale
or rental of new or used autos, small trucks or vans, trailers, motorcycles,
motor homes or recreational vehicles including recreational watercraft. Typical
examples include automobile dealers, auto malls, car rental agencies. Car-share
vehicles that are parked or stored when not being used by members of a car-
share program are not regulated as personal vehicle sales and rental uses, but
are instead considered accessory parking;
      (6)   Vehicle equipment and supplies sales and rentals. Uses related to
the sale, lease or rental of new or used parts, tools or supplies for the
purpose of repairing or maintaining motor vehicles; and
      (7)   Vehicle body and paint finishing shop. Uses that primarily conduct
motor vehicle body work and repairs or that apply paint to the exterior or
interior surfaces of motor vehicles by spraying, dipping, flow-coating or other
similar means.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2019-5, passed 3-
19-2019; Ord. 2019-6, passed 3-19-2019)
§ 152.090 WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes uses that provide and distribute goods in large
quantities, principally to retail sales, commercial services or industrial
establishments. Long-term and short-term storage of supplies, equipment,
commercial goods and personal items is included. The wholesale, distribution
and storage subcategories are as follows:
   (A)   Equipment and materials storage, outdoor. Uses related to outdoor
storage of equipment, products or materials, whether or not stored in
containers;
   (B)   Trucking and transportation terminals. Uses engaged in the dispatching
and long-term or short-term storage of trucks, buses and other vehicles,
including parcel service delivery vehicles, taxis and limousines. Minor repair
and maintenance of vehicles stored on the premises is also included. Includes
uses engaged in the moving of household or office furniture, appliances and
equipment from one location to another, including the temporary on-site storage
of those items;
   (C)   Warehouse. Uses conducted within a completely enclosed building that
are engaged in long-term and short-term storage of goods and that do not meet
the definition of a “self-service storage facility” or a “trucking and
transportation terminal”; and
   (D)   Wholesale sales and distribution. Uses engaged in the wholesale sales,
bulk storage and distribution of goods. Such uses may also include incidental
retail sales and wholesale showrooms. Expressly includes the following uses:
bottled gas and fuel oil sales, flea markets, ice distribution centers,
monument sales, portable storage building sales, vending machine sales,
auctioneers, and frozen food lockers.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.091 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes uses that produce goods from extracted and raw
materials or from recyclable or previously prepared materials, including the
design, storage and handling of these products and the materials from which
they are produced. The industrial subcategories are:
   (A)   Low-impact manufacturing and industry. Manufacturing and industrial
uses that do not, as part of their normal operations, generate noticeable off-
site impacts in terms of noise, smoke, particulate matter, odors or vibration.
Typical examples of low-impact manufacturing and industrial uses include:
commercial laundries and linen supply services, apparel manufacturing, bakery
products manufacturing, bottling plants, ice manufacturing, mattress
manufacturing and assembly, microbreweries, microdistilleries, coffee roasting
with a maximum roasting capacity of 45 kilograms per batch, musical instrument
and parts manufacturing, newspaper printing and binderies:
      (1)   Microbrewery. An establishment in which beer or malt beverages are
made on the premises and then sold or distributed, and which produces less than
15,000 barrels (465,000 gallons) of beer and malt beverages per calendar year.
Where allowed by law, microbreweries may include tasting rooms and direct sales
to consumers in addition to other methods of distribution; and
      (2)   Micro distillery. A distillery producing distilled spirits in total
quantity of no more than 40,000 proof gallons per calendar year. Where allowed
by law, micro distilleries may include tasting rooms and direct sales to
consumers in addition to other methods of distribution.
   (B)   Moderate-impact manufacturing and industry.
      (1)   Generally. Manufacturing and industrial uses that, as part of their
normal operations, generate noticeable off-site impacts in terms of noise,
smoke, particulate matter, odors or vibration. Typical examples of moderate-
impact manufacturing and industrial uses include: large breweries, distilleries
and alcohol manufacturing (other than micro distilleries), coffee roasting with
a roasting capacity of more than 45 kilograms per batch, dairy products
manufacturing, foundries, chrome plating, crematoriums and animal rendering
plants, electroplating, fiberglass manufacturing, flour mills and paper
products manufacturing; and
      (2)   Large brewery. An establishment where beer or malt beverages are
made on the premises at an annual production rate of over 15,000 barrels
(465,000 gallons). Large breweries may include tasting rooms.
   (C)   High-impact manufacturing and industry. Manufacturing and industrial
uses that regularly use hazardous chemicals or procedures or that produce
hazardous byproducts or explosive hazards. Typical examples of high-impact
manufacturing and industrial uses include: the manufacture of acetylene,
cement, lime, gypsum or plaster-of-paris, chlorine, corrosive acid or
fertilizer, insecticides, disinfectants, poisons, explosives, paint, lacquer,
varnish, petroleum products, coal products, plastic and synthetic resins and
radioactive materials. This subcategory also includes petrochemical tank farms,
gasification plants, smelting, animal slaughtering, oil refining, asphalt and
concrete (batch) plants and tanneries;
   (D)   Junk or salvage yard. A building or open area where waste, scrap, used
or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled, crushed, processed, or handled for reclamation, disposal or other
similar purposes, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles; and
   (E)   Mining or mineral processing. The extraction or quarrying of coal,
ores, stone, minerals, top soil or aggregate resources from the ground.
Examples include quarrying or dredging for sand, gravel or other aggregate
materials; mining and top soil extraction. Also includes crushing, washing and
grading coal, ore, stone, sand, gravel, minerals, top soil or aggregate
resources and manufacture of portland cement.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.092 RECYCLING USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes uses that collect, store or process recyclable
material for the purpose of marketing or reusing the material in the
manufacturing of new, reused or reconstituted products. The recycling use
subcategories are as follows:
   (A)   Construction or demolition debris. Establishments that receive and
process general construction or demolition debris for recycling;
   (B)   Consumer material drop-off station.
      (1)   An establishment that:
         (a)   Accepts consumer recyclable commodities directly from the
consuming party;
         (b)   Is staffed by personnel during times when recyclables are
accepted from consumers; and
         (c)   Stores materials temporarily before transferring them to
recyclable material processing facilities.
      (2)   Establishments that process recyclable material are classified as
“consumer material processing” establishments. (Note: dumpsters and recyclable
material bins are regulated as accessory uses.)
   (C)   Consumer material processing. Establishments that receive and process
consumer recyclable commodities for subsequent use in the secondary market.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.093 AGRICULTURAL USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes uses such as gardens, farms and orchards that involve
the raising and harvesting of food and non-food crops and the raising of farm
animals. The agricultural subcategories are:
   (A)   Animal husbandry. Uses that involve the feeding, housing and care of
farm animals for private purposes. Does not include commercial feeding of
swine, poultry or other animals, stockyards or commercial feedlots;
   (B)   Community garden. An area less than one acre in area that is managed
and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops or non-
food crops (e.g., flowers). A community garden area may be divided into
separate garden plots or orchard areas for cultivation by one or more
individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. Community
gardens may be principal or accessory uses;
   (C)   Farm, market or community-supported. An area managed and maintained by
an individual, group or business entity to grow and harvest food crops or non-
food crops (e.g., flowers) for sale or distribution. Farms may be principal or
accessory uses and may be located on a roof or within a building; and
   (D)   Horticulture nursery. A use involving propagation and growth of trees
or plants in containers or in the ground for wholesale or retail sales and
distribution. Does not include on-site retail sales unless such sales are
otherwise allowed in the subject zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.094 OTHER USE CATEGORY.
   This category includes uses that do not fit the other use categories:
   (A)   Drive-in or drive-through facility. Any use with drive-through windows
or drive-through lanes or that otherwise offers service to the occupants of
motor vehicles. Typical uses include drive-through restaurants, drive-through
pharmacies, drive-in restaurants and drive-in cinemas. Automatic teller machine
kiosks and similar drop-off or pick-up facilities that do not have on-site
employees or amplified sound are not classified as drive-in or drive-through
facilities if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use
(see §
152.130(B) of this chapter);
   (B)   Off-premises outdoor advertising sign. A sign that directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or activity that is conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the lot where the subject sign is located; and
   (C)   Wireless communication facility. Towers, antennas, equipment,
equipment buildings and other facilities used in the provision of wireless
communication services. The following are wireless communication facility
specific use types:
      (1)   Freestanding towers. A structure intended to support equipment that
is used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals, including
monopoles and guyed and lattice construction steel structures; and
      (2)   Building or tower-mounted antennas. The physical device that is
attached to a freestanding tower, building or other structure, through which
electromagnetic, wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission are transmitted or received.
(Prior Code, § 10-6-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
SUPPLEMENTAL USE AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 152.105 GENERAL.
   This subchapter includes supplemental regulations that apply to some uses
and building types. These regulations supplement the applicable zoning district
regulations. The applicability of these supplemental use regulations is
indicated in the individual sections of this chapter and in the use regulations
of the respective zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.106 BED AND BREAKFAST INNS.
   The supplemental use regulations of this section apply to all bed and
breakfast inns.
   (A)   Bed and breakfast inns are limited to a maximum of 12 guest rooms
unless a lower limit is established by the Board of Adjustment as a condition
of an approved special exception.
   (B)   The maximum length of stay for any guest is limited to 30 consecutive
days.
   (C)   The owner/operator must maintain a register of bed and breakfast
guests and on-site events for each calendar year and make the register
available to city code enforcement upon request.
   (D)   Cooking facilities are prohibited in guest rooms.
   (E)   Signs are allowed in accordance with the sign regulations of the
subject zoning district unless the Board of Adjustment establishes stricter
conditions at the time of special exception approval.
   (F)   Public restaurants are prohibited. Meals may be served only to
overnight guests and for on-site events expressly authorized by the Board of
Adjustment at the time of special exception approval. The Board of Adjustment
may authorize bed and breakfast inns to be rented for events, such as weddings,
receptions, anniversaries, private dinner parties and business seminars, in
accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter. As part of approval of the special exception, the
Board of Adjustment is authorized to establish the maximum number of on-site
events per year and the maximum number of guests per any single event.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.107 COMMUNITY GARDEN.
   The supplemental use regulations of this section apply to all community
garden uses.
   (A)   Unless permitted by the underlying zoning district or approved as a
special exception, on-site sale of community garden products is prohibited.
   (B)   Lawn and garden equipment of the type customarily used by consumers
for household lawn and garden care is the only type of motorized equipment
allowed. The use of motorized equipment is restricted to hours beginning at 8:
00 a.m. and ending at 8:00 p.m.
   (C)   The site must be designed and maintained to prevent any chemical
pesticide, fertilizer or other garden waste from draining onto adjacent
properties.
   (D)   An on-site trash storage container must be provided and located as
close as practicable to the rear lot line. Compost bins or piles must also be
located as close as practicable to the rear lot line. Trash must be removed
from the site at least once a week.
   (E)   Only individuals and organizations authorized by the property owner
may participate in the community garden.
   (F)   A sign must be posted on the property identifying the name and phone
number of the property owner or the owner’s agent name. The sign must be at
least four and no more than eight square feet in area and be posted so that it
is legible from the public right-of-way.
   (G)   The owner of any lot used for a community garden must give each
abutting property owner and occupant written notice of the intent to establish
a community garden and the applicable use regulations of this UDO at least 30
days before the start of the community garden.
   (H)   Measures must be taken to prevent cultivated areas from encroaching
onto adjacent properties.
   (I)   The property must be maintained free of tall weeds and debris. Dead
garden plants must be regularly removed and, in any instance, no later than
October 31 of each year.
   (J)   Within a residential zoning district, operating hours for community
garden activities are restricted to between 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily.
   (K)   Any community garden use regulation of this section may be modified by
special exception approval.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.108 COMMUNITY GROUP HOMES.
   The supplemental use regulations of this section apply to all community
group homes.
   (A)   Community group homes must have all licenses required by the state. A
special exception granted for a community group home use will immediately
become void upon final revocation of any required state license.
   (B)   To avoid over-concentration, community group homes in RS or RD Zoning
Districts may not be located within 1,300 feet of any other community group
home. This separation requirement is established, not on the basis of any
disability status, but on the basis of the non-family status of the groups. The
required separation distance must be measured in a straight line from the
nearest lot lines of the lots occupied by the community group home uses.
   Figure 11: Required Separation of Community Group Homes
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2365.jpg]
   (C)   In order to allow for special accommodations for inhabitants of
community group homes, the Board of Adjustment is authorized, by special
exception, to reduce or eliminate the separation distance requirement upon a
finding that the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act, as amended, requires it,
or that the grant of the special exception will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or detrimental to the public welfare and will be in harmony with
the spirit and intent of this UDO. In consideration of granting this special
exception, the Board of Adjustment must specifically consider the following
factors:
      (1)   Traffic and parking congestion given the capacity of nearby
streets;
      (2)   The likelihood that any other applicable group home use will impact
traffic and parking congestion;
      (3)   Traffic hazards;
      (4)   Availability of off-street parking;
      (5)   Availability of public transit and the likelihood of its use;
      (6)   Feasibility of traffic mitigation measures; and
      (7)   Impacts on public utilities, including water and sanitary sewer
capacities.
   (D)   When a community group home is located on a lot abutting an RS-zoned
lot, a screening wall or fence must be provided along the common lot line in
accordance with the F1 screening fence or wall standards of §
152.194 of this chapter.
   Figure 12: Screening of Community Group Home Abutting RS-Zoned Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2367.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 10-7-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.109 INDUSTRIAL USES.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any industrial use, other than a junk or salvage yard,
is located on a lot abutting an R-zoned lot, a screening wall or fence must be
provided along the common lot line in accordance with the F1 screening fence or
wall standards of §
152.194 of this chapter.
      (2)   Junk and salvage yards are subject to the regulations of §
152.110 of this chapter.
   (B)   Industrial uses located within 300 feet of an abutting R-zoned lot
must be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for storage,
loading and off-loading areas.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.110 JUNK OR SALVAGE YARDS.
   The supplemental use regulations of this section apply to all junk or
salvage yards.
   (A)   Junk or salvage yards must be screened from view of abutting streets
and all AG, R, C and IL Zoning Districts by the erection and maintenance of a
screening wall or fence that is:
      (1)   At least eight feet in height;
      (2)   Made of wood, metal or masonry construction;
      (3)   Designed and arranged to provide opaque visual screening;
      (4)   Uniform in height, except in response to significant changes in
topography;
      (5)   Constructed with all braces and supports on the interior of the
fence or wall; and
      (6)   Erected before occupancy of the building or initiation of the junk
or salvage yard use.
   (B)   Required screening walls and fences must be maintained by the owner of
the lot containing the use requiring the screening.
   (C)   The piling of junk or salvage materials may not exceed the height of
the required screening wall or fence within 150 feet of the boundary required
to be screened, except that storage racks designed for the stacking of
automotive front-ends, hoods, doors, quarter panels and similar parts that
exceed the height of the screening wall or fence, must be set back at least 25
feet from abutting R-zoned lot and street rights-of-way, plus two additional
feet of setback for every foot of rack height above 15 feet.
   Figure 13: Screening and Setback Requirements for Junk and Salvage Material
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2369.jpg]
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment is authorized as a special exception to:
      (1)   Modify or eliminate the screening wall or fence requirements where
existing physical features, such as trees and other plant materials, buildings,
earthen berms or hills, provide equivalent visual screening;
      (2)   Modify the screening wall or fence requirements when alternative
screening will provide equivalent visual screening, such as:
         (a)   Dense landscaping, or
         (b)   A six-foot privacy wall or fence;
      (3)   Grant an extension of time to erect a screening wall or fence when
properties, other than streets, are undeveloped and no immediate plans for
development are known or anticipated; or
      (4)   Eliminate the screening wall or fence requirements when the purpose
of the screening requirement cannot be achieved, such as when a street is
elevated, or when the required screening wall or fence is prohibited by other
regulations, such as in floodplains.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.111 MANUFACTURED HOUSING SUBDIVISIONS.
   The supplemental use regulations of this section apply to all manufactured
housing subdivisions.
   (A)   Manufactured housing units are allowed only in manufactured housing
subdivisions.
   (B)   Manufactured housing subdivisions require a minimum contiguous land
area of five acres.
   (C)   All manufactured housing units in manufactured housing subdivisions
must be attached to a permanent foundation and comply with the same lot and
building regulations that apply to detached houses in the subject zoning
district.
   (D)   All manufactured housing units in manufactured housing subdivisions
must have a minimum floor area of 600 square feet.
   (E)   A subdivision plat must be reviewed and approved in accordance with §§
152.235 through
152.251 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.112 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   The supplemental regulations of this section apply to all mobile home parks.
   (A)   Mobile homes are permitted only in approved mobile home parks.
   (B)   All mobile home parks require review and approval of a zoning map
amendment and mandatory development plan (see §§
152.282 and
152.286 of this chapter).
   (C)   All mobile homes and manufactured housing units must be completely
skirted.
   (D)   All mobile homes and manufactured housing units must be tied down and
anchored in accordance with city regulations.
   (E)   All housing units must be certified and display applicable federal
certifications.
   (F)   The lot and building regulations of Table 8 of this section apply to
the overall mobile home park site:
 
Table 8
Mobile Home Park Lot and Building Regulations
Regulations
Minimum area              2.5 acres
Minimum width             100 ft.
Minimum lot area per unit 2,400 sq. ft.
Maximum building height   18 ft.
 
   (G)   The lot and building regulations of Table 9 of this section apply to
individual mobile home and manufactured housing unit spaces within a mobile
home park:
Table 9
Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing Unit Space Regulations
Regulations
Table 9
Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing Unit Space Regulations
Regulations
Minimum area                                     2,000 sq. ft.
Minimum width                                    36 ft.
Minimum building setbacks:
   Street/drive                               20 ft.
   Side (interior)                            5 ft.
   Rear                                       10 ft.
Minimum separation between units                 10 ft.
Minimum outdoor recreation area (% of park area) 81
Note:
1. Must have a minimum width of 80 feet and minimum area of 10,000 square
feet.
 
   (H)   Accessory buildings must be set back at least ten feet from
manufactured housing units.
   (I)   Streets within the mobile home park must have a minimum paved width of
24 feet.
   (J)   All parking must be located on each mobile home space or within common
parking areas. Parking is not permitted on streets or drives within the park.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.113 MULTI-UNIT HOUSES.
   Multi-unit houses are subject to the lot and building regulations of the
subject zoning district, except as expressly modified by the supplemental
regulations of this section.
   (A)   The street-facing facade of a multi-unit house may have only one
building entrance that is visible from the street. If the building is located
on a corner lot, one building entrance may be visible from each street.
   (B)   Patio-style doors, such as sliding glass doors, may not be used for
entrance doors on building facades that face a street.
   (C)   The front facade of new multi-unit houses established after the
effective date established in §
152.003 of this chapter may not exceed 60 feet in width.
   (D)   Outdoor parking areas may not be located between the principal
building and the street or within any required side building setback.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.114 PATIO HOUSES.
   Patio houses are subject to the lot and building regulations of the subject
zoning district, except as expressly modified by the supplemental patio house
regulations of this section.
   (A)   A patio house development must consist of at least three contiguous
lots with frontage on the same street.
   (B)   The interior side building setback on one side of the lot containing a
patio house may be reduced to as little as zero. The zero- or reduced setback
side of a patio house may not abut a street and may not abut a lot that is not
part of the patio house development. On the “non-zero” side, a side building
setback must be provided equal to at least twice the minimum side building
setback requirement of the subject zoning district.
   Figure 14: Minimum Side Building Setbacks for Patio Houses
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2371.jpg]
   (C)   (1)   When the patio house’s exterior wall or eaves are within two
feet of the abutting property line, a perpetual maintenance easement at least
five feet in width must be provided on the lot abutting the zero- or reduced-
setback property line, which, with the exception of walls and/or fences, must
be kept clear of structures.
      (2)   The easement must be depicted on the plat and established in the
deed of dedication accompanying the plat. This provision is intended to ensure
the ability to conduct maintenance on the patio house.
      (3)   Eaves on the side of a patio house with a zero or reduced setback
may project over the side property line only if shown on the easement required
under this division (C).
   (D)   Windows, doors and other openings that allow for visibility into the
side yard of the lot abutting the reduced or zero setback side of the patio
house are prohibited. Windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard
of the lot abutting the zero or reduced setback side, such as clerestory
windows or translucent windows, are allowed, subject to compliance with the
Building Code.
   Figure 15: Patio House Maintenance Easements and “Privacy” Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2373.jpg]
   (E)   A patio house development is permitted only if a subdivision plat
incorporating the provisions and requirements of this section is approved in
accordance with the subdivision regulations and filed of record in the County
Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.115 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   When a drive-up or exterior access-style self-service storage facility
is located on a lot abutting an R-zoned lot, a screening wall or fence must be
provided along the common lot line in accordance with the F1 screening fence or
wall standards of §
152.194 of this chapter.
   Figure 16: Screening of Drive-Up Style Self-Storage Facilities From Abutting
R Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2375.jpg]
   (B)   No activities other than storage and pick-up and deposit of stored
materials are allowed within the storage units.
   (C)   In the C Districts, no outdoor (open-air) storage of any kind is
allowed that is visible at ground level from abutting R Districts or from any
street rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.116 TOWNHOUSES.
   (A)   Applicability. Townhouses are subject to all applicable regulations of
this UDO and other city codes and ordinances except as modified or supplemented
by the townhouse development and building regulations of this section.
   (B)   Side setbacks. No side building setback is required for common or
abutting walls. Otherwise, the minimum side setback requirements of the subject
zoning district apply.
   (C)   Design. Townhouses must be affixed to a permanent foundation.
   (D)   Open space. Required open space per dwelling unit for a townhouse
project may be provided either on each townhouse lot or in common areas within
the overall townhouse project, as designated on a recorded subdivision plat.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-12) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.117 TRANSITIONAL LIVING FACILITIES AND HALFWAY HOUSES.
   (A)   New transitional living facilities and halfway houses may not be
established, and existing transitional living facilities and halfway houses may
not be enlarged to increase their capacity within 1,000 feet of any existing
public or private elementary or secondary school.
   (B)   When a new public or private elementary or secondary school is
established within 1,000 feet of any existing transitional living facility or
halfway house, such transitional living facility or halfway house may remain as
long as it remains in continuous use.
   (C)   The separation distance required in this section is measured from the
nearest property line of the school to the nearest property line of the
transitional living facility or halfway house.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any transitional
living facility or halfway house established prior to the effective date of the
Oklahoma Alcohol and Drug Abuse Services Act.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-13) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.118 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The wireless communication facility regulations of this
section establish supplemental regulations governing wireless communications
towers and antennas. These regulations are established to promote the following
goals:
      (1)   Protecting residential areas and land uses from potentially adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
      (2)   Encouraging the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
      (3)   Minimizing the total number of towers;
      (4)   Encouraging co-location rather than the construction of additional
single-use towers;
      (5)   Encouraging users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      (6)   Encouraging users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through
careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques; and
      (7)   Helping to ensure the ability of telecommunications services
providers to offer such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
   (B)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from these regulations:
      (1)   Amateur (ham) radio antennas;
      (2)   Microwave reflectors and parabolic antennas;
      (3)   Antennas and equipment located completely inside of buildings; and
      (4)   Minor modifications of existing wireless communications facilities
and attached wireless communications facilities, whether emergency or routine,
provided there is little or no change in the visual appearance. Minor
modifications are those modifications, including the addition of antennas, to
conforming wireless and attached wireless communications facilities that comply
with all applicable regulations of this section.
   (C)   Federal law. The wireless communication facility regulations of this
section must be applied within the constraints of the Telecommunications Act of
1996, § 6409 of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 and
all other applicable state and federal regulations.
   (D)   Special definitions. The following definitions are established solely
for administering and interpreting the wireless communication facility
regulations of this section.
      ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device used in
communications to radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals,
analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
      FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
      HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or wireless communication facility,
means the distance from finished grade at the base of the tower or facility,
including any base pad, to the highest point of the structure.
      MONOPOLE. A single, freestanding pole structure without guy wires or
external supporting braces.
   (E)   General requirements. All towers and antennas are subject to the
general requirements of this division (E) unless otherwise expressly stated.
      (1)   Towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses.
Another principal or accessory use on the same lot does not preclude the
installation of a tower on that lot.
      (2)   Towers and antennas are subject to all of the following
requirements.
         (a)   Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of color, galvanizing or camouflaging
architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by
federal or state authorities, such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
         (b)   Except in IL and IH Zoning Districts, towers must be of a
monopole design unless the Board of Adjustment approves, by special exception,
an alternative design that it determines would better blend into the
surrounding environment or that the required antennas cannot be supported by a
monopole.
         (c)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a
color that closely matches or complements the color of the supporting
structure, so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
      (3)   Towers may not be illuminated by artificial means and may not
display strobe lights unless such lighting is expressly required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state authorities. When
incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to
illuminate ball fields, parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the
tower.
      (4)   The use of any portion of a tower for advertising or signs other
than warning or equipment information signs is expressly prohibited.
      (5)   All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower must
comply with all applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Exterior ground-mounted equipment occupying more than 50 square feet, if
visible from ground level, must be screened from view of abutting property used
or zoned for residential purposes by a screening wall or fence in accordance
with the F1 screening fence or wall regulations of §
152.194 of this chapter.
      (6)   The following setback requirements apply to all towers unless
otherwise expressly approved by the Board of Adjustment as part of the special
exception approval.
         (a)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 110% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line of an R-zoned lot, excluding R-
zoned expressway rights-of-way.
         (b)   Accessory buildings are subject to applicable zoning district
building setback requirements.
   Figure 17: Tower Setback from R-Zoned Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2377.jpg]
      (7)   Towers must be enclosed by security fencing that is at least six
feet in height or be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
   (F)   Antennas and towers requiring special exception approval.
      (1)   Applicability. The regulations of this division (F) apply to all
antennas and towers that require special exception approval.
      (2)   Factors to be considered. Applications do not require and may not
be evaluated based upon:
         (a)   Information about an applicant’s business decisions with respect
to the applicant’s designed service, customer demand for service, or quality of
the applicant’s service to or from a particular area or site;
         (b)   Availability of other potential locations for the placement or
construction of a tower or transmission equipment;
         (c)   Other options for co-location instead of the construction of a
new tower or modification of an existing tower;
         (d)   The requirement for removal of existing towers or transmission
equipment, except as stated by this section or City Council policy for removal
of abandoned towers or transmission equipment;
         (e)   Surety requirements, including bonds, escrow deposits, letters
of credit or any other type of financial surety, to ensure that abandoned or
unused towers or transmission equipment can be removed, other than requirements
stated in regulations or policy approved by City Council resolution that are
competitively neutral, nondiscriminatory, reasonable in amount, and
commensurate with the historical record for local facilities and structures
that are abandoned;
         (f)   Applicant’s agreement to provide space on or near the tower for
the city or for other local governmental or nongovernmental services at less
than the market rate for such space or to provide other services via the
structure or facilities at less than the market rate for such services;
         (g)   Environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring requirements, or
other compliance measures, for radio frequency emissions from transmission
equipment that are categorically excluded under FCC rules for radio frequency
emissions pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 1.1307(b)(1);
         (h)   Regulations or procedures for radio frequency signal strength or
the adequacy of service quality; or
         (i)   Perceived or alleged environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions, as provided in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(iv).
      (3)   Findings. The findings of the Board of Adjustment as to each of
these factors must be made on the record and included in the written minutes of
the meeting.
      (4)   Co-location. Co-location of facilities is encouraged wherever
practical by allowing reasonable extra height or tower diameter necessary to
support multiple antennas.
      (5)   Landscaping. The following requirements govern landscaping
surrounding towers that require special exception approval; provided that the
Board of Adjustment may modify or waive such requirements by special exception.
         (a)   Tower facilities must be landscaped with a continuously
maintained buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the
tower compound from property within 300 feet used or zoned for residential
purposes. The standard buffer requirement consists of a landscaped strip with a
minimum width of four feet outside the perimeter of the compound.
         (b)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
must be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers
sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may
provide sufficient buffer.
   (G)   Antennas and towers permitted as-of-right.
      (1)   Applicability. The regulations of this division (G) apply to all
antennas and towers that are permitted as-of-right.
      (2)   Permits. A permit must be obtained from the city before
installation or construction of any antenna or tower.
      (3)   Regulations. Antennas and towers that are permitted as-of-right are
subject to the following supplemental regulations.
         (a)   Antennas attached to the roof or wall of buildings in commercial
or industrial zoning districts, or to office or apartment/condo buildings, or
to public, civic or institutional buildings (e.g., schools, places of worship,
or hospitals) are subject to all of the following regulations:
            1.   An antenna may not extend more than 20 feet above the highest
point of the building, or, if located on an architectural feature such as a
steeple or bell tower, may not protrude above that structure; provided,
however, that the Board of Adjustment may modify such requirements by special
exception;
            2.   The antenna must comply with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
            3.   The antenna must comply with all applicable building codes.
         (b)   Antennas may be attached to existing towers and to city-owned
buildings and structures. When an existing tower must be modified to
accommodate the collocation of antennas, the tower must be of the same type as
the existing tower or reconstructed as a monopole and the modification or
reconstruction may not result in a height increase of more than 30 feet above
the height of the existing tower. Other modifications may be approved by
special exception.
   (H)   Removal of abandoned antenna and towers. Any antenna or tower that is
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months will be considered abandoned,
and the owner of the antenna or tower must remove it within 90 days of
receiving notice from the city. Failure to remove the abandoned antenna or
tower within 90 days constitutes grounds for the city to remove the antenna or
tower at the owner’s expense. Abandoned towers are subject to the city’s
nuisance abatement procedures.
   (I)   Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna that lawfully
existed on or before the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter, including a tower or antenna for which a permit was
issued on or before that date which was constructed within the time frame
allowed under the permit, is allowed to remain in use. Routine maintenance,
including antenna replacement, is permitted. All new construction, other than
routine maintenance, requires compliance with all applicable regulations of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-14) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.119 USE OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS TANKS/CONTAINERS.
   (A)   In instances in which the placement of a tank/container utilized for
liquefied petroleum gas has been authorized upon property as a special
exception to zoning, the placement of the tank/container upon property shall be
made subject to all applicable state, federal and local laws, rules and
ordinances including, but not limited to, the building regulations of the city.
   (B)   Zoning regulations prohibiting the placement of tanks/containers
utilized for liquefied petroleum gases upon property located in the city shall
not apply to tanks/containers utilized for liquefied petroleum gas in the
following instances.
      (1)   The use of tanks/containers of a size not to exceed 125 gallons
(water gallons) utilized for liquefied petroleum gas for recreational outdoor
purposes such as outdoor cookers, outdoor space heaters and outdoor fire places
or fire pits. All uses of tanks/containers under this division (B) shall be
conducted in compliance with any order made/issued by the city’s Fire Chief or
the Fire Chief’s designee.
      (2)   Fuel tanks/containers affixed to vehicles or other equipment, which
vehicle or equipment is powered by means of utilization of liquefied petroleum
gas stored in said tanks/containers.
      (3)   Fuel tanks/containers affixed to recreational vehicles which
recreational vehicle utilizes the fuel stored in said tank/container for
purposes of cooking or heating of the recreational vehicle.
      (4)   The use of tanks/containers of a size not to exceed 125 gallons
(water gallons) utilized for liquefied petroleum gas on a temporary basis for
construction related activities where the construction activity is being
lawfully made within the municipal limits of the city. The phrase “for
construction related activities” as used in this division (B) shall be
interpreted to mean the provision of heat for workers during times actively
engaged in the performance of construction activities at the location or other
uses directly related to the construction activities. The said phrase shall not
include uses for domestic purposes such as provision of heat for occupants of a
structure or as a means of heating water for bathing or for cooking.
(Prior Code, § 10-7-15) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2021-14, passed
2-2-2021)
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
§ 152.130 GENERALLY APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Accessory uses allowed. Accessory uses and structures are allowed only
in connection with lawfully established principal uses.
   (B)   Allowed uses and structures. Allowed accessory uses and structures are
limited to those expressly regulated in this chapter as well as those that, in
the determination of the Community Development Director, satisfy all of the
following criteria:
      (1)   They are customarily found in conjunction with the subject
principal use or principal structure;
      (2)   They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use of
the property; and
      (3)   They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort,
safety or convenience of occupants of the principal use.
   (C)   Time of construction and establishment.
      (1)   Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use of
the property is in place.
      (2)   Accessory buildings may be established in conjunction with or after
the principal building or use. They may not be established before the principal
building or use is in place.
   (D)   Location. Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same
lot as the principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise
expressly stated.
   (E)   Compliance with lot and building regulations. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, accessory uses and structures are subject to the same lot and
building regulations as apply to principal uses and buildings. See also the
provisions governing allowed yard obstructions (§
152.361(C) of this chapter) and exceptions to height limits (§
152.368(B) of this chapter).
   (F)   Detached accessory buildings.
      (1)   Detached accessory buildings may be located in rear setbacks
provided that the building does not exceed one story or 18 feet in height and
is not more than ten feet in height to the top of the top plate.
   Figure 18: Maximum Height of Accessory Buildings in Rear Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2382.jpg]
      (2)   Detached accessory buildings in the rear setbacks must be set back
at least three feet from all interior lot lines. For lot lines abutting street
rights-of-way, detached accessory buildings must comply with the same setback
requirements that apply to principal buildings.
   Figure 19: Required Setbacks for Accessory Buildings in Rear Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2379.jpg]
      (3)   Rear setback for accessory buildings or outbuildings cannot be less
than ten feet from the rear property line or cannot be placed within a utility
easement, whichever is greater. Houses and living quarters shall follow the R
District Lot and Building Regulation Table located in §
152.028. This rear setback requirement shall only apply to any accessory
building or outbuilding that is moved or built after the enactment of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2023-6, passed 11-
21-2023)
§ 152.131 ACCESSORY ANTENNAS.
   (A)   R Districts.
      (1)   In R Districts, accessory antennas and their support structures are
allowed to be mounted on a principal building or accessory building, provided
that:
         (a)   The overall mounted height of the antenna does not exceed 65
feet, measured from the average ground elevation at the base of the building to
the highest point of the antenna; and
         (b)   The aggregate surface area of all mounted antennas may not
exceed ten square feet, based on the area of side with the largest surface
area.
      (2)   In R Districts, structures other than principal or accessory
buildings that are used to support accessory antennas (including guy lines)
must comply with all of the following regulations.
         (a)   Only one such antenna support structure is allowed on a lot.
         (b)   The antenna support structure may be located only in the rear
yard, not in a street yard or side yard.
         (c)   The overall height of the antenna may not exceed 65 feet,
measured from the average ground elevation at the base of the structure to the
highest point of the antenna.
         (d)   The antenna support structure may not encroach upon the land or
airspace of any abutting property.
         (e)   The antenna support structure may not exceed 24 inches in width
above 25 feet in height, exclusive of guy lines.
   (B)   Other districts.
      (1)   In all districts other than R Districts, antenna support structures
that are accessory to principal uses must be set back from any R District a
distance equal to at least 110% of the height of the antenna, measured from the
average ground elevation at the base of the structure to the highest point of
the antenna.
      (2)   The setback distance must be measured from the nearest point of the
antenna supporting structure (excluding any guy lines) to the nearest point on
the residential zoning district boundary line.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.132 COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS (CNG) REFUELING APPLIANCES.
   Private (restricted access), consumer-oriented (home), CNG refueling
appliances are permitted as an accessory use to lawfully established household
living uses in all zoning districts.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.133 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Private (restricted-access) electric-vehicle (EV) charging stations
are permitted as accessory uses to lawfully established principal uses in all
zoning districts.
      (2)   Public EV charging stations are permitted as accessory uses to
lawfully established principal nonresidential uses in all zoning districts.
   (B)   Parking.
      (1)   Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying
minimum off-street parking space requirements.
      (2)   Public electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for
parking and charging electric vehicles.
   (C)   Equipment. Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located so
as to not impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety
hazards on sidewalks.
   (D)   Signage.
      (1)   Public electric vehicle charging stations must be posted with
signage indicating that the space is reserved for electric vehicle charging
purposes only.
      (2)   For purposes of this provision, CHARGING means that an electric
vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to
the battery charging station equipment.
   Figure 20: Electric Vehicle Parking Signs (Typical)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2384.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 10-8-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.134 FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES.
   (A)   Family child care homes must be an accessory use to an allowed
household living use and be licensed by the state.
   (B)   Applicants for family child care homes must obtain a zoning clearance
permit and a certificate of occupancy before commencing operation.
   (C)   Family child care homes may provide supervision for no more than seven
children.
   (D)   No person may be employed other than a member of the household
residing on the premises or a nonresident, substitute caregiver, as may be
required for family child care homes by the state.
   (E)   Signs advertising a family child care home are prohibited.
   (F)   No exterior building alterations or site modifications may be made
that would change the residential character of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.135 GEOTHERMAL HEAT EXCHANGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General. Geothermal heat exchange systems are permitted as an
accessory use in all zoning districts.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Above-ground equipment is subject to compliance with the minimum
building setback regulations of the subject zoning district, including the
setback obstruction provisions of §
152.361(C) of this chapter.
      (2)   Underground equipment, piping and devices may not be located in any
public easement or right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.136 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Description. Home occupations are jobs or professions conducted wholly
or partly from a residential dwelling.
   (B)   Purpose. The home occupation regulations of this section are intended
to allow city residents to engage in customary home-based work activities,
while also helping to ensure that neighbors are not subjected to adverse
operational and land use impacts (e.g., excessive noise or traffic or public
safety hazards) that are not typical of residential neighborhoods.
   (C)   Types of home occupations. Two types of home occupations are defined
and regulated under this section: type 1 and type 2.
      (1)   Type 1 home occupations. Type 1 home occupations are those in which
household residents use their home as a place of work, with no employees,
customers or clients coming to the site. Typical examples include telecommuting
office workers, writers, consultants, artists and crafts people.
      (2)   Type 2 home occupations. Type 2 home occupations are those in which
household residents use their home as a place of work and either employees or
customers come to the site. Typical examples include tutors, teachers,
photographers, counselors, hair cutting/styling and real estate agents.
   (D)   Exemptions. Nonresidential uses that are expressly allowed in
conjunction with residential uses (e.g., bed and breakfast uses and family
child care homes) are not subject to home occupation regulations.
   (E)   Allowed uses. The home occupation regulations of this section
establish performance standards for all home occupations rather than listing
specific home occupation uses that are allowed. Uses that comply with the
standards of this section are allowed as of right unless otherwise expressly
stated.
   (F)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited as home
occupations:
      (1)   Animal care, grooming or boarding businesses;
      (2)   Any type of assembly, cleaning, maintenance, painting or repair of
vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines or of large appliances
(such as washing machines, clothes dryers or refrigerators);
      (3)   Any use involving the use or storage of vehicles, products, parts,
machinery or similar materials or equipment outside of a completely enclosed
building;
      (4)   Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to the
site and are dispatched to other locations;
      (5)   Equipment or supply rental businesses;
      (6)   Funeral or interment services;
      (7)   Restaurants;
      (8)   Taxi, limo, van or bus services;
      (9)   Taxidermists;
      (10)   Tow truck services; and
      (11)   Any use that does not comply with regulations of this section.
   (G)   Where allowed.
      (1)   Type 1 home occupations. Type 1 home occupations are permitted as
of right as an accessory use to a principal use in the household living use
category. Type 1 home occupations are subject to the general regulations of
division (H) of this section and the supplemental regulations of division (I)
of this section.
      (2)   Type 2 home occupations.
         (a)   Type 2 home occupations may be approved as an accessory use to a
principal use in the household living use category through the special
exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter. Type 2 home occupations are subject to the general
regulations of division (H) of this section and the supplemental regulations of
division (J) of this section.
         (b)   Type 2 home occupations may be approved as an accessory use to a
principal use in the household living use category through the mandatory
development plan provisions of §
152.286 of this chapter. Type 2 home occupations are subject to the general
regulations of division (H) of this section and the supplemental regulations of
division (J) of this section or as may be further regulated by an approved
mandatory development plan.
   (H)   General regulations. All type 1 and type 2 home occupations are
subject to the following regulations.
      (1)   Home occupations must be accessory and subordinate to the principal
residential use of the property.
      (2)   Home occupations that change the character of the residential
building they occupy or that adversely affect the character of the surrounding
neighborhood are prohibited. Home occupations may not, for example, produce
light, noise, vibration, odor, parking demand, or traffic impacts that are not
typical of a residential neighborhood in the city. Home occupations must be
operated so as not to create or cause a nuisance.
      (3)   Any tools or equipment used as part of a home occupation must be
operated in a manner or sound-proofed so as not to be audible beyond the lot
lines of the subject property.
      (4)   External structural alterations or site improvements that change
the residential character of the lot upon which a home occupation is located
are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include construction of
parking lots, the addition of commercial-like exterior lighting, the addition
of a separate building entrance that is visible from abutting streets or the
exterior display of an illuminated nameplate sign (see §
152.212(C) of this chapter).
      (5)   No display of any material or merchandise is allowed.
      (6)   The use or storage of hazardous substances is prohibited, except at
the “consumer commodity” level, as that term is defined in 49 C.F.R. part
171.8.
   (I)   Supplemental regulations for type 1 home occupations.
      (1)   Only residents of the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is
located may be engaged in a type 1 home occupation. No nonresident owners,
employees or contractors may be present on the subject property.
      (2)   No clients, customers, patients or students are allowed in
conjunction with a type 1 home occupation.
      (3)   Type 1 home occupations and all related activities, including
storage (other than the lawful parking of passenger vehicles), must be
conducted entirely within the principal residential building or an allowed
accessory building.
      (4)   More than one type 1 home occupation is allowed as an accessory
use, but the general regulations of division (H) of this section and the
supplemental regulations of this division (I) apply to the combined home
occupation uses.
   (J)   Supplemental regulations for type 2 home occupations.
      (1)   Only uses approved in accordance with the special exception
procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter or through a mandatory development plan are allowed as
type 2 home occupations.
      (2)   At least one individual engaged in the home occupation must reside
in the dwelling unit in which the home occupation is located as their primary
place of residence.
      (3)   No more than three clients or customers may be present at any one
time on the site of a type 2 home occupation. Family members of the client or
customer are not counted towards the three-person limit.
      (4)   A maximum of one nonresident employee is allowed with a type 2 home
occupation if no customers or clients come to the site at any time. Home
occupations that have clients, customers or students coming to the site may not
have nonresident employees and vice-versa. For the purpose of this provision,
the term NONRESIDENT EMPLOYEE includes an employee, contractor, business
partner, co-owner or any other person affiliated with the home occupation, who
does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home
occupation.
      (5)   Type 2 home occupations and all related activities, including
storage (other than the lawful parking of passenger vehicles), must be
conducted entirely within the principal residential building or an allowed
accessory building.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.137 INTOXICATING BEVERAGE AND BEER SALES AND SERVICE.
   (A)   Accessory use bars are allowed in conjunction with assembly and
entertainment uses, hotels and restaurants, subject to compliance with all
other applicable regulations of this UDO and license and permitting
requirements.
   (B)   The Community Development Director is authorized to allow accessory
sales or service of intoxicating beverages or beer as an accessory use to other
uses if the Community Development Director determines that all of the following
criteria are met:
      (1)   The proposal complies with the accessory use criteria of §
152.130(B) of this chapter; and
      (2)   The use is located in a zoning district in which bars and taverns
are permitted as of right or the use is temporary in nature and located on
city-owned property.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2019-7, passed 3-
19-2019)
§ 152.138 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Where allowed.
      (1)   Satellite dish antennas up to 40 inches in diameter are permitted
as of right as an accessory use to all lawfully established principal uses in
all zoning districts. They are subject to all applicable accessory structure
setback regulations.
      (2)   Satellite dish antennas over 40 inches in diameter, up to 120
inches in diameter, are permitted as of right as an accessory use to all
lawfully established principal uses in nonresidential zoning districts. They
are subject to all applicable accessory structure setback regulations.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   In RS, RD and RT Districts, satellite antennas may be located only
to the rear of any principal structure. If usable communication signals cannot
be obtained from a rear location, the satellite antenna may be located in the
side yard. If usable satellite communication signals cannot be received by
locating the antenna in the rear or to the side of the principal structure, the
antenna may be placed in the street yard outside of the required building
setback or on the roof in a location that is visible from the street, provided
that the diameter of the satellite dish antenna does not exceed 18 inches.
      (2)   In districts other than RS, RD and RT, satellite dish antennas may
be located anywhere in the buildable area of the lot (outside of required
building setbacks) or on an allowed principal or accessory building on the lot.
      (3)   Ground-mounted satellite dish antennae must be placed or visually
screened to reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level
and from public streets.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.139 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Solar energy systems are permitted as of right as an accessory use
to all lawfully established principal uses in all zoning districts.
      (2)   Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable
Building and Electrical Code requirements.
   (B)   Building-mounted solar energy systems.
      (1)   Building-mounted solar energy systems may be mounted on principal
and accessory structures.
      (2)   Building-mounted solar energy systems may not encroach into
required street setbacks. Systems mounted on principal structures may encroach
into interior side and rear building setbacks in accordance with §
152.361(C) of this chapter.
      (3)   Only building-integrated or flush-mounted solar energy systems may
be installed on street-facing building elevations.
      (4)   Solar energy systems may not extend more than three feet above the
applicable maximum building height limit for the subject building type or more
than five feet above the highest point of the roof line, whichever is less.
   Figure 21: Roof-Mounted Solar Energy Systems
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2386.jpg]
   (C)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
      (1)   In residential zoning districts, ground-mounted solar energy
systems may not be located in a required street setback or street yard area.
      (2)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems may be located within required
interior side and rear setbacks.
      (3)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems are subject to applicable
accessory structure height and lot coverage regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.140 SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The regulations of this section apply to all small wind energy
conversion systems.
      (2)   Small wind energy conversion systems are also subject to Building
Code requirements.
   (B)   Where allowed.
      (1)   One small wind energy conversion system is permitted per lot as an
accessory use to a lawfully established principal use in all zoning districts,
provided that such systems comply with all applicable requirements of this
section.
      (2)   Up to three small wind energy conversion systems may be allowed on
a single lot if the lot is at least one acre in area and the systems are
approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
   (C)   Height.
      (1)   The maximum allowed height of a small wind energy conversion
system, measured as the distance from ground level at the base of the structure
to the highest point of the structure, varies based on the size of the lot on
which it is located, as indicated in Table 10 of this section.
 
Table 10
Maximum Height of Small Wind Energy Conversion System
Lot Area        Maximum Height
0—0.99 acres  30 feet
1—1.99 acres  65 feet
2—4.99 acres  85 feet
5 acres or more 100 feet
 
      (2)   The lowest point of any moving elements, such as blades or vanes,
must be at least 25 feet above grade immediately beneath the moving element.
   (D)   Siting. Small wind energy conversion systems may not be located in
required building setbacks or within easements. In addition, systems must be
set back from all property lines by a distance at least equal to 110% of the
overall height of the system, measured from grade at the base of the structure
to the highest point of the system structure, which includes the tip of the top
blade when the blade is in its highest position.
   (E)   Design and operation.
      (1)   All small wind energy conversion systems must be equipped with
manual and automatic over-speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to
within the design limits of the system.
      (2)   The rotating turbine may not produce vibrations that are
perceptible to humans standing at ground level outside the property lines of
the subject lot.
      (3)   Operational noise of a small wind energy system may not exceed 60
db(A) at the nearest property line except during short-term high wind speed
events such as storms.
      (4)   Lattice-type towers and towers using guy wires are prohibited.
      (5)   All power transmission and telemetry lines from a ground-mounted
small wind energy conversion system to any building or other structure must be
placed underground.
      (6)   Towers, rotors and turbines may not be illuminated unless required
by a state or federal agency, such as the FAA.
      (7)   All structures and equipment must maintain factory colors or be
finished in a non-reflective, matte finished, neutral color.
      (8)   No commercial messages may be placed or painted on the tower,
rotor, turbine, generator or tail vane that is legible from off-site. This
provision is not intended to prohibit warning signs or manufacturer’s logos.
      (9)   All climbing pegs, ladders and similar apparatus on ground-mounted
small wind energy conversion systems must be located at least 12 feet above the
ground at the base of the structure.
   (F)   Permits. The following information must be submitted with a zoning
clearance permit application for a small wind energy conversion system.
      (1)   A description of the system, including its maximum power-rated
output capacity.
      (2)   The make, model, an illustrative photograph or brochure,
manufacturer’s specifications including noise data (decibels) for the proposed
wind energy conversion system, the support structure, and method of attachment
to the ground and/or structure.
      (3)   Elevation drawing of the wind energy conversion system showing
total height, turbine dimensions, tower and turbine colors, distance between
ground and lowest point of any blade, and if proposed, the location of climbing
apparatus.
      (4)   If the wind energy conversion system is not certified as meeting
the IEEE 1547 standards (Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers),
then an assessment must be provided from an electrical engineer indicating that
protection equivalent to the IEEE standard will be provided.
   (G)   Abandonment. Any small wind energy conversion system that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months or more or that is in an obvious
state of disrepair or a threat to public safety will be considered abandoned
and must be dismantled and removed from the property at the expense of the
property owner.
(Prior Code, § 10-8-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
TEMPORARY USES
§ 152.155 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   A temporary use is the use of private property that does not require a
building permit and that may or may not comply with the use and lot and
building regulations of the zoning district in which the temporary use is
located.
   (B)   The temporary use regulations of this chapter are intended to permit
such occasional, temporary uses and activities when consistent with the
purposes and regulations of this UDO.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.156 AUTHORITY TO APPROVE.
   (A)   Except as expressly stated in §
152.159 of this chapter, all temporary uses require city approval.
   (B)   The Community Development Director is authorized to establish
administrative procedures governing the processing, review and approval of
temporary uses.
   (C)   The Community Development Director is authorized to approve a zoning
clearance permit for temporary uses that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and to impose conditions on the operation of temporary uses to help
ensure that they do not create significant adverse impacts on surrounding uses
and that they operate safely and without causing nuisances, consistent with the
general purposes of this UDO.
   (D)   Temporary uses that do not comply with all applicable regulations and
all conditions of approval may be approved as special exceptions in accordance
with §
152.291 of this chapter. The Community Development Director is authorized to
refer any temporary use to the Board of Adjustment for consideration in
accordance with special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
   (E)   Special events require City Council review and approval.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.157 AUTHORIZED USES.
   The Community Development Director is authorized to approve a zoning
clearance permit for temporary uses upon determining that the proposed use is a
customary temporary use in the subject location and will generally be
compatible with surrounding uses and not be a detriment to public safety. The
following is a non-exhaustive list of the types of temporary uses and
activities for which a zoning clearance permit may be approved by the Community
Development Director:
   (A)   Christmas tree and similar holiday sales lots for a maximum of 90 days
per lot per year;
   (B)   Construction staging areas, construction offices and storage of
materials related to ongoing construction for the period in which construction
is ongoing and all required permits remain valid;
   (C)   Outdoor carnivals, concerts, festivals, revivals and public gatherings
for a maximum of 30 days per lot per year and no more than ten consecutive days
per occurrence;
   (D)   Parking lot sales for a maximum of 30 days per lot per year;
   (E)   Temporary mobile storage units, subject to the following supplemental
regulations:
      (1)   Temporary mobile storage units are allowed in R Zoning Districts,
subject to compliance with all of the following regulations.
         (a)   Temporary mobile storage units are permitted for a period not to
exceed a total of 90 days within any calendar year unless a valid building or
construction permit is in place for the subject property, in which case the
temporary mobile storage unit may remain in place for a maximum of 115 days or
until the permit expires, whichever occurs first. If a dwelling unit on the
subject lot has been damaged by natural disaster act of God, the Community
Development Director is authorized to grant time extensions of otherwise
applicable temporary mobile storage unit time limits.
         (b)   No more than one temporary mobile storage unit may be located on
any lot.
         (c)   Temporary mobile storage units may not exceed 16 feet in length,
eight feet in width, and eight and one-half feet in height. See Figure 22 of
this section.
   Figure 22: Maximum Mobile Storage Unit Size in Residential Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2388.jpg]
         (d)   Temporary mobile storage units must be set back at least five
feet from all property lines.
         (e)   Temporary mobile storage units must be placed on an improved
all-weather surface, generally asphalt, brick pavers, or concrete. Units are
prohibited within landscape areas, open spaces, stormwater basins, or any other
location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to public
safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses and
development.
         (f)   No materials may be stacked or stored on the exterior of the
mobile storage unit and no running gear or transport trailer may be stored on
site outside of a completely enclosed building.
      (2)   Temporary mobile storage units are allowed in nonresidential zoning
districts, subject to compliance with all the following regulations.
         (a)   Temporary mobile storage units are permitted for a period not to
exceed a total of 90 days within any calendar year unless a valid building or
construction permit is in place for the subject property, in which case the
temporary mobile storage unit may remain in place for a maximum of 180 days or
until the permit expires, whichever occurs first. If the principal building on
the subject lot has been damaged by natural disaster act of God, the Community
Development Director is authorized to grant time extensions of otherwise
applicable temporary mobile storage unit time limits.
         (b)   No more than three temporary mobile storage units may be located
on any lot.
         (c)   Temporary mobile storage units may not exceed 20 feet in length,
eight feet in width, and eight and one-half feet in height. See Figure 23 of
this section.
   Figure 23: Maximum Mobile Storage Unit Size on Nonresidential Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2390.jpg]
         (d)   Temporary mobile storage units must comply with all building
setback requirements of the subject zoning district.
         (e)   Temporary mobile storage units may not be placed or located on a
required parking space, circulation aisle/lane or fire access lane.
         (f)   Vertical stacking of storage units and stacking of any other
materials or merchandise on top of any mobile storage unit is prohibited. No
running gear or transport trailer may be left underneath any mobile storage
unit.
         (g)   Temporary mobile storage units are prohibited within landscape
areas, required open spaces, stormwater basins, or any other location that may
cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to public safety, or create a
condition detrimental to surrounding land uses and development.
   (F)   Temporary residential sales and leasing offices and model homes, when
located on the same lot or in the same subdivision as the residential units
actively being offered for lease or sales; and
   (G)   Tents accessory to an allowed principal or temporary use.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.158 GENERAL PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of a complete application for a zoning clearance permit for a
temporary use, the Community Development Director must review the proposed use
for its likely effects and surrounding properties and its compliance with the
general provisions of this chapter. The Community Development Director may
impose such conditions of approval on the zoning clearance permit as the
Community Development Director determines necessary to mitigate potential
adverse impacts. Such conditions may include the following:
   (A)   Requirements for vehicle access and parking;
   (B)   Restrictions on hours of operation;
   (C)   Limitations on signs and outdoor lighting;
   (D)   Requirements for financial guarantees covering the costs of cleanup
and/or removal of structures or equipment; and
   (E)   Other conditions necessary to carry out the stated purposes of this
UDO and this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.159 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following temporary uses are permitted as of right, without obtaining a
zoning clearance permit from the Community Development Director:
   (A)   Garage sales conducted in R districts or on lots occupied by
residential dwelling units no more than two times in any calendar year and for
no more than four consecutive days per occurrence. These limits apply on a per-
lot basis, regardless of the person conducting the garage sale. No person
conducting a garage sale may sell merchandise at the garage sale acquired
solely for resale purposes. Garage sales are sometimes referred to as “yard
sales”, “estate sale”, “moving sales”, “occasional sales” and other similar
names. All such sales, by whatever name, are classified and regulated as
“garage sales”. Authorization to conduct more than two garage sales in any
calendar year requires review and approval in accordance with the special
exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter; and
   (B)   Temporary dumpsters are allowed on lots with ongoing construction,
subject to compliance with all the following regulations.
      (1)   Temporary dumpsters related to ongoing construction are permitted
for a period in which construction is ongoing and all required permits remain
valid.
      (2)   Temporary dumpsters may not exceed 22 feet in length, eight feet in
width, and eight and one-half feet in height.
      (3)   Temporary dumpsters must comply with all structure setback
requirements of the subject zoning district.
      (4)   Temporary dumpsters are prohibited within stormwater basins, or any
other location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to
public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses and
development.
      (5)   In single-family residential zoning districts and development
areas, no more than one temporary dumpster may be located on any lot.
      (6)   Temporary dumpsters are allowed on lots for a period of 60 days
following a natural disaster (act of God) occurring in the immediate area of
the lot, to be used for the disposal of debris resulting from the natural
disaster (act of God). The Community Development Director is authorized to
grant extensions of the 60-day time limit.
(Prior Code, § 10-9-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
PARKING
§ 152.170 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The regulations of this chapter are intended to help promote
economically viable and beneficial use of land and avoid the negative impacts
that can result from establishing sometimes arbitrary minimum motor vehicle
parking requirements.
   (B)   Such adverse impacts include increased costs for and barriers to
development, leaving valuable land unproductive, increasing stormwater runoff,
degrading water quality and negatively affecting community appearance.
   (C)   The regulations are also intended to accommodate nonmotorized
transportation alternatives.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.171 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided in accordance
with the minimum ratios established in this section.
   (B)   See §
152.172 of this chapter for additional information about bicycle parking
requirements.
      (1)   Residential.
         (a)   Household living uses. Uses in the household living use
subcategory (see §
152.087(A) of this chapter) must provide at least one off-street motor vehicle
parking space per dwelling unit; apartment/condo projects must provide an
additional one-half off-street motor vehicle parking spaces for each dwelling
unit with more than one bedroom.
         (b)   Group living uses. Uses in the group living use subcategory (see
§
152.087(B) of this chapter) must provide at least one off-street motor vehicle
parking space per dwelling unit or at least one off-street motor vehicle
parking space per four sleeping rooms.
      (2)   Nonresidential. There is no minimum off-street motor vehicle
parking requirement for nonresidential uses, provided that uses requiring
special exception approval may be subject to minimum parking requirements
established at the time of special exception approval.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.172 BICYCLE PARKING.
   (A)   Purposes. This section establishes requirements for the provision of
short-term bicycle parking. Short-term bicycle parking is generally intended to
serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for short time periods,
including customers, clients, students and other short-term visitors.
   (B)   Spaces required. Short-term bicycle parking spaces must be provided in
accordance with the minimum ratios established in Table 11 of this section.
Table 11
Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Ratios
Use Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Table 11
Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Ratios
Use                                   Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Residential:                           
Household living:                      
   Apartment/condo                 5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
Public, civic and institutional:       
   Library or cultural exhibit     10% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Parks and recreation            10% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
School:                                
   Elementary or middle school     10% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Senior high                     5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
Commercial:                            
   Assembly and entertainment      5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Commercial service:              
      Personal improvement servi5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Financial services              5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Restaurant                      5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Retail sales:                    
      Consumer shopping goods   5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
      Convenience goods         5% of provided motor vehicle parking
                                      spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
   Studio, artist or instructional 5% of provided motor vehicle parking
service                               spaces or 2 spaces, whichever is greater
 
   (C)   Location and design.
      (1)   Location. Short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located in
highly visible areas that do not interfere with pedestrian movements. At least
50% of required short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located within 100
feet of a customer entrance, with the remainder located no more than 300 feet
from any entrance. Short-term bicycle parking must be located on the subject
lot, unless a license has been approved by the city to allow private bicycle
parking facilities to be located in the right-of-way.
      (2)   Design. Required short-term bicycle parking spaces must:
         (a)   Consist of bike racks or lockers that are anchored so that they
cannot be easily removed;
         (b)   Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion, hammers
and saws;
         (c)   Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked with
the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock;
         (d)   Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle;
         (e)   Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to adjacent
bicycles; and
         (f)   Have minimum dimensions of two feet in width by six feet in
length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet.
   Figure 24: Bicycle Parking Space Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2392.jpg]
   (D)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   Reductions of short-term bicycle parking requirements may be
approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
      (2)   Modifications of bicycle parking design and location requirements
may be approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.173 USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Off-street parking spaces are intended to serve residents, tenants,
patrons, employees or guests of the principal use. Off-street parking areas may
only be used for the temporary parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating
condition.
   (B)   Off-street parking spaces may not be used for the storage, display or
sale of goods, equipment or materials. No motor vehicle repair work of any kind
is permitted in an off-street parking space.
   (C)   Parking spaces may be used for electric vehicle charging.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.174 PARKING LOCATION.
   Off-street parking is prohibited in front and street side setback areas in R
zoning districts. This provision is not intended to prohibit parking on an
approved driveway on a lot occupied by a detached house, patio house, townhouse
or duplex.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.175 PARKING AREA DESIGN.
   (A)   Applicability. The parking area design regulations of this section
apply to all off-street parking lots for motor vehicles, whether containing
required parking spaces or non-required parking spaces.
   (B)   Ingress and egress. All parking areas must be designed to allow
vehicles to enter and exit a street and cross public sidewalks in a forward
motion, except that this requirement does not apply to lots with access on a
minor street.
   (C)   Stall size. Parking spaces must be at least eight and one-half feet in
width and 18 feet in length, exclusive of access drives and aisles. In parking
areas where permanent wheel stops have been installed, two and one-half feet of
the parking space length (depth) beyond the wheel stop may be counted as part
of the required stall length if that area is unobstructed and not part of
another parking stall, drive aisle or sidewalk.
   (D)   Parking area layout (geometrics). Parking areas must be designed and
marked in accordance with the dimensional standards of Table 12 of this
section, which shows minimum dimensions for various parking layouts (angles).
Requirements for layouts or angles not shown in Table 12 of this section may be
interpolated from the layouts shown, as approved by the Community Development
Director.
Table 12
Parking Area Geometrics
A = Stall angle; B = Stall width; C = Stall length; D = Aisle width (1-way/
2-way)
A (in degrees) B C D
Table 12
Parking Area Geometrics
A = Stall angle; B = Stall width; C = Stall length; D = Aisle width (1-way/
2-way)
A (in degrees) B        C        D
               9.0 ft.  22.0 ft. 12.0/20.0 ft.
               9.0 ft.  18.0 ft. 11.0/19.0 ft.
               9.0 ft.  18.0 ft. 15.0/20.0 ft.
               9.0 ft.  18.0 ft. 20.0/21.0 ft.
               9.0 ft.  18.0 ft. —/22.0 ft.
               10.0 ft. 18.0 ft. —/20.0 ft.
 
   Figure 25: Parking Area Geometrics
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.jpg]
   (E)   Tandem parking. Tandem parking spaces may be used to satisfy minimum
parking requirements for household living uses when the spaces are assigned to
the same dwelling unit. In all other cases, required parking spaces must be
designed to allow each parking space to be accessed without passing through
another parking space. Tandem parking arrangements must have a minimum stall of
eight and one-half feet and a minimum length of 36 feet.
   Figure 26: Tandem Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2396.jpg]
   (F)   Surfacing.
      (1)   All off-street parking areas must be surfaced with a dustless, all-
weather surface unless otherwise expressly stated in this UDO. Parking area
surfacing must be completed prior to initiation of the use to be served by the
parking.
      (2)   All motorized vehicles designed for travel upon public streets and
that are being parked, stored or displayed for sale must be parked, stored or
displayed on dustless, all-weather surface. This surfacing requirement does not
apply to junk or salvage yards or to storage areas for agricultural, industrial
or construction equipment. Other requests for use of alternative surfacing
require approval in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
      (3)   Pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems, including pervious
asphalt, pervious concrete, modular pavers designed to funnel water between
blocks, lattice or honeycomb shaped concrete grids with turf grass or gravel
filled voids to funnel water, plastic geocells with turf grass or gravel,
reinforced turf grass or gravel with overlaid or embedded meshes, resin-bound
pervious pavement systems, or similar structured and durable systems are
allowed as parking lot surfacing materials. Gravel, turf or other materials
that are not part of a structured system designed to manage stormwater are not
considered pervious pavement or a pervious pavement system. Pervious pavement
and pervious pavement systems must comply with the following:
         (a)   Materials must be installed and maintained in accordance with
all applicable city standards. Damaged areas must be promptly repaired. Gravel
that has migrated from a pervious pavement system onto adjacent areas must be
regularly swept and removed;
         (b)   Accessible parking spaces and accessible routes from the
accessible space to the principal structure or use served must comply with the
Building Code;
         (c)   Pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems are prohibited in
areas used for the dispensing of gasoline or other liquid engine fuels or where
other hazardous materials are used or stored;
         (d)   Pervious asphalt, pervious concrete, or modular pavers may be
used for drive aisles and driveways, but no other pervious pavement systems may
be used in such areas unless expressly approved by the Community Development
Director;
         (e)   Pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems that utilize
gravel with overlaid or embedded mesh or geocells may be used only in
industrial zoning districts; and
         (f)   Parking areas with pervious pavement or pervious pavement
systems must have the parking spaces marked as required by this chapter, except
that pervious pavement systems that utilize gravel or turf may use alternative
marking to indicate the location of the parking space, including markings at
the end of spaces on the drive aisle or curbing, wheel stops, or concrete or
paver strips in lieu of painted lines.
   (G)   Vertical clearance. All parking spaces must have overhead vertical
clearance of at least seven feet.
   (H)   Landscaping and screening. See §§
152.190 through
152.197 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.176 STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.
   (A)   Spaces required. Establishments with drive-through facilities must
provide stacking spaces for each drive-through station as indicated in Table 13
of this section:
Table 13
Drive-Through Stacking Space Requirements
Use Minimum Spaces (Per Lane)
Table 13
Drive-Through Stacking Space Requirements
Use                              Minimum Spaces (Per Lane)
Automated teller machine         2 (measured from ATM)
Bank                             3 (measured from teller or service area)
Car wash, attendant hand wash    3 (measured from vehicle entrance)
Car wash, automated or customer- 2 (measured from vehicle entrance)
operated
Drug store                       2 (measured from pick-up window)
Kiosks                           2 (measured from service window)
Restaurant drive-through         3 (measured from order board)
Other                            As determined by the Community
                                 Development Director
 
   (B)   Dimensions. Each lane of stacking spaces must be at least eight and
one-half feet in width and at least 18 feet in length. Stacking lanes must be
delineated with pavement markings.
   (C)   Location and design.
      (1)   Stacking lanes must be located on the subject property. They may
not be located within required driveways or drive aisles and may not interfere
with access to parking and ingress and egress from the street.
      (2)   All areas associated with drive-through facilities, including
drive-through signs, stacking lanes, trash receptacles, loudspeakers and
service windows must be located to the rear or on the non-street-facing side of
the property. Drive-through lanes must be set back at least ten feet from
abutting R-zoned lots, and a screening wall or fence must be provided along the
common lot line in accordance with the F1 screening regulations of §
152.194(C)(2) of this chapter.
   (D)   Pedestrian access. The principal pedestrian access to the entrance of
the use from a public sidewalk may not cross the drive-through facility
stacking lane.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.177 ACCESSIBLE PARKING FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES.
   Accessible parking facilities must be provided in accordance with the
Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.178 LOADING.
   Off-street loading areas must be designed so that all vehicle maneuvering
and loading/unloading operations will occur on private property. Unenclosed
off-street loading areas may not be located within 50 feet of any abutting R-
zoned properties unless the loading area is screened on all sides abutting the
R-zoned property in accordance with the F1 screening regulations of §
152.194(C)(2) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.179 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION.
   (A)   Applicability. An on-site circulation system for pedestrian and non-
motorized travel must be provided in accordance with the requirements of this
section for all lots occupied by buildings, except for:
      (1)   Residential buildings containing four or fewer dwelling units;
      (2)   Agricultural uses;
      (3)   Industrial or other uses without a resident- or customer-entrance;
and
      (4)   Uses, other than parking lots, that do not include a principal
building intended for regular human occupancy.
   (B)   Required connections. The pedestrian circulation system must provide
safe, direct and convenient pedestrian access connecting main entrances of
buildings and uses with all other such entrances and with available access
points including parking, streets, sidewalks and transit stops. In the case of
building or site additions, these requirements apply only to the new or
expanded areas.
   (C)   Design. Required on-site pedestrian circulation facilities must be
designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements.
      (1)   Pedestrian access must consist of an accessible, easily-discernible
walkway or multi-use path with a minimum width of five feet.
      (2)   The pedestrian access surface located on private property must be
constructed of concrete, asphalt or other fixed, firm and nonslip material,
approved by the Community Development Director.
      (3)   Pedestrian access routes that cross parking lots, drive aisles or
other parking lots must be clearly differentiated from the vehicle surface
through the use of physical separation or by durable, low-maintenance materials
such as pavers, bricks, scored concrete, pavement textures or painted surfaces
to define places of pedestrian movement.
(Prior Code, § 10-10-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
§ 152.190 PURPOSES.
   The regulations of this subchapter establish minimum requirements for
landscaping and screening. The regulations are intended to advance the general
purposes of this UDO and to help:
   (A)   Maintain and enhance the city’s appearance;
   (B)   Mitigate possible adverse impacts of higher intensity land uses
abutting lower intensity land uses;
   (C)   Reduce the impacts of noise and glare;
   (D)   Maintain and improve air quality;
   (E)   Protect surface water quality and reduce the negative impacts of
stormwater runoff by reducing impervious surface area and providing vegetated
areas that filter and retain greater amounts of stormwater on site;
   (F)   Moderate heat by providing shade;
   (G)   Encourage preservation and replacement of existing trees and
landscaping; and
   (H)   Encourage use of low-impact development practices.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.191 APPLICABILITY.
   The landscaping and screening regulations apply as set forth in the
individual sections of this chapter. The following are expressly exempt from
all landscaping and screening regulations of this chapter:
   (A)   Agricultural uses;
   (B)   Public parks and open spaces; and
   (C)   Reconstruction of any building that is damaged or destroyed by
tornadoes, straight-line winds, ice storms, accidental fire, floods, hail,
lightning or other forces beyond the reasonable control of the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.192 STREET TREES.
   (A)   Purpose. Street trees help maintain and enhance the appearance of the
city, contribute to pedestrian safety and comfort and offer environmental
benefits by allowing the infiltration of stormwater, reducing urban heating and
improving air quality.
   (B)   Applicability. The street tree planting requirements of this section
apply to all the following, except as otherwise expressly stated:
      (1)   Construction of any principal building or non-accessory parking;
      (2)   Any addition to or enlargement of an existing principal building
when the addition or enlargement exceeds 20% of the building’s existing floor
area; and
      (3)   Any increase in impervious coverage on the subject lot that exceeds
20% of the lot’s existing impervious coverage.
   (C)   Requirements.
      (1)   Number. At least one large tree is required per lot or per 50 feet
of street frontage, whichever results in more trees. If large trees are not
appropriate due to the presence of overhead lines or other obstructions, small
trees may be substituted.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   Required street trees must be installed in front of the subject
property between the curb or outer edge of street where there is no curb and
the sidewalk. When no sidewalk exists, required trees must be installed on the
subject property within 20 feet of the street right-of-way.
         (b)   The Community Development Director is expressly authorized to
approve the installation of street trees in alternative locations when
circumstances prevent tree planting within the areas described in division (C)
(2)(a) of this section or when compliance with division (C)(2)(a) of this
section would result in a poor growing environment for the tree or damage to
public or private improvements.
         (c)   Required street trees must be located within pervious landscape
areas or within tree wells.
      (3)   Spacing. Street trees are not required to be evenly spaced, but the
distance between street trees may not exceed 75 feet.
      (4)   Materials, installation and maintenance. See §§
152.195 and
152.196 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.193 PARKING LOT BUFFERS.
   (A)   Purpose. The parking lot buffer regulations of this section are
intended to help mitigate the visual and operational impacts of parking lots
that are adjacent to streets or residential zoning districts.
   (B)   Applicability. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking lot
buffer regulations of this section apply to all the following:
      (1)   The construction or installation of any new parking lot containing
ten or more parking spaces; and
      (2)   The expansion of any existing parking lot results in the provision
of ten or more parking spaces or more than 3,500 square feet of paved area.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Parking areas used solely for the display of motor vehicles for
sale, lease or rental are exempt from the street frontage buffer and R District
buffer requirements of this section.
      (2)   Household living uses consisting of a single household on one lot
or two households on one lot (existing or proposed) are exempt from the street
frontage buffer and R District buffer requirements of this section.
      (3)   Parking areas in Industrial Zoning Districts are exempt from the
street frontage buffer requirements of this section.
   (D)   Requirements.
      (1)   Street frontage buffers.
         (a)   When a parking lot is located adjacent to a street right-of-way,
street frontage (parking lot) buffers must be provided in accordance with the
regulations of this division (D) to physically and visually buffer the parking
lot from the right-of-way.
         (b)   Street frontage buffers are required only when the parking lot
is located within 100 feet of the right-of-way and there are no intervening
buildings between the parking lot and the right-of-way.
         (c)   Except as expressly stated for parking lots in the Downtown
Overlay District (see division (D)(1)(e) of this section), street frontage
buffers must be at least seven feet in width and be planted with at least one
large or medium tree per 50 linear feet street-frontage buffer. An S1 low-
profile screen must also be provided within the street frontage buffer, in
accordance with §
152.194(C)(1) of this chapter.
         (d)   Trees planted to satisfy the street tree planting requirements
of §
152.192 of this chapter may be counted toward satisfying street frontage buffer
tree planting requirements.
         (e)   In the Downtown Overlay District, required street frontage
buffers must be at least three feet in width and include a minimum three foot
tall decorative metal or wrought-iron fence or brick, stone, cast stone, or
stamped concrete wall.
         (f)   Shrubs and ground cover plants must be provided in all street
frontage buffer areas that are not covered by fences or walls.
         (g)   A portion of a motor vehicle parking space may be landscaped
instead of paved to meet street frontage landscape buffer requirements. The
landscaped area may be up to two and one-half feet of the front of the space,
as measured from a line parallel to the direction of the bumper of the vehicle
using the space.
   Figure 27: Parking Lot Street Frontage Buffer
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2398.jpg]
      (2)   R District parking lot buffers.
         (a)   When a parking lot is located adjacent to an abutting R-zoned
lot, an R District buffer must be provided in the form of an F1 screen, in
accordance with §
152.194(C)(2) of this chapter.
         (b)   R District buffers are required only when the parking lot is
located within 100 feet of an abutting R-zoned lot and there are no intervening
buildings between the vehicular use area and the abutting R-zoned lot.
         (c)   Shrubs and ground cover plants must be provided in all R
District buffer areas that are not covered by fences or walls.
         (d)   A portion of a motor vehicle parking space may be landscaped
instead of paved to meet R District landscape buffer requirements. The
landscaped area may be up to two and one-half feet of the front of the space,
as measured from a line parallel to the direction of the bumper of the vehicle
using the space.
   Figure 28: R District Parking Lot Buffer
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2400.jpg]
      (3)   Materials, installation and maintenance. See §§
152.195 and
152.196 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.194 SCREENING.
   (A)   Purpose. Screening requirements are intended to partially or
completely shield expressly identified uses and site features from view of
abutting streets or other abutting lots.
   (B)   Features required to be screened.
      (1)   General. This division (B) establishes screening requirements for
several common site features that require visual separation from streets and
abutting lots. Other uses, districts, structures and activity areas may also
require screening in accordance with other provisions of this UDO.
      (2)   Dumpsters and recyclable material bins. All dumpsters and
recyclable material bins must be screened from view of the street and all
abutting properties. Required screening must consist of an opaque fence or wall
with a minimum height of six feet. One side of the storage area must be
furnished with an opaque, lockable gate.
   Figure 29: Dumpster and Recycling Bin Screening
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2402.jpg]
   (C)   Type of screens.
      (1)   S1, low-profile screen.
         (a)   Purpose. The S1, low-profile screen is intended to help soften
visual impacts of parking and other vehicular use areas and provide an “urban
edge” along the street, while maintaining some visibility of the areas required
to be screened.
         (b)   Design. An S1 screen requires shrubs planted to form a
continuous visual barrier (hedge) at least three feet in height. A three foot
tall brick, stone, cast stone, or formed concrete wall may be substituted for
the shrubs.
      (2)   F1, screening fence or wall.
         (a)   Purpose. An F1 screening fence or wall is required in those
instances where a complete visual barrier is needed.
         (b)   Options. F1 screening requirements may be met by either of the
following options.
            1.   The installation of an opaque fence at least six feet in
height and at least one tree per 30 linear feet of fence; or
            2.   The installation of a masonry wall with a minimum height of
six feet.
         (c)   Street setback. When located in a required street setback,
required F1 screening fences and walls may not exceed four feet in height.
      (3)   Materials, installation and maintenance. See §§
152.195 and
152.196 of this chapter.
      (4)   Modification of requirements.
         (a)   Applicable screening requirements may be waived or modified
through the alternative compliance approval process (see §
152.197(D) of this chapter) or through the special exception approval process
when:
            1.   Existing features provide a visual screen equivalent to the
screening requirements of this section;
            2.   The screening requirements cannot be achieved; or
            3.   The screening is prohibited by other ordinances or regulations
or by plat restrictions.
         (b)   An extension of time to install required screening may be
approved through the alternative compliance approval process or special
exception approval process when the properties benefitted by the screening are
undeveloped.
      (5)   Screening or setbacks triggered by proximity to nonresidential
areas/features. When a screening wall or fence or setback is required by this
UDO because a use abuts one or more R Districts, such wall, fence or setback is
not required if the actual use of the abutting R District is a nonresidential
use; or a nonresidential development area. This exemption from screening does
not apply to junk or salvage yards.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.195 LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING MATERIAL.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Applicability. The regulations of this section apply to all trees,
plant materials and other features used to satisfy the landscaping and
screening requirements of this UDO.
      (2)   Plant list. The Community Development Director is authorized to
prepare a specific list of recommended and prohibited plant species for use in
administering and enforcing the regulations of this chapter.
      (3)   Selection. Trees and plants used to satisfy the requirements of
this UDO must:
         (a)   Meet or exceed the plant quality standards established in the
latest edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1); and
         (b)   Not be artificial plants or listed as a prohibited species on
the recommended and prohibited species list.
      (4)   Planting areas.
         (a)   All planting areas must have amended soil to help ensure the
health of newly installed plant material.
         (b)   All planting areas must be contained by edging material other
than vegetation.
   (B)   Trees.
      (1)   Types. Unless otherwise expressly specified, required trees may be
deciduous (broadleaf) or evergreen (conifers).
      (2)   Size.
         (a)   New trees. New or transplanted trees provided to satisfy the
requirements of this UDO must comply with the following minimum size
requirements:
            1.   Large trees must have a minimum caliper size of two inches at
the time of installation;
            2.   Small trees must have a minimum caliper size of one and one-
half inches at the time of installation; and
            3.   Evergreen trees must have a minimum height of six feet at the
time of installation.
         (b)   Overhead lines. Trees to be installed below overhead lines must
be selected from the list of small trees specified on the recommended and
prohibited species list or be otherwise expressly approved by the Community
Development Director.
         (c)   Existing (preserved) trees.
            1.   Preserved trees will be credited toward satisfying the tree
planting requirements of this UDO in accordance with the regulations of this
division (B)(2(c).
            2.   Credit will be given on the following basis:
               a.   Preserved trees up to six inches in diameter at breast
height (dbh) will be credited as three trees;
               b.   Preserved trees larger than six inches dbh, up to 12 inches
dbh will be credited as four trees;
               c.   Preserved trees that are more than 12 inches dbh up to 24
inches dbh will be credited as five trees; and
               d.   Preserved trees that are more than 24 inches dbh will be
credited at a ratio of ten trees.
            3.   The tree preservation incentive credits provided in this
division (B)(2)(c) may not be used to reduce the number of trees required by
this subchapter by more than 50%.
            4.   To receive tree preservation credit, the following additional
conditions must be met:
               a.   Preserved trees for which credit is given must be in good
health and condition and may not be prohibited species; and
               b.   The original grade of the dripline area of a preserved tree
may not be changed.
            5.   Tree protection fencing must be installed around the outer
limits of the dripline area and remain in place from commencement of
construction activity until all exterior work is complete.
            6.   Tree protection fencing must consist of orange vinyl
construction fencing, chain link fencing, snow fencing or other similar fencing
at least 42 inches in height and supported at maximum of ten-foot intervals by
posts or stakes sufficient to keep the fence upright and in place. A visible
warning/no-disturb sign must be affixed to fence at 100 foot-intervals.
            7.   The Community Development Director is expressly authorized to
reduce off-street parking requirements to allow for the preservation of
existing trees.
            8.   If healthy, preserved trees are removed, they must be replaced
by the number of trees for which credit was given.
            9.   If preserved trees die or are lost to storms or natural causes
within one year of the date of approval of the landscape plan, they must be
replaced by the number of trees for which credit was given. If preserved trees
die or are lost to storms or natural causes beyond one year of the date of
approval of the landscape plan, they must be replaced by an equal number of
trees (1:1 basis).
      (3)   Species. If more than ten trees are required, no more than 40% may
be of a single species. If more than 25 trees are required, no more than 25%
may be of a single species. This requirement applies to trees being planted,
not to existing trees.
   (C)   Shrubs.
      (1)   New shrubs.
         (a)   Deciduous shrubs must have a minimum container size of three
gallons.
         (b)   Evergreen shrubs must have a minimum container size of five
gallons.
         (c)   Shrubs may also be balled and burlapped.
         (d)   If more than 75 shrubs are required, no more than 40% may be of
a single species.
      (2)   Existing (preserved) shrubs. Existing shrubs may be used to satisfy
the landscaping and screening requirements of this UDO if protected and
maintained during site development and construction phases of work and if such
plants are not otherwise prohibited.
   (D)   Ground cover.
      (1)   All required landscape areas that are not planted with trees or
shrubs must be covered with ground cover plants, which may include turf. Mulch
must be confined to areas underneath trees and shrubs and is not an allowed
substitute for ground cover.
      (2)   Ground cover plants other than turf must be minimum four-inch pot
or plug size. Areas planted in ground cover other than turf must be planted at
distances appropriate for the species and at a density that will achieve
complete coverage after the second full growing season.
   (E)   Mulch. All required trees and shrubs must be located within a mulched
area and be separated from turf by a minimum distance of two feet (four-foot
diameter mulched area). Mulch within such areas must comply with the following
requirements.
      (1)   Mulch must be applied to provide a two inch (minimum) to four inch
(maximum) soil cover, with no weed barrier material visible.
      (2)   At least 50% of the total mulch area must be comprised of organic
mulch, such as bark, shredded wood, wood chips or other organic matter. Mineral
mulch such as decorative stone, river stone or tumbled glass may be used in up
to 50% of the mulch area.
      (3)   Organic mulch must be fully chipped or shredded, un-splintered wood
product or bark chips free of soil, rocks, weeds, metals, toxins, and foreign
objects.
   (F)   Fences and walls. Unless otherwise expressly stated, fences and walls
provided to meet the regulations of this chapter are subject to the regulations
of this division (F).
      (1)   Fences must be durable and constructed with materials that are
customarily used for fences, including wood, decorative rigid vinyl (polyvinyl
chloride), metal or wrought iron. Fence posts must be structurally stable.
      (2)   The finished side of all fences other than tree protection fences
must face the adjacent property or street. Chain-link fencing may not be used
to satisfy the regulations of this chapter.
      (3)   Walls, raised planting beds and planters must be constructed of
brick, stone or other durable masonry material approved by the Community
Development Director.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.196 LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION, IRRIGATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Installation.
      (1)   Required landscaping must be installed in accordance with an
approved landscape plan.
      (2)   All trees and plant material must be installed in accordance with
sound nursery practices, in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth.
      (3)   All newly installed trees must be staked.
      (4)   Trees and plant material suitable for planting must be balled and
burlapped or container grown. Planting areas should be at least twice the
diameter of the root system or the container.
      (5)   All landscaped areas that are adjacent to pavement must be
protected with curbs or equivalent barriers. Flush curbs, curb cuts or other
methods must be used to direct stormwater to landscape areas that abut paved
areas.
      (6)   Landscaping may not obstruct traffic visibility at street
intersections or driveways.
      (7)   The city is not liable for any damage to above-ground or below-
ground improvements or landscaping within the public right-of-way, even when
such damage or destruction is the direct result of government action. When
landscaping is placed or installed within the public right-of-way, the city has
no obligation to replace or repair such landscaping if removed or damaged by
city field operations or other governmental functions. The city also has no
obligation to maintain above ground or below ground improvements or landscaping
within the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Protection. All landscape areas provided to meet the requirements of
this UDO must be protected from potential damage by adjacent uses and
development, including parking and storage areas.
   (C)   Irrigation.
      (1)   All required landscaped areas must be provided with irrigation in
accordance with one of the following options:
         (a)   A permanent irrigation system with a controller to tailor
watering schedules to weather and site conditions; or
         (b)   A temporary irrigation system that provides sufficient water to
ensure that all trees and plants will become established.
      (2)   Irrigation systems must comply with all applicable Building and
Plumbing Codes.
   (D)   Timing of installation.
      (1)   All required landscaping and appurtenances, except trees, must be
installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   All required trees must be installed within 120 days after issuance
of a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Required landscaping and screening must be continuously maintained,
including necessary watering; weeding; pruning; pest control; litter and debris
clean-up; and replacement of dead, diseased or damaged plant material.
      (2)   Failure to comply with an approved landscaping plan, including
failure to maintain required landscaping and screening and failure to replace
dead, diseased or damaged landscaping, constitutes a violation of this UDO and
is subject to penalties and enforcement under §§
152.335 through
152.342 of this chapter.
      (3)   The property owner is responsible for maintenance of trees and
landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan and the regulations
of this UDO. Any dead, diseased or damaged trees, landscaping or screening
materials must be removed and replaced by the property owner within 90 days of
date that written notice of the obligation to remove and replace required
landscaping is issued by the city. Property owners have no obligation to
replace or restore required landscaping that is damaged or destroyed as a
direct result of government action or lawful action of a franchise utility
provider.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.197 LANDSCAPE PLANS.
   (A)   Preparation of landscape plan. Required landscape plans must be
accompanied by written certification from an architect, landscape architect or
engineer licensed to practice in the state, that the landscape plan is in
conformance with the minimum requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Required information. All building permit applications for sites
requiring landscaping must include a landscape plan that includes at least the
following information:
      (1)   General. The date, scale, north arrow and name of the property
owner;
      (2)   Site features.
         (a)   The location of property lines and dimensions of the site;
         (b)   The approximate centerline of existing water courses;
         (c)   The approximate location of significant drainage features;
         (d)   The location and size of existing and proposed streets and
alleys, drive aisles, parking areas and sidewalks on or adjacent to the lot;
         (e)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings and
structures on the lot;
         (f)   Existing topography and proposed grading;
         (g)   Area in which grading and vegetation removal will occur; and
         (h)   The location of existing and proposed utility easements and
overhead utility lines on or adjacent to the lot.
      (3)   Proposed landscaping.
         (a)   The location, size and type of proposed landscaping (trees,
shrubs, ground cover) and the location and size of the proposed landscape
areas;
         (b)   Planting details and specifications, including type of mulch and
edging to be used in landscape areas;
         (c)   The method of protecting any existing trees and vegetation
proposed to be preserved, including the identification of existing and finished
contours illustrating the limits of grading near the drip line of any trees;
         (d)   The proposed irrigation plan for each required landscape area,
including a list of abbreviations and symbols, water main size, water meter
size and location, point of connection, backflow prevention assembly size, make
and model;
         (e)   The schedule of installation of required trees, landscaping and
appurtenances;
         (f)   The location of all existing and proposed structures on the
site;
         (g)   The existing topography and proposed grading; and
         (h)   The area and dimensions of each landscape area and the total
landscape area provided on the site.
   (C)   Administrative review. After receipt of a complete landscape plan, the
Community Development Director must:
      (1)   Approve the landscape plan as complying with the requirements of
this chapter;
      (2)   Approve the landscape plan with conditions of approval that will
bring it into compliance with the requirements of this chapter; or
      (3)   Reject the landscape plan as failing to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Alternative compliance landscape and screening plans.
      (1)   To accommodate creativity in landscape and screening design and to
allow for flexibility in addressing atypical, site-specific development/
redevelopment challenges, the Community Development Director is authorized to
approve alternative compliance landscape plans prepared by a landscape
architect licensed to practice in the state.
      (2)   In order to approve such alternative compliance landscape plans,
the Community Development Director must determine that one or more of the
following conditions or opportunities are present:
         (a)   The site has space limitations or an unusual shape that makes
strict compliance impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Physical conditions on or adjacent to the site such as
topography, soils, vegetation or existing structures or utilities are such that
strict compliance is impossible, impractical or of no value in terms of
advancing the general purposes of this chapter;
         (c)   Safety considerations such as intersection visibility, utility
locations and the like make alternative compliance necessary; or
         (d)   Creative, alternative landscape plans will provide an equal or
better means of meeting the intent of the landscaping and screening regulations
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-11-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
SIGNS
§ 152.210 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The sign regulations of this subchapter are intended to
balance the following differing, and at times, competing goals:
      (1)   To support the desired character of the city, as expressed in
adopted plans, policies and regulations;
      (2)   To promote an attractive visual environment;
      (3)   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
for businesses, organizations and individuals;
      (4)   To provide a means of way-finding for visitors and residents;
      (5)   To provide for reasonable business identification, advertising and
communication;
      (6)   To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they
obscure one another to the detriment of the economic and social well-being of
the city and its residents, property owners and visitors;
      (7)   To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing
hazards for motorized and nonmotorized traffic;
      (8)   To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public
and private property; and
      (9)   To provide broadly for the expression of individual opinions
through the use of signs on private property.
   (B)   Scope and applicability. All signs within the city are subject to the
regulations of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this UDO.
   (C)   Content neutrality. Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain,
in lieu of any other message or copy, any lawful noncommercial message that
does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product,
commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or
activity, as long as the sign complies with all size, height, location and
other applicable requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. Off-premises outdoor
advertising signs are allowed only in those zoning districts and locations
expressly identified in this UDO and only when such signs comply with all
applicable off-premises outdoor advertising sign regulations. Provisions of
this UDO that refer to “signs” being allowed or certain types of signs being
allowed (e.g., freestanding, wall, projecting) are not to be construed as
references to off-premises outdoor advertising signs being allowed, unless the
subject provision expressly refers to “off-premises outdoor advertising signs”.
See §
152.085,
Table 7 of this chapter to determine which zoning districts allow off-premises
outdoor advertising signs.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.211 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND SIGN CHARACTERISTICS.
   The following signs and sign characteristics are prohibited except as
otherwise expressly stated:
   (A)   Signs for which no required permit has been issued;
   (B)   Signs located in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance;
   (C)   Search lights, strobe lights, rotating beacon lights, flashing lights
that are visible from public right-of-way, except as otherwise expressly
allowed by this chapter or required by law;
   (D)   Signs located in or obstructing a required parking or loading space,
or that otherwise obstruct vehicular or pedestrian access or circulation, or
that pose any other hazard to motorized or nonmotorized travel;
   (E)   Signs located in or that project into the right-of-way of a public
street, unless a license has been granted by the city;
   (F)   Signs that obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door
opening used as a means of egress;
   (G)   Signs that interfere with an opening required for ventilation, except
that signs may cover transom windows when not in violation of Building and Fire
Prevention Codes;
   (H)   Signs affixed directly to a tree, utility pole or traffic-control
device;
   (I)   Signs that obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or
that may be confused with, any authorized traffic-control sign, signal or
device;
   (J)   Sign displays with a brightness of such intensity or brilliance that
they impair the vision or endanger the safety and welfare of any pedestrian,
cyclist or person operating a motor vehicle;
   (K)   Roof signs;
   (L)   Signs attached to or painted on an inoperable or unlicensed vehicle
(motorized or non- motorized) located in view of the right-of-way; and
   (M)   Signs attached to or painted on a licensed motor vehicle if the sign:
      (1)   Directs attention to a business, service, commodity or activity
offered or sold on the premises; and
      (2)   If the vehicle is parked closer to the street than the nearest
building wall (does not apply to vehicles parked for the purpose of immediate
loading and unloading).
(Prior Code, § 10-12-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.212 SIGN EXCEPTIONS.
   The following signs are not counted as signs for purposes of determining the
number of signs or amount of signage on a lot.
   (A)   Driveway signs.
      (1)   One driveway sign may be installed at each vehicle entrance and
exit to any lot occupied by an allowed nonresidential use or apartment/condo
building. Such signs must be located within ten feet of the intersection of the
driveway and the street right-of-way. Driveway signs may be illuminated but may
not exceed four square feet in area or five feet in height.
      (2)   Off-street parking areas with a capacity of more than four
vehicles, multi-tenant developments and uses on lots exceeding 80,000 square
feet in area may display internal site driveway signs. Such signs must be
located within ten feet of an internal site driveway or drive aisle and may not
exceed 12 square feet in area or ten feet in height.
   (B)   Drive-through signs. Drive-through signs are permitted in conjunction
with drive-through uses, in accordance with the following regulations.
      (1)   Location. Drive-through signs must be located within ten feet of a
drive-through lane.
      (2)   Number and dimensions. One primary drive-through sign not to exceed
36 square feet in area or eight feet in height is allowed per order station up
to a maximum of two primary drive-through signs per lot. One secondary drive-
through sign not to exceed 15 square feet in area or six feet in height is
allowed per lot.
      (3)   Residential separation. Drive-through signs must be set back at
least 50 feet from residential zoning districts.
      (4)   Visibility. Drive-through signs must be oriented to be visible by
motorists in allowed drive-through lanes.
   Figure 30: Drive-Through Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2404.jpg]
   (C)   Nameplates. Nameplates are allowed in all zoning districts, provided
they do not exceed two square feet in area in Residential Districts or four
square feet in area in all other districts.
   (D)   Window signs. Window signs are allowed as sign exceptions for allowed
nonresidential uses, provided they do not cover more than 25% of the area of
the window to which they are affixed.
   (E)   Temporary signs.
      (1)   Real estate signs. One real estate sign is allowed per street
frontage, subject to the standards in Table 14 of this section:
Table 14
Real Estate Signs
Regulation AG, R and CO Districts All Other Districts
Table 14
Real Estate Signs
Regulation                    AG, R and CO Districts All Other Districts
Maximum sign area:                                   
   Minor street frontage   8 square feet          8 square feet
   All other street frontag32 square feet         80 square feet
Maximum sign height:
   Minor street frontage   8 feet                 8 feet
   All other street frontag15 feet                25 feet
 
      (2)   Construction signs. One construction sign is allowed per street
frontage, subject to the following standards.
         (a)   Construction signs may not exceed 32 square feet in area or one-
half square feet of sign area per linear foot of street frontage, whichever is
greater, but in no case may the sign exceed 400 square feet in area. The
maximum sign area calculation must be based on the street frontage to which the
sign is oriented.
         (b)   Construction signs may not exceed 15 feet in height.
         (c)   Construction signs must be removed within two weeks of
completion of the construction or development.
      (3)   Banners.
         (a)   One banner attached to the wall of a building is allowed as a
sign exception for allowed nonresidential uses, provided that such banner does
not exceed 32 square feet in area.
         (b)   Banners must be removed no later than 90 days after installation
or at such time that permanent signs are installed, whichever occurs first.
      (4)   Promotional signs. Promotional signs are permitted as sign
exceptions on lots occupied by allowed nonresidential uses. Such signs are
subject to the following standards.
         (a)   No more than four promotional sign permits are allowed per
business per year.
         (b)   A promotional sign permit may be issued for a maximum 14-day
period. Any or all of the four allowed promotional sign time periods may run
consecutively.
         (c)   The height of a promotional sign may not exceed the maximum
allowed height of any freestanding sign allowed in the subject zoning district.
In addition, any inflatable promotional signs must be set back from all
property lines by a minimum distance of one foot for every one foot of sign
height, as measured from ground level at the base of the sign.
         (d)   Promotional signs may not be mounted on the roof, except for
inflatable or other non-rigid sign/displays, which may be roof-mounted.
      (5)   Campaign signs. Campaign signs must be removed no later than seven
days after the voting event. Campaign signs are prohibited on public property
and are allowed on private property only with the consent of the owner of the
subject property. In R and CO Zoning Districts campaign signs may not exceed 16
square feet in area.
      (6)   Special event signs. Special event signs are subject to City
Council approval. City Council- approved special event signs are not subject to
the sign regulations of this chapter unless otherwise expressly stated at the
time of approval.
   (F)   Other sign exceptions. The following additional signs are also allowed
as sign exceptions:
      (1)   Signs erected and maintained pursuant to the discharge of
governmental functions, or that are required by law, ordinance, or government
regulation, or that are required to be posted in order to effectuate a legal
right;
      (2)   Flags that do not contain a commercial message;
      (3)   Wall plaques and wall signs that are not illuminated and that do
not exceed four square feet in area;
      (4)   Signs that are not legible from any public right-of-way or from
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel;
      (5)   Signs within completely enclosed buildings, provided that such
signs are oriented to be primarily visible from inside the subject building;
and
      (6)   Labels and notices on equipment or structures, provided the label
or notice does not exceed 15 square inches in area.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.213 SIGN REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this section apply to on-premises
wall, projecting and freestanding signs and all off-premises outdoor
advertising signs, except as otherwise expressly stated. These regulations are
in addition to any other applicable regulations established in this chapter.
   (B)   Required setbacks, spacing and separations.
      (1)   All parts of a sign must be set back at least ten feet from street
rights-of-way.
      (2)   All on-premises projecting signs and freestanding signs and all
off-premises outdoor advertising signs must be separated from all other
projecting signs, freestanding signs and off-premises outdoor advertising signs
by a minimum distance of 30 feet. Additional spacing requirements apply between
off-premises outdoor advertising signs (see §
152.216(F)(5) of this chapter).
      (3)   Signs that are visible from an R District or from a designated
residential development area must be separated from the R District or
residential development area by a minimum distance of 50 feet.
      (4)   Signs with an area of more than 300 square feet that are visible
from an R District or from a designated residential development area must be
separated from the R District or residential development area by a minimum
distance of 200 feet.
   (C)   Mounting height of wall signs and projecting signs. Wall signs and
projecting signs must be mounted so that no portion of the sign extends above
the top of the parapet or building wall to which they are attached, except in
those cases where the height of the parapet or building wall or the presence of
architectural features will not accommodate a wall or projecting sign that is
at least three feet in height. In such cases, the sign may extend above the
parapet or building wall for a distance that will permit a sign with a height
of up to three feet.
   (D)   Dynamic displays. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all signs that
include a dynamic display are subject to the supplemental regulations of §
152.218 of this chapter.
   (E)   Illumination. Except for authorized dynamic displays, the illumination
on the face of any sign where illumination is permitted must be by constant
light and may not exceed 70 foot-candles measured at a distance of two feet
from the face of the sign.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.214 SIGNS IN R AND AG ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this section apply to signs in R
Districts and AG Districts. See also the general regulations of §
152.213 of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs allowed. The following signs are allowed in R Districts and AG
Districts in addition to any signs allowed pursuant to §
152.212 of this chapter. On-premises projecting signs and all off-premises
outdoor advertising signs are prohibited in R Districts and in AG Districts.
      (1)   Apartment/condo buildings and neighborhood and subdivision
identification signs.
         (a)   Lots occupied by one or more apartment/condo buildings are
allowed a maximum of one freestanding sign per street frontage and a maximum of
one wall sign per building wall. Wall signs may not exceed 32 square feet in
area.
         (b)   Residential neighborhoods and residential subdivisions,
including mobile home parks, are allowed a single freestanding sign at each
street entrance to the neighborhood or subdivision.
         (c)   The freestanding signs allowed by this section may not exceed 32
square feet in area or two-tenths square feet of sign area per linear foot of
street frontage, whichever is greater, but in no case may the sign exceed 150
square feet in area. The maximum sign area calculation must be based on the
street frontage to which the sign is oriented. Maximum height may not exceed 20
feet.
      (2)   Nonresidential uses. The following regulations apply to all
principal nonresidential uses in R Districts and AG Districts.
         (a)   Wall signs. Nonresidential uses in R and AG Districts are
allowed a maximum of one wall sign per public building entrance. No individual
wall sign may exceed 32 square feet in area. In buildings with multiple public
building entrances, the sign area of all wall signs may not exceed 32 square
feet in the aggregate.
         (b)   Freestanding signs. Nonresidential uses in R Districts and AG
Districts are allowed a maximum of one freestanding sign per street frontage.
Allowed freestanding signs are subject to a maximum height limit of 20 feet and
may not exceed 32 square feet in area or two-tenths square feet of sign area
per linear foot of street frontage, whichever is greater, but in no case may
the sign exceed 150 square feet in area. The maximum sign area calculation must
be based on the street frontage to which the sign is oriented.
         (c)   Dynamic displays. Dynamic displays are prohibited in R Districts
and AG Districts except that on a lot occupied by an allowed public, civic or
institutional use, the Board of Adjustment is authorized to approve a special
exception for the allowed wall sign or the allowed freestanding sign to include
a dynamic display.
            1.   The allowed dynamic display component may not exceed 32 square
feet in area, and no more than one (wall or freestanding) dynamic display is
allowed per street frontage.
            2.   The sign area allowed for a dynamic display is not in addition
to the maximum sign area allowed for a wall or freestanding sign, but rather is
counted as part of the maximum area of a wall or freestanding sign.
            3.   Dynamic displays in R Districts and in AG Districts may
operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. unless otherwise
expressly approved through the special exception process.
            4.   Dynamic displays are subject to the dynamic display
regulations of §
152.218 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.215 SIGNS IN CO ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this section apply to signs in CO
Zoning Districts. See also the general regulations of §
152.213 of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs allowed. In addition to any sign exceptions allowed pursuant to
§
152.212 of this chapter, lots in CO Zoning Districts are allowed a maximum of
one on-premises sign per street frontage. The allowed on-premises sign may be a
wall sign, a projecting sign or a freestanding sign. Off-premises outdoor
advertising signs are prohibited in CO Districts.
   (C)   Maximum area. Signs allowed in the CO District may not exceed 32
square feet in area or three- tenths square feet of sign area per linear foot
of street frontage, whichever is greater, but in no case may the sign exceed
150 square feet in area. The maximum sign area calculation must be based on the
street frontage to which the sign is oriented.
   (D)   Maximum height. Freestanding signs in the CO District may not exceed
20 feet in height.
   (E)   Dynamic displays. Dynamic displays are prohibited in CO Districts
except that on a lot occupied by an allowed public, civic or institutional use,
either the allowed wall sign or the allowed freestanding sign may include a
dynamic display.
      (1)   The allowed dynamic display component may not exceed 32 square feet
in area, and no more than one (wall or freestanding) dynamic display is allowed
per street frontage.
      (2)   The sign area allowed for a dynamic display is not in addition to
the maximum sign area allowed for a wall or freestanding sign, but rather is
counted as part of the maximum area of a wall or freestanding sign.
      (3)   Dynamic displays in CO Districts may operate only between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      (4)   Dynamic displays are subject to the dynamic display regulations of
§
152.218 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.216 SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Applicability. The regulations of this section apply to signs in all
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, except the CO District. Separate
sign regulations apply in the CO District (see §
152.215 of this chapter). See also the general regulations of §
152.213 of this chapter.
   (B)   Signs allowed. In addition to any sign exceptions allowed pursuant to
§
152.212 of this chapter, the following signs are the only signs allowed in all
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts.
      (1)   On-premises wall signs. On-premises wall signs are allowed in all
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. Wall signs may not exceed an
aggregate area of more than one square foot per linear foot of building wall to
which they are attached. Wall signs are not counted against a lot’s allowed
sign budget, pursuant to division (C) of this section.
      (2)   On-premises projecting signs. On-premises projecting signs are
allowed in all Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. Projecting signs are
counted against a lot’s allowed sign budget, pursuant to division (C) of this
section. They are also subject to the regulations of division (D) of this
section.
      (3)   On-premises freestanding signs. Freestanding signs are allowed in
all Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. Freestanding signs are counted
against a lot’s allowed sign budget, pursuant to division (C) of this section.
They are also subject to the regulations of division (D) of this section.
      (4)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. Off-premises outdoor
advertising signs are subject to the regulations of division (F) of this
section. Where allowed, off-premises outdoor advertising signs are counted
against a lot’s allowed sign budget, pursuant to division (C) of this section.
   (C)   Sign budget.
      (1)   Applicability. The sign budget provisions of this division (C)
govern the maximum aggregate number and combined area of all projecting, roof,
freestanding and off-premises outdoor advertising signs allowed on a lot in
Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, except as otherwise expressly
stated.
      (2)   Maximum number. The maximum aggregate number of projecting,
freestanding and off-premises outdoor advertising signs allowed on lots with
frontage on one or more major streets may not exceed one sign per 200 feet of
street frontage or fraction thereof.
      (3)   Maximum area. Signs allowed may not exceed 32 square feet in area
or two-tenths square feet of sign area per linear foot of street frontage,
whichever is greater, but in no case may the sign exceed 150 square feet in
area. The maximum sign area calculation must be based on the street frontage to
which the sign is oriented.
   (D)   Maximum height of on-premises projecting and freestanding signs. On-
premises projecting signs and freestanding signs may not exceed 20 feet in
height.
   (E)   Dynamic displays on on-premises wall, projecting and freestanding
signs. A maximum of one of the on-premises wall signs, projecting signs or
freestanding signs allowed on a lot in a Commercial or Industrial Zoning
District may include a dynamic display. The dynamic display may not exceed the
maximum sign area allowed for the respective sign type or 48 square feet,
whichever is less. The sign area allowed for a dynamic display is not in
addition to the maximum sign area allowed for a wall, projecting or
freestanding sign, but rather is counted as part of the maximum area of the
wall, projecting or freestanding sign. Only one, contiguous dynamic display is
allowed on a wall, projecting or freestanding sign face. Off-premises outdoor
advertising signs that incorporate a dynamic display are subject to the dynamic
display regulations of §
152.218 of this chapter.
   (F)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. Off-premises outdoor
advertising signs are allowed only in compliance with regulations of this
division (F).
      (1)   Where allowed. See §
152.085,
Table 7 of this chapter to determine which zoning districts allow off-premises
outdoor advertising signs.
      (2)   Maximum number and area. The maximum number and area of allowed
off-premises outdoor advertising signs is governed by the sign budget
provisions of division (C) of this section.
      (3)   Maximum height. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs may not
exceed 30 feet in height.
      (4)   Orientation. All off-premises outdoor advertising signs must be
oriented to be primarily visible from the adjacent roadway.
      (5)   Required setbacks, spacing and separations.
         (a)   All off-premises outdoor advertising signs must be separated by
a minimum distance of 1,200 feet from any other off-premises outdoor
advertising sign except when the subject signs are separated by and on opposite
sides of the same road.
         (b)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs must be separated by a
minimum distance of 150 feet from any public park.
         (c)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs that are visible from an
R District or from a designated residential development area must be separated
from the R District or residential development area by a minimum distance of
150 feet.
         (d)   See §
152.213(B) of this chapter for setback, spacing and separation regulations
generally applicable to all signs.
      (6)   Number of sign faces. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs may
not have more than two sign faces. See also §
152.221(A)(3) of this chapter.
      (7)   Cutouts and extensions. Cutouts or extensions are permitted and do
not count in calculating the sign area of an off-premises outdoor advertising
sign unless the cutouts or extensions exceed 15% of the sign face, in which
case the cutout or extension area in excess of 15% of the sign face area does
count.
      (8)   Posts and columns. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs that are
freestanding may not be supported by more than one post or column unless
required by site engineering considerations, as certified by a registered
professional engineer.
      (9)   Illumination.
         (a)   Illumination on the face of any off-premises outdoor advertising
sign may not exceed 70 foot-candles.
         (b)   Any illumination must be by constant light unless otherwise
expressly stated.
         (c)   No off-premises outdoor advertising sign may contain flashing,
blinking or traveling lights or reflective glitter.
      (10)   Conversion. A sign permitted as an off-premises outdoor
advertising sign may not be converted to any other type of sign without first
obtaining a permit. The reverse is also true.
      (11)   Dynamic displays.
         (a)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs that incorporate a
dynamic display are subject to the dynamic display regulations of §
152.218 of this chapter.
         (b)   No off-premises outdoor advertising sign with a dynamic display
may be modified, extended or enlarged until a permit has been issued for its
installation and use as a dynamic display sign.
         (c)   The conversion of an off-premises outdoor advertising sign into
an off-premises outdoor advertising sign with a dynamic display requires a
permit as if it were an entirely new sign.
         (d)   A nonconforming off-premises outdoor advertising sign may not be
modified, changed or converted into a dynamic display off-premises outdoor
advertising sign unless it complies with all requirements of this UDO, and all
setback, spacing and separation requirements have been verified.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.217 SIGNS IN SPECIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   AG District. See §
152.214 of this chapter.
   (B)   PD District. Except as otherwise expressly allowed as part of an
approved PD development plan:
      (1)   Residential development areas are subject to the sign regulations
that apply to R Districts; and
      (2)   Nonresidential development areas are subject to the sign
regulations that apply to Commercial and Industrial Districts.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.218 DYNAMIC DISPLAYS.
   The supplemental regulations of this section apply to all signs with dynamic
displays. Except as otherwise expressly stated, these regulations apply whether
incorporated into off-premises outdoor advertising signs or on-premises signs
that are allowed to include a dynamic display.
   (A)   The images and messages displayed on a dynamic display must have a
minimum dwell time of at least eight seconds and may not contain any movement,
animation, audio, video, pyrotechnics or other special effects.
   (B)   The transition or change from one message to another must occur in one
second or less and involve no animation or special effects.
   (C)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in and of
themselves within the required dwell time.
   (D)   Dynamic displays may not be located within 50 feet of the driving
surface of a signalized intersection, measured horizontally in a straight line
from the nearest point of the sign structure to the nearest point of the
intersection.
   (E)   Dynamic displays may not be located within or within 20 feet of the
driving surface of a street, measured horizontally in a straight line from the
nearest point of the sign structure to the nearest point of the street curb or
edge of the traveled roadway marked or understood as such.
   (F)   (1)   Dynamic displays may not be located within 200 feet of any of
the following:
         (a)   An R District; or
         (b)   A residential development area.
      (2)   This separation distance does not apply if the dynamic display is
not visible from the referenced district, area or lot, and the requirements may
be modified in R and AG Districts if approved through the special exception
process. Required separation distances must be measured horizontally in a
straight line from the nearest point on a sign structure to the nearest point
of an R District or residential development area boundary.
   (G)   Dynamic displays must be equipped with a default mechanism that
freezes the display in one position or presents a static or blank display if a
malfunction occurs.
   (H)   Dynamic displays must be equipped with a light detector/photocell that
automatically adjusts the display’s brightness according to natural ambient
light conditions.
   (I)   The maximum brightness level of a dynamic display may not exceed 6,500
nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 500 nits between 30
minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, as those times are
determined by the National Weather Service (actual time). Brightness must be
measured from the brightest element of the sign’s face.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.219 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person proposing to erect any sign requiring a sign permit must
submit a sign permit application to the Community Development Director.
Applications for such permit must be accompanied by detailed plans, including
scaled drawings of the proposed sign, a detailed site plan and other
information deemed necessary by the Community Development Director to determine
compliance with applicable regulations.
   (B)   Sign permit fees must be paid prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
   (C)   If the work associated with a sign permit has not been completed
within 180 days of the date of the issuance of the permit, such permit will
lapse and become null and void.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.220 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully
established but that no longer complies with applicable UDO regulations because
of the adoption or amendment of regulations after the sign was established.
   (B)   On-premises signs. Nonconforming on-premises signs may continue
subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Nonconforming on-premises signs must be maintained in good repair
and safe condition. No permits may be issued for upgrades or modifications of
nonconforming signs.
      (2)   If an on-premises sign is nonconforming by reason of restrictions
on its brightness or illumination or its use of strobe or beacon lights, the
sign must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      (3)   A window sign that is nonconforming by reason of restrictions on
its sign area must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      (4)   If a nonconforming on-premises sign is damaged or partially
destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of
damage, the sign must be removed or made to conform to all applicable
regulations within 90 days of the date of damage or destruction.
      (5)   If the on-premises sign is not used for advertising purposes for a
period of 180 consecutive days, the sign is deemed abandoned and must be
removed.
   (C)   Strobe lights and beacons. Search lights, strobe lights and rotating
beacon lights that are visible from public right-of-way are prohibited and must
be removed immediately, except as otherwise required by law.
   (D)   Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. Nonconforming off-premises
outdoor advertising signs may continue subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   Nonconforming off-premises outdoor advertising signs must be
maintained in good repair and safe condition. No permits may be issued for
upgrades or modifications of nonconforming off-premises outdoor advertising
signs.
      (2)   If an off-premises outdoor advertising sign is nonconforming by
reason of restrictions on its brightness or illumination or its use of strobe
or beacon lights, the sign must be immediately removed or made to conform.
      (3)   If a nonconforming off-premises outdoor advertising sign is damaged
or partially destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost
at the time of damage, the sign must be removed or made to conform to all
applicable regulations within 90 days of the date of damage or destruction.
      (4)   (a)   If a nonconforming off-premises outdoor advertising sign is
not used for advertising purposes for a period of 180 consecutive days, the
nonconforming off-premises outdoor advertising sign is deemed to have been
abandoned and must be removed.
         (b)   A sign that directs attention to the sign owner’s outdoor
advertising business, commodity or service is not considered “outdoor
advertising” for purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.221 RULES OF MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   Sign area.
      (1)   Signs enclosed in frames or cabinets. The area of a sign enclosed
in a frame or cabinet is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame
or cabinet surrounding the sign face. See Figure 31 of this section.
   Figure 31: Sign Area Measurement (Signs in Cabinets or Frames)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2406.jpg]
      (2)   Channel (individual) letter signs.
         (a)   The area of a sign comprised of individual letters or elements
attached to a building wall is determined by calculating the area of the
smallest geometric figure (e.g., square, rectangle, circle, polygon and the
like) that can be drawn around the letters and/or elements. See Figure 32 of
this section.
         (b)   Signs consisting of individual letters and/or elements will be
measured as one sign when the distance between the letters and/or elements is
less than the largest dimension of the largest sign letter. See Figure 33 of
this section.
   Figure 32: Sign Area Measurement (Individual Letter Signs)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2408.jpg]
   Figure 33: Sign Area Measurement (Single Versus Multiple Signs)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2410.jpg]
      (3)   Multi-sided signs.
         (a)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the sign faces of a
multi-sided sign are parallel or within 30 degrees of parallel, only one side
is counted for the purpose of determining the area and number of signs. If the
sign faces are not parallel or within 30 degrees of parallel, all sign faces
are counted.
         (b)   See Figure 34 of this section.
   Figure 34: Multi-Sided Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2412.jpg]
      (4)   Non-planar signs.
         (a)   Spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-planar sign area
is measured as 50% of the sum of the areas using only the four vertical sides
of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure.
         (b)   Signs with greater than four polyhedron faces are prohibited.
   Figure 35: Non-Planar Sign Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2414.jpg]
   (B)   Sign height. The height of a sign is measured as the vertical distance
from curb level to the highest point of the sign.
   Figure 36: Sign Height Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2416.jpg]
   (C)   Setback, spacing and separation distances.
      (1)   Required setback, spacing and separation distances between signs
must be measured in a straight line from the nearest points on the respective
sign structures. Required separation distances between signs and zoning
districts, area or lots must be measured in a straight line from the nearest
point on the sign structure to the nearest point of the subject district, area
or lot.
      (2)   The required separation distance between off-premises outdoor
advertising signs must be measured in a straight line from the center of the
respective off-premises outdoor advertising sign structures, as located on the
ground.
   (D)   Illumination and luminance.
      (1)   Foot-candles. Sign illumination in foot-candles is measured two
feet from the sign face.
      (2)   Nits. For the purpose of verifying compliance with maximum
brightness level limits expressed in “nits”, brightness levels must be measured
with the dynamic display set to run full white copy with a luminance meter
positioned at a location perpendicular to the sign face center. When taking the
luminance reading, the sign face must be the only subject visible in the
viewfinder.
   (E)   Window area. The area of a window includes only the glass or glazed
elements of the window. Frames, mullions and similar features are not counted
as part of the window area. See Figure 37 of this section.
   Figure 37: Measurement of Window Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2418.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 10-12-12) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.222 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELL TIME (SIGN). The duration or interval of time during that each
individual advertisement or message is displayed on any sign with a dynamic
display.
   RULES OF MEASUREMENT (SIGN). See §
152.221 of this chapter.
   SIGN. Any object, device, structure or part thereof used to advertise,
identify, display or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images. SIGNS as defined herein do not include
temporary holiday decorations; or landscape features that display no words or
symbols.
      (1)   ANIMATION SIGN. The presentation of pictorials and graphics on
signs displayed in a progression of frames that give the illusion of motion,
including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns
or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes.
      (2)   BANNER SIGN. A sign composed of lightweight, flexible, non-rigid
material that is mounted to a pole or a structure at one or more edges either
vertically or horizontally. Flags are not considered BANNERS.
      (3)   CAMPAIGN SIGN. A temporary sign displayed on a lot during an active
local, state or federal campaign for public office or ballot issue or
referenda, generally intended to promote the ultimate exercise of voting by the
general public.
      (4)   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE (SIGN). See §
152.388 of this chapter, definition of COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.
      (5)   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign located on a lot upon which
building or construction is actively occurring.
      (6)   DEVELOPMENT PLAN SIGN. A sign approved as part of a development
plan (see § 152.286 of this chapter) that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or activity that is conducted, sold or offered on property
that lies within the boundaries of an approved development plan covering a
contiguous area that includes both the subject sign and the subject business,
commodity, service or activity.
      (7)   DRIVE-THROUGH SIGN. A sign located on the site of an allowed drive-
through use.
      (8)   DRIVEWAY SIGN. A sign located near a driveway entrance from a
street or near an internal site driveway or drive aisle. See also §
152.212(A) of this chapter.
      (9)   FLAG SIGN. A generally rectangular or triangular sign or part of a
sign made of fabric or other pliant material attached to a flagpole only along
one side and which predominately displays distinctive colors, images, shapes or
designs rather than legible words, letters, numbers or other linguistic
characters.
      (10)   FLASHING (ILLUMINATION) SIGN. A light source or other image that
in whole or in part physically changes in light intensity or gives the
appearance of such change.
      (11)   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is part of a self-supporting
structure, other than a building or portion of a building. Sometimes referred
to as a GROUND SIGN.
   Figure 38: Freestanding Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2420.jpg]
      (12)   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign, other than a dynamic display, that is
directly lighted by any constant light source, internal or external, except
light sources specifically and clearly operated for the purpose of lighting the
general area in which the sign is located rather than the sign itself.
      (13)   MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign where the base of the sign
structure is on the ground or no more than 12 inches above the ground adjacent
to the sign. Typically constructed of brick, wood, stone or metal, monument
signs have a base that is at least 75% of the width of the sign face.
      (14)   NAMEPLATE (SIGN). A sign attached flush against a building.
      (15)   OFF-PREMISES BUSINESS SIGN. A sign that directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or activity that is conducted, sold or offered
within the development where the subject sign is located and that is expressly
approved as part of a mandatory development plan.
      (16)   OFF-PREMISES OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. See §
152.094(B) of this chapter.
      (17)   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or activity that is conducted, sold or offered upon the lot
where the subject sign is located.
      (18)   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign that is affixed to a building wall,
canopy, awning or marquee and that extends horizontally more than 15 inches
from the wall, canopy, awning or marquee.
   Figure 39: Projecting Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2422.jpg]
      (19)   PROMOTIONAL SIGN. A temporary sign that is located on a lot on
which a business promotion is actively occurring and that consists of tinsel,
flags, balloons, banners, wind devices or similar attention-getting devices,
whether or not the same contain any words, numbers or characters.
      (20)   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign located on a lot or portion of
a lot that is actively being marketed for sale, rental or lease.
      (21)   ROOF SIGN. A sign that is affixed to a roof, extended roof,
pitched roof or canopy, and that extends above the building wall or parapet
wall.
      (22)   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN.
         (a)   A sign approved in connection with a special event permit
approved by the City Council.
         (b)   See also §
152.212(E)(6) of this chapter.
      (23)   WALL SIGN. A sign affixed to a building wall, canopy, awning,
marquee or parapet wall, or a sign displayed in or on a door that does not
extend horizontally more than 15 inches from the wall, canopy, awning, marquee,
parapet wall or door, nor extend above the parapet wall.
   Figure 40: Wall Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2424.jpg]
      (24)   WIND DEVICE (SIGN). Any flag, banner, pennant, streamer or similar
device that moves freely in the wind.
      (25)   WINDOW SIGN. A sign attached to a window.
   SIGN AREA. See §
152.221(A) of this chapter.
   SIGN BUDGET. Sign regulations governing the maximum aggregate number and/or
maximum aggregate area of all or a defined group of signs on a lot.
   SIGN, DYNAMIC DISPLAY. Any element of a sign or sign structure capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures, images or messages that can be
electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. This also
includes any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated
through digital input, “digital ink” or any other method or technology that
allows a sign to present a series of images, messages or displays.
   SIGN, HEIGHT OF. See §
152.221(B) of this chapter.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATION AND LUMINANCE. See §
152.221(D) of this chapter.
   STATIC MESSAGE (SIGN). An advertisement or message that, when displayed,
contains no motion, flashing, changeable copy, running lights, variances in
brightness or animation.
   STORYBOARDING (SIGN). The consecutive display of advertisements or messages
on a sign, used to provide a continuing or evolving message, theme or story.
   WORD (SIGN). Any and all of the following (otherwise, each separate
character is considered to be a word):
      (1)   A word in any language found in any standard unabridged dictionary
or dictionary of slang;
      (2)   A proper noun or any initial;
      (3)   A separate symbol or abbreviation, such as “&”, “S”, “%” and “INC”;
      (4)   A telephone number, street number or commonly used combination of
numerals and/or symbols such as “$5” or “50%”; and
      (5)   A symbol or logo that is a registered trademark, but that itself
contains no word or character.
(Prior Code, § 10-12-13) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 152.235 APPLICABILITY.
   Except as otherwise expressly stated, the design and improvement regulations
of this subchapter apply to all land divisions.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.236 REQUIRED INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly stated, developers are responsible for
the construction and installation of infrastructure and public improvements in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter. Required infrastructure and
improvements must comply with all applicable design criteria and standard
specifications.
   (B)   All improvements must be designed and installed to provide for a
logical inter-connected system of infrastructure and to create continuity of
improvements that will facilitate land development on adjacent properties.
   (C)   If a developer files a final plat for only a portion of a development
for which a preliminary plat was approved, the infrastructure and improvements
required to be constructed, installed and maintained are those improvements
that the City Engineer reasonably deems necessary to serve the lots shown on
the final plat.
   (D)   A developer may seek formal acceptance of improvements to be dedicated
to the public after all the following have occurred:
      (1)   The developer has submitted all required record plans for such
improvements to the City Engineer;
      (2)   The city has conducted field inspections to ensure that
improvements are installed and constructed in accordance with the submitted
record plans; and
      (3)   The owner has certified that there are no liens against the subject
property.
   (E)   (1)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the developer is responsible
for maintenance of all required infrastructure and improvements, including
rights-of-way, to the standards of these regulations until the city, another
unit of government, a property owners’ association, or other legal entity
assumes actual responsibility for maintenance of the infrastructure and
improvements.
      (2)   See §
152.250 of this chapter.
      (3)   Final plats must include the developer’s signed acknowledgment of
this maintenance responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.237 BLOCKS.
   (A)   General. The size and shape of blocks must be suitable for the
proposed development and be laid out in a pattern that ensures the connectivity
of streets and nonmotorized travel routes and provides for efficient provision
of public and safety services.
   (B)   Depth. Blocks must have a depth that accommodates at least two rows of
lots, except when reverse frontage along major streets is provided or when
prevented by topographic conditions or other physical constraints, such as
property size or location next to railroads, water bodies or public parks or
open spaces.
   (C)   Length.
      (1)   To provide safe and convenient motorized and nonmotorized travel
routes within and among neighborhoods and minimize out-of-direction travel,
blocks within new residential subdivisions may not exceed the maximum block
lengths established in Table 15 of this section.
Table 15
Maximum Block Lengths
PL = Property Line (At End of Block)
Mean Lot Width1 Of All Maximum Block Length Without Maximum Block Length With
Fronting Lots          Mid-Block Pedestrian         Mid-Block Pedestrian
                       Connection (PL To PL)        Connection (PL To PL)
Table 15
Maximum Block Lengths
PL = Property Line (At End of Block)
Mean Lot Width1 Of All Maximum Block Length Without Maximum Block Length With
Fronting Lots          Mid-Block Pedestrian         Mid-Block Pedestrian
                       Connection (PL To PL)        Connection (PL To PL)
>125 ft.               1,000 ft.                    1,320 ft.
70 ft. to 125 ft.      850 ft.                      1,000 ft.
<70 ft.                700 ft.                      850 ft.
Note:
1.    Lot widths must be measured in accordance with the lot width
measurement definition of this UDO.
 
      (2)   Block lengths are measured along the street frontage from property
line to property line at opposite ends of the subject block.
      (3)   Mid-block pedestrian connections must be located within 200 feet of
the actual mid-point between intersecting streets and be in the form of a
sidewalk, shared-use path, alley or similar alternative that provides ADA-
compliant connection that minimizes out-of-direction nonmotorized travel.
      (4)   Exceptions to the block length and mid-block connection regulations
of this section may be approved in accordance with the modification procedures
of §
152.285 of this chapter. In order to approve such modifications, the decision-
making body must determine that the general modification approval criteria are
met and that topography, natural resources (e.g., wetlands, woodlands,
floodplains, wildlife habitats), existing development or other physical
constraints make shorter block lengths or midblock connections undesirable or
impractical or that it is unreasonable to impose otherwise applicable block
length and mid-block connection regulations based on the existing pattern of
development or other relevant factors.
      (5)   Decision-making bodies are authorized to condition modifications to
the regulations of this section on the provision of traffic calming
improvements, emergency vehicle access routes, and access features that provide
safe and convenient motorized and non-motorized access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping areas, transportation routes and other community facilities.
      (6)   The block length regulations of this section do not apply to
nonresidential subdivisions or along arterial streets if the City Engineer
determines that access control policies or other safety or traffic management
policies require longer block lengths along such major streets.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.238 LOTS.
   (A)   General. The size, shape and orientation of lots must comply with
applicable zoning regulations. When lots will not be served by centralized
sewer or water service, lot dimensions and area must comply with the
requirements of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality.
   (B)   Flag lots.
      (1)   The creation of flag lots is prohibited unless the authorized
decision-making body determines that a flag lot design is necessary to:
         (a)   Limit direct access onto a major street;
         (b)   Provide greater protection of sensitive natural resources areas;
         (c)   Hide or conceal utility buildings/substations, or radio,
television or telecommunication towers; or
         (d)   Avoid substantial hardship to the subject property owner due to
the property’s topography or another such condition.
      (2)   Decision-making bodies are authorized to impose conditions on the
approval of a flag lot, including, but not limited to, requirements for shared
driveways, maximum flag pole length, minimum street frontage and minimum flag
pole width.
   (C)   Access to lots.
      (1)   General. Land must be divided in a way that affords each lot with
access to a street that complies with the applicable provisions of these
regulations.
      (2)   Reserve areas. These regulations recognize that it may occasionally
be necessary and in the public interest to create lots designated as reserve
areas to be occupied by stormwater detention, common recreation, private
rights-of-way or other similar uses, subject to the common area maintenance
provisions of §
152.250 of this chapter. If declared reserved for such purposes by restrictive
covenants or other recorded legal documents approved by the city, reserve areas
are exempt from the lot regulations of this section.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.239 STREETS.
   (A)   Applicability. The standards of this section apply to all streets
unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (B)   Complete streets. All new and modified streets must be designed and
constructed in accordance with the complete streets regulations of §
151.12 of this code.
   (C)   Access. All lots must have an approved means of access to a public
street or an approved private street that complies with the street standards of
this section.
      (1)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets are prohibited except
where their control is placed with the city under conditions approved as part
of the land division.
      (2)   When proposed lots abut an existing or proposed major street, the
decision-making body is authorized to require one or more of the following:
         (a)   Create through lots that back onto the arterial street and front
onto and take access from a parallel street, coupled with the installation of a
fence, wall or vegetative visual screen along the arterial street frontage;
         (b)   Provide a frontage road separated from the arterial street;
         (c)   Establish deed restrictions or other legally enforceable means
of preventing private driveway access to the arterial street;
         (d)   Provide a cross-access easement to abutting properties that
front on the same arterial street; or
         (e)   Provide a mutual, reciprocal, non-exclusive easement (mutual
access easement) to ensure perpetual access to the subject property.
   (D)   General street layout.
      (1)   The arrangement and layout of all streets must conform to the
comprehensive plan.
      (2)   When streets are not shown on the comprehensive plan, the
arrangement and layout of new streets must:
         (a)   Create an integrated system of streets and nonmotorized
transportation facilities that provide for safe and efficient access to lots
and movement of people;
         (b)   Provide for the efficient movement of through traffic by
providing an interconnected network of streets and nonmotorized transportation
facilities to avoid isolation of areas and over-reliance on major streets and
highways; and
         (c)   Be uncomplicated, so that emergency services, public services,
and visitors can find their way to their intended destinations.
   (E)   Connectivity of streets and nonmotorized transportation facilities.
      (1)   Intent. Connected streets and nonmotorized transportation
facilities help ensure connected neighborhoods; pedestrian access to adjacent
parks, schools, libraries and other public amenities; diffusion and
distribution of traffic among multiple travel routes; and easy access by public
and emergency service vehicles.
      (2)   Requirement. When new public streets or public nonmotorized
transportation facilities are required to be constructed as part of a
development, they must connect to similar public improvements within the
development and be extended to the outer perimeter of the development so that
they can be connected to similar public improvements in the future.
   (F)   Dead-end streets.
      (1)   Temporary dead-end (“stub”) streets.
         (a)   Temporary turnarounds must be provided at the end of stub
streets that are intended for extension when a subsequent phase of the
development is completed or when the abutting property is developed if the stub
street is more than 100 feet in length, as measured from the centerline of the
intersecting street to the perimeter of the subdivision to which the stub
street extends.
         (b)   At the time that the temporary dead-end street is extended or
connected to another street segment, any existing temporary turnaround must be
removed by the developer responsible for extending the street. If for any
reason the stub street is not extended, a permanent turnaround must be
constructed by the subject developer on the (abutting) site being developed.
         (c)   Stub streets must be clearly marked on plats and labeled “Future
Street Extension”. In addition, developers must post an approved sign in the
right-of-way of the stub street indicating that the temporary dead-end (stub)
street is intended as a “Future Street Extension”.
         (d)   The following notation must be incorporated into any plat
showing a stub street:
      THIS STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY IS NOT INTENDED TO BE A PERMANENT DEAD-END
STREET. IT IS PLATTED WITH THE INTENT OF BEING EXTENDED AND CONNECTED TO
STREETS THAT MAY BE BUILT IN THE FUTURE, THEREBY PROVIDING ACCESS TO AND FROM
ABUTTING PROPERTIES.
      (2)   Permanent dead-end streets.
         (a)   All approved permanent dead-end streets must comply with
International Fire Code standards.
         (b)   Permanent dead-end streets may not exceed 500 feet in length
measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the center of the
turn-around. If a modification of maximum length regulations is approved,
decision-making bodies are authorized to impose one or more of the following
conditions:
            1.   Supplemental emergency vehicle access routes;
            2.   A pedestrian access easement from the terminus of the dead-end
street;
            3.   A planted island with a pervious or bioretention landscaped
area in the center of any cul-de-sac bulb; or
            4.   Other requirements designed to ensure connectivity, decrease
stormwater runoff, or otherwise promote the purposes of these subdivision
regulations.
   (G)   Right-of-way widths. The minimum right-of-way width of all new streets
must comply with Table 16 of this section.
Table 16
Minimum Right-of-Way Width for Streets
Street Type Minimum Row Width
Table 16
Minimum Right-of-Way Width for Streets
Street Type                     Minimum Row Width
Primary arterial                120 ft.
Secondary arterial              80 ft.
Residential collector           60 ft.
Commercial/industrial collector 70 ft.
Local street                    50 ft.1
Notes:
1. Minimum ROW width of 60 feet required for streets without curb and gutter.
 
   (H)   Street pavement width, construction and design. All streets must
comply with pavement width, street surfacing, design and other requirements
established in the standards and specifications of the city.
   (I)   Private streets.
      (1)   Private streets require review and approval through the development
plan procedures. Such streets are subject to all applicable regulations of this
section.
      (2)   Except as expressly approved through approval of a development plan
(see §
152.286 of this chapter), private streets must be constructed in accordance
with the same regulations that apply to public streets and must include
sidewalks and all street fixtures required for public streets.
      (3)   Maintenance responsibility for private streets must be established
in accordance with §
152.250 of this chapter.
      (4)   The cost of powering street lights along private streets is the
sole responsibility of the property owners’ association or other legal entity
responsible for perpetual maintenance (see §
152.250 of this chapter).
      (5)   Private street entrances (at the gate) must have entrance and exit
lanes, with lanes having a width of at least 14 feet. If covered, travel lanes
must have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet.
      (6)   Call boxes must be located at least 60 feet from the curb line of
the public street from which the private street is accessed.
      (7)   Private streets intersecting with public streets must have a
vehicle turn-around area before any entrance gate that allows a passenger
vehicle to complete a turn-around completely outside of the right-of-way of the
intersecting public street.
      (8)   Guaranteed access to all emergency vehicles must be provided at all
entrances even in case of electrical power loss.
      (9)   Gate designs, security systems and access controls must be reviewed
and approved by the Technical Advisory Committee before installation. Hard-
tempered steel locks are prohibited.
   (J)   Street intersections.
      (1)   All street intersections involving arterial streets must be at
right angles. The City Engineer is authorized to approve intersection designs
that are within 15 degrees of a right angle when reasonably determined to be
necessary to address pedestrian and vehicle safety, topography or similar
considerations.
      (2)   Where there is an offset in the alignment of a street across an
intersection on a major street, the centerline offset (jog) must be at least
125 feet. Alternative centerline offsets may be approved by the City Engineer
when reasonably determined to be necessary to address turn-lane stacking or
traffic safety considerations.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.240 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Sidewalks must be installed on both sides of all arterial streets and
one side of all other streets. Decision-making bodies are authorized to require
the installation of sidewalks in other locations, such as at the end of
permanent dead-end streets when they determine that such sidewalks will create
a logical and well-connected pedestrian circulation system.
   (B)   Decision-making bodies are authorized to approve a modification (see §
152.285 of this chapter) waiving the requirement for sidewalk installation when
they determine that the general modification approval criteria are met and that
topography, natural resource constraints or other factors unique to the subject
property make sidewalk installation impractical.
   (C)   Sidewalks must be located inside the right-of-way line or in an
alternative location approved by the Community Development Director.
   (D)   All sidewalks must be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the city, including sidewalk width requirements. When a
sidewalk will provide a connection between existing sidewalks that are less
than current required widths, the new sidewalk connection may be tapered to
match the width of the sidewalk to which the connection is being made. This
reduced width taper may not extend more than seven feet from the point of
connection and must comply with ADA requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.241 FLOOD PROTECTION AND TOPOGRAPHY.
   (A)   All natural drainage courses into which other drainage courses empty
must be left undisturbed and be provided with adequate easements or dedicated
rights-of-way. Street alignment should follow contour lines or be generally
parallel to such drainage ways.
   (B)   The subdivision must be designed to ensure that peak release rates
from developments will not exceed the existing runoff that occurred before
development for all storm frequencies up to and including the 100-year
frequency storm.
   (C)   See also the flood protection regulations of §§
152.265 through
152.268 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.242 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   Developers are responsible for designing and installing stormwater
management facilities in accordance with all applicable city requirements
including subdivision designs that incorporate low-impact development best
management practices for reducing runoff and mimicking a site’s predevelopment
hydrology by minimizing disturbed areas and impervious cover and then
infiltrating, filtering, storing, evaporating and detaining stormwater runoff
close to its source. Low-impact development practices include measures such as
preserving undeveloped open space, biofiltration, reducing impervious cover and
using porous pavement.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.243 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Water service must be made available to each lot within a proposed
development. The developer must enter into an agreement with the city for water
service.
   (B)   Fire hydrants must be provided by the developer in accordance with the
requirements of the Superintendent of Utilities and the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.244 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   See §§
150.165 through
150.178 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.245 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Developers must make all necessary arrangements with respective
utility providers for the installation of utilities, including water, sanitary
sewer, gas, electrical and communications service.
   (B)   Overhead lines for the supply of electric, telephone, communication,
and cable television services may be located within alleys or perimeter
easements of a subdivision. Street light poles or standards may be served by
overhead line or underground cable. All other supply lines for electric,
telephone, communication, cable television, natural gas and similar services
must be located underground in easements dedicated for general utility services
and in street rights-of-way. Service pedestals and transformers, as sources of
supply at secondary voltages, may also be located in such utility easements.
   (C)   No underground water, electric, gas, communication service or other
similar utility may be placed within a storm or sanitary sewer easement, except
for crossings, unless expressly approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.246 EASEMENTS.
   Easements must be provided by the developer when review agencies and
authorized decision-making bodies determine that such easements are necessary
or desirable to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or maintenance
(surface or subsurface), best management practices, pedestrian access,
emergency vehicle access or other necessary facilities and improvements.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-12) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.247 STREET LIGHTS.
   Decision-making bodies are authorized to require the installation of street
lights along streets. The location and type will be determined during the
development review process based on guidelines established in the American
National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting (ANSI/IESNA RP-8-00).
(Prior Code, § 10-13-13) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.248 STREET SIGNS AND TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   All street signs, traffic-control devices and related apparatus must comply
with city standards.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-14) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.249 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES AND SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. Performance guarantee and security requirements are
established to address those circumstances under which a developer wishes to
receive final plat approval and record the approved final plat before
installing required infrastructure and public improvements. The provisions help
ensure that funding is in place to cover the cost of installing any required
improvements that are not installed by the developer within a reasonable period
of time after receiving final plat approval.
   (B)   Term of agreement. The term of a performance guarantee may not exceed
two years. If the developer has not completed the required infrastructure and
public improvements within the two-year period, the Community Development
Director is authorized to approve one extension of up to six months in
duration. Any additional extensions or extensions of a longer duration require
approval as part of the land division. Decision-making bodies are authorized to
require updated improvement cost estimates and additional security as a
condition of any extension granted.
   (C)   Form and amount of security.
      (1)   Security must be in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit,
cash or other instrument readily convertible to cash, as approved by the City
Attorney or District Attorney. The performance guarantee and security must be
conditioned upon the performance of all work necessary to complete the required
infrastructure and improvements.
      (2)   The estimated total cost of any required infrastructure and
improvements that have not been installed by the developer prior to recording
of the approved final plat must be itemized by improvement type and certified
by the developer’s registered engineer. Cost estimates must be based on
industry norms within the county.
      (3)   The amount of the performance guarantee must equal at least 110% of
the estimated total cost of all required infrastructure and improvements that
have not been installed by the developer prior to recording of the approved
final plat.
   (D)   Default and use of security.
      (1)   If the developer fails to properly install required infrastructure
and improvements within the term of the guarantee and any approved extension,
the guarantee will be deemed in default. In the case of default, the city is
authorized to draw or foreclose upon the security funds to fund completion of
the required infrastructure and improvements or to contract for installation of
the required infrastructure and improvements.
      (2)   If the cost of completing the required infrastructure and
improvements exceeds the security amount, the developer is liable for all
excess costs.
      (3)   Any security funds to be drawn upon or foreclosed will be subject
to an administrative fee that reflects the city’s actual costs associated with
preparing bid documents and preparing and administering a contract for the work
to be completed.
   (E)   Release of security. The security must be released once all the
following occur:
      (1)   The conditions of the performance guarantee have been completed to
the satisfaction of all agencies with jurisdiction over the improvements;
      (2)   Any required maintenance guarantee has been provided;
      (3)   A final inspection has been conducted by the City Engineer or other
qualified professional selected by the City Engineer and retained by the
developer;
      (4)   Written evidence has been submitted that all owners of the
infrastructure and improvements have accepted ownership of the improvements;
      (5)   The developer has provided as-built or record plans showing
monuments, streets, curbs, sidewalks and all other infrastructure and public
improvements as they were installed; and
      (6)   All required certifications of completion have been provided.
   (F)   Plat vacation. Vacation of the plat as provided by state statute
removes the obligation to construct improvements and constitutes grounds for
release of any remaining financial guarantee.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-15) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.250 PERPETUAL MAINTENANCE OF COMMON AREAS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Maintenance obligation for common areas and improvements.
      (1)   (a)   The obligation for perpetual maintenance of any common areas
and public or private improvements within a development must be established by
the developer and approved as part of the land division.
         (b)   Such obligation must be provided for in the plat, or for
developments not required to be platted, by a deed restriction or other
appropriate document recorded with the County Clerk.
      (2)   (a)   If multiple property owners will be responsible for perpetual
maintenance and control of common areas and public or private improvements, a
property owners’ association must be established.
         (b)   Each property owner, by acceptance of a deed to a property
within the development, will be deemed to have agreed to be a member of the
property owners’ association and be subject to assessment for maintenance of
the common areas and public or private improvements.
      (3)   If the entire development is to remain under single ownership, the
common areas and public or private improvements must be maintained by the owner
of the property.
   (B)   Declarations and covenants.
      (1)   Declarations and covenants guaranteeing ongoing maintenance of
common areas and public or private improvements must be established within a
deed of dedication accompanying a plat or, for developments subject to these
regulations but not required to be platted, by a deed restriction or other
appropriate document recorded with the County Clerk.
      (2)   The declarations and covenants must expressly authorize the city to
correct maintenance deficiencies in areas containing public improvements that
the property owner or property owners’ association is required to maintain, and
to recover actual costs and any legal fees from the subject property owner or
property owners’ association if maintenance duties are not carried out, and to
establish and enforce a lien against the property in the development for
recovery of the costs and fees.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-16) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.251 SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS.
   Surveys and monuments must comply with the Minimum Standards for the
Practice of Land Surveying, as promulgated by the Oklahoma State Board of
Licensure for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
(Prior Code, § 10-13-17) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
FLOOD PROTECTION
§ 152.265 GENERAL.
   (A)   Effective date. The flood protection regulations of this chapter
become effective on August 2, 2011.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
   (C)   Purpose. It is the purpose of the regulations of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
flood area.
   (D)   Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes,
the regulations of this chapter:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
   (E)   Applicability. The regulations of this chapter apply to all areas of
special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (F)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report
entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for Mayes County, Oklahoma and
Incorporated Areas” dated September 16, 2011, with the accompanying flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted on September 16, 2011, by
reference and declared to be a part of the regulations of this chapter.
   (G)   Establishment of development permit. A development permit is required
to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Compliance. No structure or land may hereafter be located, altered, or
have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
   (I)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of the
regulations of this chapter, all provisions must be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (J)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by the regulations of this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. The regulations of this chapter do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. The
regulations of this subchapter do not create liability on the part of the city
or any official or employee of the city for any flood damages that result from
reliance on the regulations of this subchapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made under the terms of this subchapter.
   (K)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. All other words and terms must be interpreted in accordance
with the general definition provision of §
152.385 of this chapter.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
      AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within the City
of Pryor Creek subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
      BFE. Base flood elevation.
      BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the
base flood or 1% chance flood.
      BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
      DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the Floodplain Administrator which
authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with the
regulations of this chapter.
      ELEVATED BUILDING. A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zones AE, A and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones AE, A and
X, ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
      EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM (see division (F) of this section) or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to
as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
      EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 4, 1972.
      EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME, PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
      FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      FIRM. Flood insurance rate map.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. An official map upon which FEMA has delineated
the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable within
the city.
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA for City of
Pryor Creek that contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base
flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocity.
      FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or
tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
      FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within the city subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane
tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
      FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. A person accredited by the OWRB and designated
by the City Council to administer and implement laws, ordinances and
regulations relating to the management of floodplains.
      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning codes and ordinances,
subdivision regulations, Building Codes, health regulations, special purpose
regulations and ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control
regulations and ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
      FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. (See definition of FLOOD or FLOODING.)
      FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A FLOODWAY is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in division (F) of this section. A FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area due
to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
      FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
      HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
Historic District or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
         (d)   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
            1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
            2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
      LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
      LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or
levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
      MANUFACTURED HOME, PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
      MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on the city’s flood insurance rate maps are referenced.
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM (see division (F) of this section) or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City Council
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
      NEW MANUFACTURED HOME, PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City Council.
      OWRB. The Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
      START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Public Law 97-348),
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, addition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, placement or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
      STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
      VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the City Council to a person from the
terms of the regulations of this chapter when specific enforcement would result
in unnecessary hardship. A VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by the regulations of this
chapter. (For full requirements see 44 C.F.R. § 60.6.)
      VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the regulations of this chapter.
      WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Prior Code, § 10-14-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.266 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Council
designates the building inspector (or designee) as Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the regulations of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of national flood insurance program regulations in 44 C.F.R.
pertaining to floodplain management.
   (B)   Duties And responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The
duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601
through 1618, as amended;
      (2)   Reviews permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
      (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by the regulations of this chapter;
      (4)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required;
      (5)   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions);
      (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the OWRB
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the FEMA;
      (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      (8)   Require developers/applicants to determine and provide the base
flood elevation on two FEMA elevation certificates, one preconstruction and one
postconstruction, as well as other data as required in order to administer the
provisions of §
152.267 of this chapter;
      (9)   When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) is permitted within Zone AE as delineated
on the Mayes County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the city;
      (10)   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures,
determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and manufactured
homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial improvement
requirement;
      (11)   Maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the City Council; and
      (12)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of the regulations of this chapter.
   (C)   Permit procedures.
      (1)   An application for a development permit must be submitted to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations,
existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured
homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood
hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
         (b)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator must be based on all regulations of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (b)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (c)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (d)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (e)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (f)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges,
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
         (g)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         (h)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (i)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
         (j)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may
approve certain development in Zones A or AE delineated on the Mayes County
FIRM that increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
one foot, provided that the applicant for the development permit in that case
first complies with 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
   (D)   Variances.
      (1)   General provisions.
         (a)   1.   The Floodplain Board is authorized to grant variances for
uses that do not satisfy the requirements of the Oklahoma Floodplain Management
Act or the regulations of this chapter, if the applicant for the variance
presents adequate proof that:
               a.   Compliance with the regulations of this chapter will result
in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit
or advantage to the people; and
               b.   Satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section.
            2.   However, no variance may be granted where the effect of the
variance will be to permit the continuance of a condition which unreasonably
creates flooding hazards.
         (b)   Any variance so granted is not to be construed as relieving any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the Oklahoma Floodplain
Management Act or by other laws of the state.
         (c)   Variances may not be effective for a period longer than 20
years.
         (d)   Any person seeking a variance must file a petition with the City
Council, accompanied by a filing fee.
         (e)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in division (C)(2) of this section
and provisions of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
         (f)   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the
base flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the Chairperson of the
City Floodplain Board which states that:
            1.   The cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than
the base flood elevation; and
            2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks
to life and property.
         (g)   At such time as the Floodplain Board deems the petition ready
for notification to the public, the City Floodplain Board must schedule a
hearing and direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation in Mayes County at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
         (h)   The Floodplain Board must conduct the hearing and make
determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section.
The Board exercises wide discretion in weighing the equities involved and the
advantages and disadvantages to the applicant and to the public at large when
determining whether the variance should be granted.
         (i)   Variances may only be granted upon:
            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
            2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
            3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances;
and
            4.   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
         (j)   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of the regulations of this chapter, the Floodplain Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
         (k)   The Floodplain Administrator must maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any
variance issued by the Floodplain Board must be sent by the Floodplain
Administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within 15 days after issuance of the
variance.
      (2)   Special provisions.
         (a)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of the regulations of this chapter.
         (b)   Variances may not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
         (c)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
         (d)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
            1.   The criteria of divisions (D)(1)(e), (D)(1)(i), (D)(2)(b) and
(D)(2)(c) of this section are met; and
            2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety.
   (E)   Violations and penalties. No structure or land may hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance
with the terms of the regulations of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate
or other certifications required in the regulations of this chapter is presumed
to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Violation
of the provisions of the regulations of this chapter by failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who violates the regulations of this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements must upon conviction thereof be fined as provided in this code.
Nothing herein contained prevents the City Council or its City Attorney from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Prior Code, § 10-14-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.267 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (A)   General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements must be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   All new construction or substantial improvements must be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      (4)   All new construction or substantial improvements must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
      (7)   On-site waste disposal systems must be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (B)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the
following provisions are required.
      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure must have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor must submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
division (B) is satisfied.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of two
feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer,
architect, or land surveyor must submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standard of this division (B) is satisfied.
      (3)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding must be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
must be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings may be no higher than one foot above
grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. Require that all manufactured homes to be
placed anywhere within the city within Zones A and AE on the FIRM must be
installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the
bottom of the I-beam elevated at least two feet above the BFE. For the purposes
of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
The home must be installed by a licensed installer according to state law and
compliance herewith must be certified in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A and AE on the Mayes County FIRM either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements of §
152.266(C) of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements that
apply to manufactured homes. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
      (6)   Accessory structure. Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A and AE on the Mayes County FIRM must comply with the following:
         (a)   The structure must be unfinished on the interior;
         (b)   The structure may be used solely for parking and limited
storage;
         (c)   The structure may not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living,
cooking or restroom use;
         (d)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must
be elevated to or above the BFE;
         (e)   The structure must be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (f)   The structure must be designed to have low flood damage
potential and constructed with flood resistant materials;
         (g)   The structure must be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement;
         (h)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure;
         (i)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood must be
provided below the BFE; and
         (j)   The structure must be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures.
   (C)   Standards for subdivisions.
      (1)   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located
in Zones A and AE that is 51 or more lots or greater than five acres must
generate the base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
      (2)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, must have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
      (3)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, must have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
   (D)   Floodways. The following provisions apply to floodways.
      (1)   Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited
within the adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements must comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   The city is authorized to permit encroachments within the adopted
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, only if the
applicant for the development permit complies with relevant provisions of 44
C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 10-14-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.268 EPA WAIVER.
   (A)   Irrespective of any other provisions of this UDO to the contrary,
beginning August 2, 2011, new development is prohibited within the 100-year
floodplain (as defined on the latest publication of the national flood
insurance program’s flood insurance rate map for the city) that would generate
wastewater to be transported to the wastewater treatment facilities of the
city.
   (B)   An owner/developer of property situated in the 100-year floodplain may
request a “waiver of service area restriction” if the subject owner/developer
can sufficiently show that the natural environment in the 100-year floodplain
would be preserved if the waiver was granted. The request for a “waiver of
service area restriction” must be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator who upon review is authorized to determine whether the requested
waiver is in conformance with the purpose of the flood protection regulations
of this chapter. If the Floodplain Administrator determines that the requested
waiver would not be in keeping with the purpose of these regulations, the
request for a “waiver of service area restriction” must be denied. If the
Floodplain Administrator determines that the requested waiver would not violate
the purpose of these regulations, nor have detrimental effect upon the natural
functions and values of the floodplain, then such a request must be presented
to the City Council for a final local decision. If the City Council approves
the requested waiver, the request must then be submitted to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s Regional Administrator for review and
possible approval. The Regional Administrator is the final decision-making
authority for all requests for “waivers of service area restriction”.
(Prior Code, § 10-14-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 152.280 COMMON PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. The common provisions of this section apply to all of
the procedures in this chapter unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (B)   Review and decision-making authority (summary table).
      (1)   Table 17 of this section provides a summary of the review and
approval procedures of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event of conflict between this summary table and the
detailed procedures contained elsewhere in this chapter, the detailed
procedures govern.
Table 17
Review and Decision-Making Authority Summary Table
R = Review body (review and recommendation)
DM = Decision-making body (final decision to approve or deny)
< > = Public hearing required
Hearing notice: N = newspaper; M = mail; P = posting (signs)
Procedure Staff Planning   Board of Adjustment City Council Public Notice
                Commission
Table 17
Review and Decision-Making Authority Summary Table
R = Review body (review and recommendation)
DM = Decision-making body (final decision to approve or deny)
< > = Public hearing required
Hearing notice: N = newspaper; M = mail; P = posting (signs)
Procedure          Staff Planning   Board of   City Council Public Notice
                         Commission Adjustment
Zoning text        R     <R>        —        <DM>         N
amendments
Zoning map
amendments (non-   R     <R>        —        <DM>         N, M, P
HP)
Subdivisions:
   Preliminary  R     <DM>       —        —          M
plat
   Final plat   DM    —        —        —          —
Lot splits and
adjustments:
   Type 1       DM    —        —        —          —
   Type 2       R     DM         —        —          M
Modifications      —   DM         —        —          —
Development plans  R     <R>        —        <DM>         N, M, P
Site plans         DM1   —        —        —          —
Zoning             DM3   —        —        —          —
interpretations
Administrative     DM    —        —        —          M
adjustments
Special exceptions —   —        <DM>       —          N, M, P2
Variances          —   —        <DM>       —          N, M
Appeals of
administrative     —   —        <DM>3      —          N, M
decisions
Notes:
1.    Unless alternative site plan review procedure/decision-maker is
established by City Council at time of development plan approval (see §
152.287(C) of this chapter).
2.    Special notice requirements apply to minor special exceptions (see
§ 152.291(E) of this chapter).
3. Appeals of administrative decisions on-site plans to the Planning
Commission.
 
   (C)   Applications and fees.
      (1)   Owner-initiated applications. Whenever the provisions of this UDO
allow the filing of an application by the owner of the subject property, that
application must be filed by all record title owners of the real properties
that are the subject of the application or the property owners’ authorized
agent.
      (2)   Pre-application meetings.
         (a)   Purpose. Pre-application meetings provide an early opportunity
for staff and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations
required for development approval under this UDO.
         (b)   Applicability. Pre-application meetings are required whenever
the provisions of this UDO expressly state that they are required. They are
encouraged in all cases.
         (c)   Scheduling. Pre-application meetings must be scheduled with the
Community Development Director.
         (d)   Guidelines. The Community Development Director is authorized to
establish guidelines for pre-application meetings, including information that
should be provided and any available alternatives to face-to-face meetings,
such as telephone conversations and email correspondence.
      (3)   Form of application.
         (a)   Applications required under this UDO must be submitted in a form
and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the
application. Applications must include materials and information to assist
authorized review and decision-making bodies in their consideration of the
application, including at least the following:
            1.   A list of the names and addresses of all owners of record of
the property that is the subject of the application; and
            2.   Maps, plats, surveys, dimensioned site plans, engineering
documents, environmental reports, traffic studies, and other materials and
information, as required by this UDO or application checklists established by
the official responsible for accepting the application. Application forms and
submittal requirements must be made available to the general public.
      (4)   Application filing fees and notification costs. All applications
must be accompanied by the application fee that has been established by the
City Council and by an amount to cover the costs of required public hearing
notices and publication.
      (5)   Application completeness, accuracy and sufficiency.
         (a)   An application will be considered complete and ready for
processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes
all required information and is accompanied by the required application filing
and notification fees.
         (b)   The official responsible for accepting the application must make
a determination of application completeness within ten business days of
application filing.
         (c)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the official
responsible for accepting the application must provide notice to the applicant
along with an explanation of the application’s deficiencies. Notice of an
incomplete application may be provided by personal service, electronic mail or
first-class mail.
         (d)   No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the
deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the first
available processing cycle. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the
applicant within 60 days, the application will be deemed to have been
withdrawn.
         (e)   Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the
processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-
making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of
this UDO.
         (f)   The official responsible for accepting the application may
require that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an agenda
for possible action if the Community Development Director determines that:
            1.   The application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
plan’s/application’s compliance with UDO requirements or other regulations;
            2.   The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan’s/
application’s compliance with UDO requirements or other regulations; or
            3.   The decision-making body does not have legal authority to
approve the application.
   (D)   Application processing cycles. The Community Development Director and
other officials responsible for accepting applications, after consulting with
review and decision-making bodies, is authorized to promulgate reasonable
cycles and timelines for processing applications, including deadlines for
receipt of complete applications.
   (E)   Public hearing notice.
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Whenever the procedures of this chapter require
that newspaper notice be provided, the notice must be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city.
      (2)   Mailed notice.
         (a)   Whenever the procedures of this chapter require that notices be
mailed, the notices must be sent by United States Postal Service first class
mail.
         (b)   Addresses must be based on property ownership information from
the County Assessor’s office. When required notices have been properly
addressed and deposited in the U.S. mail, alleged failure of a party to receive
the mailed notice does not constitute grounds to invalidate any action taken.
      (3)   Posted notice.
         (a)   Except as expressly stated in division (E)(3)(b) of this
section, when the procedures of this chapter require that posted notice be
provided, at least one notice sign must be posted on each public street
frontage abutting the subject property in locations plainly visible to passers-
by. If the subject application includes an area with more than 1,000 feet of
street frontage on a single street, at least one sign must be posted for each
1,000 feet of street frontage or fraction thereof on that street.
         (b)   When the city initiates a zoning map amendment in order to
ensure consistency with its comprehensive plan or to implement land use and
zoning policies in areas that require special attention due to topography,
geography or other distinguishing features, such as floodplain, drainage,
historic preservation or blight, the Community Development Director is
authorized to designate the number and location of posted notice signs. The
locations must be within the area proposed for rezoning, be plainly visible to
passers-by and provide reasonable posted notice.
      (4)   Content of notice. All required public hearing notices must:
         (a)   Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing that is
the subject of the notice;
         (b)   Describe any property involved in the application by map, street
address or by legal description, provided that a map must be included in the
newspaper notice for any zoning map amendment;
         (c)   Describe the action sought in the application or proposal;
         (d)   Identify who will conduct the hearing; and
         (e)   Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
      (5)   Constructive notice.
         (a)   Minor defects in required notices will not be deemed to impair
the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice. Minor defects in
notice are limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or
grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected
parties. If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice,
the hearing body must make a formal finding about whether there was substantial
compliance with the notice requirements of this UDO.
         (b)   When the records of the city document the publication, mailing
and posting of notices as required by this chapter, required notice of the
public hearing will be presumed to have been given.
      (6)   Courtesy notice.
         (a)   In addition to otherwise required notices of public hearings,
the Community Development Director must endeavor to provide one or more of the
following forms of additional courtesy notice of public hearings required under
this UDO:
            1.   Mailing notices to registered neighborhood and resident
organizations whose boundaries include or are abutting the subject property;
            2.   Posting notices in City Hall or in other government buildings;
or
            3.   Publishing notice on the city or Planning Commission website.
         (b)   Failure to provide any form of courtesy notice that is not
required under this UDO or any defect in courtesy notice that is provided does
not invalidate, impair or otherwise affect any application, public hearing or
decision rendered in respect to the matter under consideration.
   (F)   Hearing procedures.
      (1)   At required public hearings, interested persons must be permitted
to submit information and comments, verbally or in writing. The hearing body is
authorized to establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct
of hearings and the presentation of information and comments.
      (2)   Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing
body. No re-notification is required if the continuance is set for specified
date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the
continuance.
      (3)   If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite
period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new
public hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing. If
the applicant requests and is granted a continuance or postponement requiring
renotification, the applicant must pay any costs of renotification.
   (G)   Action by review bodies and decision-making bodies.
      (1)   In taking action under the procedures of this chapter, review and
decision-making bodies must act by simple majority vote of a quorum, unless
otherwise expressly stated.
      (2)   Review and decision-making bodies may take any action that is
consistent with:
         (a)   The regulations of this UDO;
         (b)   Any rules or bylaws that apply to the review or decision-making
body; and
         (c)   The notice that was given.
      (3)   In acting on zoning map amendments, review and decision-making
bodies are expressly authorized to recommend and approve a less intensive
zoning district classification than the zoning district that was described in
required public notices (see definition of “less intensive zoning district” in
§
152.388 of this chapter).
      (4)   Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to continue a
public hearing or defer action in order to receive additional information or
further deliberate.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. When the procedures of this chapter authorize
approval with conditions, review bodies, including staff, are authorized to
recommend conditions and decision-making bodies are authorized to approve the
subject application with conditions. Any conditions recommended or approved
must relate to a situation likely to be created or aggravated by the proposed
use or development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use
or development.
   (I)   Decision-making criteria; burden of proof or persuasion. Applications
must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the
burden is on the applicant to show that an application or proposal complies
with all applicable review or approval criteria.
   (J)   Required time-frames for action. Any time limit specified in this UDO
for any decision or action on behalf of a review or decision-making body may be
extended if the applicant agrees to an extension. Unless otherwise expressly
stated, if a review or decision-making body does not render a decision or take
action within any time period required under this UDO and the applicant has not
agreed to an extension of that time limit, the application is deemed denied.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.281 DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Authority to file. Amendments to the text of this UDO may be initiated
only by the City Council, Planning Commission or Community Development
Director.
   Figure 41: Zoning Text Amendment Process (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2426.jpg]
   (B)   Review and recommendation - Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director must prepare a report and recommendation on the
proposed UDO text amendment. The report must be transmitted to the Planning
Commission before its public hearing on the proposed amendment.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Planning Commission’s required public
hearing on a UDO text amendment must be published in the newspaper at least 15
days before the scheduled public hearing (see § 152.280(E) of this chapter for
additional information on newspaper notices).
   (D)   Hearing and recommendation - Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed UDO text amendment.
Following the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission must act to
recommend that the proposed text amendment be approved, approved with
modifications, or denied and transmit its report and recommendations to the
City Council. Motions to approve, approve with modifications or deny zoning
text amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote. If the Planning
Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application may be forwarded to the City
Council with the notation of the tie vote.
   (E)   Final action - City Council. Following receipt of the Planning
Commission’s report and recommendation, the City Council must hold a public
hearing and act to approve the proposed UDO text amendment, approve the
proposed text amendment with modifications or deny the proposed text amendment.
The City Council is also authorized to remand the proposed text amendment back
to the Planning Commission for further consideration. Development ordinance
text amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote.
   (F)   Review and approval criteria. The decision to amend the UDO text is a
matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any one standard. In
making recommendations and decisions about zoning text amendments, review and
decision-making bodies must consider all relevant factors, including at least
the following:
      (1)   Whether the proposed text amendment is in conformity with the
policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; and
      (2)   Whether the proposed UDO text amendment corrects an error or
inconsistency or is necessary or desirable to meet the challenge of a changed
or changing condition.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.282 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS).
   (A)   Authority to file. Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated only
by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the owner of the real property
that is the subject of the proposed zoning map amendment or by the property
owner’s authorized agent.
   Figure 42: Zoning Map Amendment Process (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2428.jpg]
   (B)   Application filing. Property owner-initiated applications for zoning
map amendments must be filed with the City Clerk. Property owners have the
option of filing applications for zoning map amendments with or without a
development plan. If the applicant elects to submit a development plan
concurrently with a zoning map amendment application, the development plan
procedures of §
152.286 of this chapter govern review and approval of the development plan.
   (C)   Review and recommendation - Community Development Director. Following
receipt of a complete zoning map amendment application or initiation of zoning
map amendment by the Planning Commission or the City Council, the Community
Development Director must prepare a report and recommendation on the proposed
zoning map amendment. The report must be transmitted to the Planning Commission
before its public hearing on the proposed amendment.
   (D)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Planning Commission’s required public
hearing on a zoning map amendment must be provided as follows. (See §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required newspaper,
mail and posted notices.)
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice must be published in the newspaper at
least 15 days before the scheduled public hearing.
      (2)   Mailed notice. Notice must be mailed to all owners of property
included within the area that is the subject of the proposed zoning map
amendment and all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property at
least 15 days before the scheduled public hearing. Mailed notice is not
required for city-initiated rezonings proposed as a means of revising the
comprehensive plan or official map or designating areas that require specific
land use development due to topography, geography or other distinguishing
features, including but not limited to floodplain, drainage and blighted areas.
      (3)   Posted notice. Notice (signs) must be posted at least 15 days
before the scheduled public hearing.
   (E)   Hearing and recommendation - Planning Commission.
      (1)   Following receipt of a complete application for a zoning map
amendment or initiation of a zoning map amendment by the Planning Commission or
City Council, the Planning Commission must hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Following the close of the public hearing, the Planning
Commission must act to recommend that the proposed amendment be approved,
approved with modifications, or denied.
      (2)   A property owner-initiated application recommended for denial by
the Planning Commission may not be considered further unless the applicant,
within 15 days of the date of the Planning Commission’s action, files a written
request with the City Clerk and the Recording Secretary of the Planning
Commission for a public hearing by the City Council. The request for hearing
must be accompanied by the payment of the required filing fee. Upon notice of a
request for a public hearing before the City Council, the Planning Commission
must transmit the application and its report and recommendations to the City
Council.
      (3)   Motions to approve, approve with modifications or deny zoning map
amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote. If the Planning
Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application must be forwarded to the City
Council with the notation of the tie vote.
   (F)   Final action - City Council.
      (1)   Following receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the
City Council must hold a public hearing on the application and act to approve
the proposed zoning map amendment, approve the proposed amendment with
modifications, including approval of a less intensive zoning district, or deny
the proposed amendment. The City Council is also authorized to remand the
proposed zoning map amendment back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration.
      (2)   Zoning map amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote,
except as stated in division (G) of this section.
   (G)   Protest petitions.
      (1)   If a valid protest petition is filed against any proposed zoning
map amendment, passage of the zoning map amendment requires a favorable vote of
three-fourths of the members of the entire City Council.
      (2)   A protest petition will be deemed valid if it is signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots included in
the proposed zoning map amendment or by the owners of 50% or more of the area
of the lots within 300 feet of the area included in the proposed zoning map
amendment and if it meets the other regulations of this division (G).
      (3)   A written protest petition opposing a zoning map amendment must be
submitted to the Community Development Director at least three business days
before the City Council’s vote.
      (4)   The protest petition must state that it is a formal protest of the
proposed zoning map amendment and include the street address of subject
property.
      (5)   Persons signing the protest petition must be at least 18 years of
age and must hold record title to their properties, as shown in the land
records of the County Clerk. If a lot is owned jointly by more than one owner,
all owners must sign the protest petition. If a lot is owned by a trust, the
trustee must sign, noting that he or she signs “as trustee”. If there is more
than one trustee, and no single trustee is authorized to sign, then all the
trustees must sign. If a lot is owned by a corporation, the president or a vice
president or the chair or vice chair of the board of directors, must sign. If a
lot is owned by a limited liability company, a manager must sign. If a lot is
owned by any other legal entity, the person signing the protest petition must
be someone authorized by that entity to convey title to land.
      (6)   Persons signing the protest petition must indicate the street
address of the lot owned. If no street address is assigned, a legal description
(lot and block of a subdivision, metes and bounds description of unplatted
tracts) or a map must be provided.
      (7)   If a protest petition contains multiple signature pages, each page
must contain the same protest language. Signatures must be accompanied by the
legibly printed or typed name of the person signing. The name of the person
signing must be the same as the name of that person as shown in the land
records of the County Clerk.
      (8)   A protest petition may not be amended, supplemented or corrected
after the deadline for filing the petition.
   (H)   Review and approval criteria. The decision to amend the zoning map is
a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any single
standard or criterion. In making recommendations and decisions on zoning map
amendments, review and decision-making bodies must consider all relevant
factors, including at least the following:
      (1)   Whether the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the
policy and intent of the comprehensive plan; and
      (2)   Whether the proposed zoning map amendment corrects an error or
inconsistency or is necessary or desirable to meet the challenge of a changed
or changing condition.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.283 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. The subdivision review and approval procedures of this
section must be followed for all land divisions that will result in the
creation of four or more lots.
   (B)   General process. The subdivision review and approval process is a
multi-step process requiring:
      (1)   Pre-application meeting;
      (2)   Preliminary plat;
      (3)   Infrastructure plans; and
      (4)   Final plat.
   (C)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is required to be
held before or concurrently with the submittal of an application for
preliminary plat approval. (See §
152.280(C)(2) of this chapter for additional information on pre-application
meetings.)
   (D)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Application submittal. Applications for preliminary plat approval,
including the preliminary plat, must be submitted to the Community Development
Director.
      (2)   Review and distribution to review agencies - Community Development
Director.
         (a)   Upon receipt of a complete application for preliminary plat
approval, the Community Development Director must review the preliminary plat
for compliance with these and other applicable regulations.
         (b)   The Community Development Director is authorized to distribute
relevant application documents to review agencies and specify a date by which
review agency comments must be received if they are to be incorporated into the
comments provided to the applicant and the Planning Commission.
         (c)   The Community Development Director must notify the applicant of
all review agencies on the preliminary plat distribution list.
      (3)   Agency review meeting.
         (a)   The Community Development Director must work with review
agencies to integrate all review comments into a single comprehensive written
summary, including the name of agency contact from whom the comment was
received. The written summary must be submitted to the applicant at least 24
hours before the agency review meeting at which the matter will be discussed.
         (b)   An agency review meeting must be held to allow applicants the
opportunity to discuss review comments and recommendations with representatives
from reviewing agencies.
         (c)   Following the agency review meeting, the Community Development
Director must prepare a recommendation and provide the recommendation and
agency review comments to the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Hearing and decision - Planning Commission.
         (a)   Following receipt of a recommendation and agency review comments
from the Community Development Director, the Planning Commission must hold a
public hearing on the preliminary plat application.
         (b)   Notice of the Planning Commission’s required public hearing on a
preliminary plat must be mailed at least ten days before the date of the
hearing to all owners of property abutting the property that is the subject of
the preliminary plat application. (See § 152.280(E) of this chapter for
additional information on required notices.)
         (c)   Approval of a preliminary plat requires a simple majority vote.
         (d)   The Planning Commission must act on preliminary plats within 60
days of the date of the public hearing at which the preliminary plat
application was first considered unless the applicant agrees to an extension of
time for Planning Commission action. If approval is denied, the Planning
Commission must state the reasons for denial, which must be included in the
official minutes of the meeting.
         (e)   If the Planning Commission fails to act on the preliminary plat
application within the time required, including any extension agreed to by the
applicant, the preliminary plat is deemed approved.
         (f)   The Planning Commission’s action must be based on whether the
proposed preliminary plat complies with all applicable regulations, other than
those regulations for which a modification is expressly approved by the
Planning Commission in accordance with §
152.285 of this chapter.
         (g)   If the preliminary plat is approved with conditions, the final
plat and any other required submittals related to the subdivision review
process must demonstrate compliance with the imposed conditions. The Planning
Commission is also authorized to require the applicant to submit a revised
preliminary plat that complies with the imposed conditions.
      (5)   Effect of approval. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the
applicant may proceed with submittal of the required infrastructure plans and
final plat.
      (6)   Lapse of approval.
         (a)   Except as otherwise expressly stated in these regulations, an
approved preliminary plat remains valid and effective for two years from the
date of approval by the Planning Commission. If final plat approval has not
occurred within this two-year period, preliminary plat approval lapses and is
of no further effect, unless the subdivision is to be built in phases, and a
phasing plan was approved by the Planning Commission as part of the preliminary
plat approval. If a phasing plan is approved, the expiration date of the
preliminary plat will be governed by the time periods approved by the Planning
Commission as part of the phasing plan.
         (b)   The Planning Commission is also authorized to rescind approval
of a preliminary plat prior to approval of a final plat if the Commission
determines that information provided by the applicant and upon which the
approval or conditional approval was based, was false or misleading.
      (7)   Extension of preliminary plat approval.
         (a)   The Planning Commission is authorized to approve one or more
extensions of preliminary plat approval for a maximum of one year per
extension. Extension requests must be considered in a public hearing.
         (b)   Applicants must file extension requests with the Community
Development Director before the preliminary plat approval lapses.
         (c)   Notice of the Planning Commission’s public hearing must be
provided in accordance with the notice requirements that apply to preliminary
plats (see division (D)(4)(b) of this section).
         (d)   The Planning Commission’s decision on a preliminary plat
extension request must be based on the following criteria:
            1.   Whether circumstances affecting the timing of final plat
approval have changed and are beyond the control of the applicant;
            2.   Whether the applicant can meet the new deadline despite the
changed circumstances;
            3.   Whether all aspects of the Planning Commission’s original
decision to approve the preliminary plat will continue to be valid if the
extension is granted;
            4.   Whether any significant changes in or near the area included
in the preliminary plat have occurred or are expected to occur within the
extension period that would change the evaluation of the preliminary plat; and
            5.   Whether planning and provision of public facilities and
services in the area will be disrupted if the extension is granted.
         (e)   In approving an extension request, the Planning Commission is
authorized to impose conditions and to impose updated engineering and
construction requirements as deemed necessary to protect the public interest.
   (E)   Infrastructure plans.
      (1)   Application submittal. Before any construction occurs and before
the final plat is approved, proposed infrastructure plans and engineering data
addressing hydrology, hydraulics, grading, water distribution, sewage
collection, stormwater management and paving must be submitted to the city for
review and approval.
      (2)   Review and approval.
         (a)   Review agencies must review proposed infrastructure plans for
compliance with the preliminary plat and all applicable regulations and
standards. Applicants must revise and resubmit plans for review, as necessary
to address review agency comments.
         (b)   Once all applicable requirements have been met, the proposed
infrastructure plans must be approved.
   (F)   Final plat.
      (1)   Application submittal. Applications for final plat approval,
including the final plat must be submitted to the Community Development
Director following Planning Commission approval of the preliminary plat and
before such approval lapses (see division (D)(6) of this section).
      (2)   Intake and distribution to review agencies. Upon receipt of a
complete final plat application, the Community Development Director must
certify the submittal date, identify the review agencies to whom the final plat
application must be distributed and distribute application documents to those
review agencies. The Community Development Director must notify the applicant
of all agencies and individuals on the review agency distribution list.
      (3)   Review and action - Community Development Director.
         (a)   The Community Development Director must review the final plat to
determine if:
            1.   It is in conformance with the approved preliminary plat and
any conditions of preliminary plat approval;
            2.   It complies with these and other applicable regulations; and
            3.   All applicable release letters, certificates and other
documents evidencing review agencies’ determination of final plat compliance or
approval have been received.
         (b)   If the Community Development Director determines that the final
subdivision plat shows no revisions or only minor deviations from the approved
preliminary plat and complies with all applicable regulations, the Community
Development Director is authorized to approve the final plat on behalf of the
Planning Commission. The Community Development Director is also authorized to
forward the final plat to the Planning Commission for review and final
decision. Applicants may elect to request that the final plat be forwarded to
the Planning Commission for a final decision, including reversal of the
decision of the Community Development Director.
         (c)   Minor deviations from approved preliminary plats are deemed to
be those that involve insignificant shifts in street and open space locations,
minor changes to lot size, minor shifts in lot lines; and other changes that do
not alter the general layout and intensity of the subdivision or have a
significant impact on proposed or existing infrastructure. All other deviations
from the approved preliminary plat, including revisions that are determined by
the Community Development Director to constitute a public interest, are deemed
to be major revisions.
         (d)   If the final plat includes major deviations from the approved
preliminary plat, a revised preliminary plat must be submitted in accordance
with the procedures of division (D) of this section.
      (4)   Planning Commission action.
         (a)   The Planning Commission is not required to review and act on
final plats unless:
            1.   The applicant requests review and action by the Planning
Commission or reversal of the Community Development Director’s decision on the
final plat; or
            2.   The Community Development Director elects to forward the final
plat to the Planning Commission, without acting on the plat.
         (b)   Following receipt of a final plat application from the Community
Development Director, the Planning Commission must review the final plat and
the report and recommendation of the Community Development Director and act to
grant final approval, conditional approval (upon receipt of applicable release
letters and other documents evidencing review agencies’ determination of
compliance) or deny approval of the final plat.
         (c)   The Planning Commission must act on final plats within 45 days
of the date of the public meeting at which the final plat application was first
considered unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time for Planning
Commission action. If approval is denied, the Planning Commission must state
the reasons for denial, which must be included in the official minutes of the
meeting.
         (d)   If the Planning Commission fails to act on the final plat
application within the time required, including any extension agreed to by the
applicant, the final plat is deemed approved.
         (e)   Action on final plats requires a simple majority vote of the
Planning Commission.
         (f)   The Planning Commission’s action must be based on whether the
final plat is in conformance with the approved preliminary plat, including any
conditions of approval and whether it complies with all applicable regulations,
other than those regulations for which a modification is expressly approved by
the Planning Commission in accordance with §
152.285 of this chapter.
      (5)   Endorsements. A final plat is not deemed to have been finally
approved and may not be recorded until all requirements of final plat approval
have been met and the following endorsements are recorded on the face of the
plat:
         (a)   The Community Development Director on behalf of the Planning
Commission;
         (b)   The City Engineer;
         (c)   The Mayor; and
         (d)   The City Attorney.
      (6)   Required improvements. If the applicant elects to install required
improvements before recording the plat, approval of the improvements may not be
endorsed on the plat until all conditions of the approval have been satisfied
and all improvements satisfactorily completed. Evidence that required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed must be provided in the form of
certificates signed by the City Engineer.
      (7)   Performance guarantees and security. If the applicant elects to
provide performance guarantees and security instead of installing required
improvements before recording the plat, approval may not be endorsed on the
plat until:
         (a)   All conditions of the approval pertaining to the final plat have
been satisfied;
         (b)   An agreement to install required improvements has been executed
and delivered to the Planning Commission; and
         (c)   All applicable requirements of §
152.249 of this chapter have been met.
      (8)   Release of final plat; recording. After the final plat has received
all required endorsements, the Community Development Director must provide a
signed copy to the applicant. The applicant is responsible for recording the
official, signed final plat with the County Clerk and for providing evidence of
recordation to the Community Development Director. No lot proposed to be
created through the subdivision process may be sold or offered for sale until a
final plat of the subdivision has been released by the Community Development
Director and recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.284 LOT SPLITS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The procedures of this section may be used instead of the
subdivision procedures for all:
         (a)   Lot splits, which are non-exempt land divisions of platted or
unplatted property resulting in the creation of no more than three lots,
including the parent tract and any remainders; and
         (b)   Lot line adjustments, which combine multiple, existing abutting
lots into a single lot or alter the boundary between or reconfigure the shapes
of existing abutting lots without creating more lots than existed before the
lot line adjustment occurred.
      (2)   The procedures of this section may not be used for and no
application may be approved by the Community Development Director or the
Planning Commission if approval of the application would result in the creation
of four or more lots from the parent tract, as calculated cumulatively for the
five- year period immediately preceding the submittal date of the lot split/
adjustment application.
      (3)   Lots created by platting are deemed to create new parent tracts.
   (B)   Application submittal. Lot split and adjustment applications must be
submitted to the Community Development Director.
   (C)   Review of application.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application for lot split/adjustment
approval, the Community Development Director must review the proposal to
determine whether it complies with these and other applicable regulations.
      (2)   The Community Development Director is authorized to distribute
relevant lot split/adjustment application documents to review agencies and
specify a date by which review agency comments must be received if they are to
be considered in the action on the proposed lot split/adjustment.
      (3)   The Community Development Director must notify the applicant of all
review agencies on the lot split/adjustment distribution list.
      (4)   The Community Development Director is authorized to call an agency
review meeting to allow applicants the opportunity to discuss review comments
and recommendations with representatives from reviewing agencies. The Community
Development Director must work with review agencies to integrate all review
comments into a single comprehensive written summary. The written summary must
be submitted to the applicant at least 24 hours before any agency review
meeting at which the matter will be discussed.
   (D)   Type 1 lot splits/adjustments (Community Development Director action).
      (1)   Type 1 lot splits/adjustments are those that do not include any
modifications of these regulations.
         (a)   The Community Development Director is authorized to review and
take final action on type 1 lot split/adjustment applications, in accordance
with the procedures of this division (D).
         (b)   If, after review of a proposed type 1 lot split/adjustment, the
Community Development Director determines that the proposed lot split/
adjustment complies with all applicable regulations and approval criteria and
requires no modifications, the Community Development Director must approve the
lot split/adjustment application. Otherwise, the Community Development Director
is authorized to approve the type 1 lot split/adjustment with conditions or
deny approval of the type 1 lot split/adjustment application.
      (2)   In lieu of acting on a type 1 lot split/adjustment application in
accordance with division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the Community Development
Director is authorized to forward the lot split/adjustment application, a
recommendation and any agency review comments to the Planning Commission for
final review and decision in a public meeting.
      (3)   The Planning Commission is not required to review and act on type 1
lot split/adjustment applications unless:
         (a)   The applicant requests review and action by the Planning
Commission or reversal of the Community Development Director’s decision on the
lot split/adjustment; or
         (b)   The Community Development Director elects to forward the lot
split/adjustment to the Planning Commission, without acting on the application.
      (4)   Lot split/adjustment applications requiring review and action by
the Planning Commission must be processed in accordance with the type 2 lot
split/adjustment procedures of division (E) of this section.
   (E)   Type 2 lot split/adjustments (Planning Commission action).
      (1)   The type 2 lot split/adjustment procedures of this division (E)
must be followed for all lot split/adjustment applications that:
         (a)   Include one or more requested modifications of these
regulations; and
         (b)   Lot split/adjustment applications that are forwarded to the
Planning Commission in accordance with division (D)(3) of this section.
      (2)   Type 2 lot split/adjustment applications require review and action
by the Planning Commission in a public hearing, in accordance with the
procedures of this division (E).
      (3)   Following receipt of a recommendation from the Community
Development Director, including any agency review comments, the Planning
Commission must hold a public hearing on the lot split/adjustment application.
      (4)   Notice of the Planning Commission’s required public hearing on a
type 2 lot split/adjustment must be mailed at least ten days before the date of
the hearing to all owners of property abutting the property that is the subject
of the lot split/adjustment application (see §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required notices).
      (5)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission must act to
approve the lot split/adjustment, approve the lot split/adjustment with
conditions or deny approval of the lot split/adjustment. If approval is denied,
the Planning Commission must state the reasons for denial, which must be
included in the official minutes of the meeting.
      (6)   Approval of all type 2 lot split/adjustments requires an
affirmative vote of at least a simple majority of the members of the Planning
Commission who are present and voting.
      (7)   The Planning Commission’s action must be based on whether the
proposed lot split/adjustment complies with all applicable regulations, other
than those regulations for which a modification is expressly approved by the
Planning Commission in accordance with §
152.285 of this chapter.
      (8)   If a modification is approved or conditionally approved, the
Planning Commission must state the reasons for approval of the modification and
include the reasons in the official minutes of the meeting.
      (9)   If a type 2 lot split/adjustment is approved with conditions, the
Planning Commission is authorized to require the applicant submit revised
documents that demonstrate compliance with the imposed conditions.
   (F)   Review and approval criteria. Review and final action on all proposed
type 1 and type 2 lot split/adjustments must be based on whether the proposed
lot split/adjustment complies with the following review and approval criteria,
as applicable:
      (1)   Zoning.
         (a)   All lots resulting from the lot split/adjustment will comply
with all applicable zoning district regulations or come closer to complying
with applicable zoning district regulations and create no new nonconformities;
and
         (b)   The lot line adjustment will not result in a single lot being
included in multiple zoning districts, unless expressly approved as a
modification (§
152.285 of this chapter).
      (2)   Access, streets and trails.
         (a)   When lots proposed to be split contain areas that do not comply
with the street right-of-way requirements, the lot split/adjustment may not be
approved, except upon a finding that one or more of the following conditions
are met:
            1.   Adequate assurances are in place to ensure that the needed
right-of-way is dedicated;
            2.   All utilities are already in place or the additional right-of-
way is not required for utility placement;
            3.   The public has, by statutory easement or suitable roadway
dedication, right-of-way sufficient to allow the placement of pavement of a
width necessary to meet the requirements applicable to the particular street
and sidewalk involved; or
            4.   Existing structures are located within the proposed right-of-
way.
         (b)   When the comprehensive plan or an adopted trails plan identifies
the need for a trail on the subject property, the decision-making body is
expressly authorized to condition approval of the lot split/adjustment on the
dedication of a trail easement.
      (3)   Flood protection. The regulations of §
152.241 of this chapter apply to all portions of a proposed lot split/
adjustment located in a flood hazard area.
   (G)   Approval and recordation.
      (1)   Lot splits.
         (a)   If a lot split application is approved, a certification must be
affixed to the instrument of transfer. The certification must include notice of
the conditions stated in division (A)(2) of this section and be signed by the
Planning Commission Chair, another Planning Commission officer or the Community
Development Director.
         (b)   The applicant is responsible for recording the certified
instrument of transfer with the County Clerk, as an official document that will
be contained in the abstract of the subject property. The applicant must
provide the Community Development Director with evidence of recordation. The
lot split approval lapses and is of no further effect if the conveyance is not
recorded within two years of the date of approval of the lot split. The
Planning Commission is authorized to approve an extension of the time frame for
recording if an extension request is filed by the applicant before the approval
lapses (within the two-year timeframe).
      (2)   Lot line adjustments.
         (a)   If a lot line adjustment is approved, the Community Development
Director must issue a certificate of compliance for lot line adjustment and
affix a certification to the lot line adjustment declaration. The property
description on the certificate must describe the reconfigured parcel or
parcels, which will then be recognized by the city as legal lots. The
certification must be signed by the Planning Commission Chair, another Planning
Commission officer or the Community Development Director.
         (b)   The applicant is responsible for recording the signed
certificate of compliance for lot line adjustment and certified lot line
adjustment declaration with the County Clerk, as an official document that will
be contained in the abstract of the subject property. The applicant must
provide the Community Development Director with evidence of recordation. The
lot line adjustment approval lapses and is of no further effect if the lot line
adjustment declaration is not recorded within two years of the date of approval
of the lot line adjustment.
   (H)   Effect of approval of lot line adjustments.
      (1)   After approval and recordation of an executed lot line adjustment
declaration, any combined lots will be considered a single lot for the purposes
of complying with applicable zoning and subdivision regulations.
      (2)   The owner of any combined lot resulting from a lot line adjustment
may not sell, convey or mortgage any of the lots comprising the combined lot
separate and apart from any of the other lots unless a land division is
approved in accordance with these regulations.
      (3)   Any attempted sale, conveyance or mortgage of lots within any
combined lots separate and apart from any of the other lots within the combined
lot is void.
      (4)   The covenants within the lot line adjustment declaration run with
the title to the subject lots and are binding on all parties having or
acquiring any right, title or interest in any part thereof.
      (5)   Lot line adjustments are for and inure to the benefit of the city,
which has the right and standing to enforce the terms of the lot line
adjustment declaration.
   (I)   Amendment or termination of lot line adjustments. Lot line adjustment
declarations may be amended or terminated only by a written instrument executed
by the subject property owner and approved by the Community Development
Director and duly recorded in the office of the County Clerk. Any subsequent
lot line adjustment involving the subject property constitutes an amendment or
termination of the previously approved lot line adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.285 SUBDIVISION MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicability. All property owner requests for relief from strict
compliance with the subdivision design and improvement regulations of §§
152.235 through
152.251 of this chapter must be processed as modification requests in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Intent. Modifications are intended to provide for regulatory relief
when requiring strict compliance with applicable regulations would cause an
undue hardship or practical difficulty because of unusual topographical or
other exceptional conditions that apply to the subject property.
   (C)   Process.
      (1)   For properties being subdivided or for which an application is made
for a lot split/adjustment, modification requests must be processed
concurrently with the preliminary plat or lot split/adjustment application.
When requesting a modification, the applicant must identify each regulation for
which a modification is sought and provide a written response to each of the
required approval criteria listed in division (D) of this section for each
requested modification.
      (2)   For properties not being platted, modification requests require
review and action by the Planning Commission in a public hearing, in accordance
with the following procedures.
         (a)   Modification requests must be submitted to the Community
Development Director.
         (b)   Following receipt of a recommendation from the Community
Development Director, including any agency review comments, the Planning
Commission must hold a public hearing on the application.
         (c)   Notice of the Planning Commission’s required public hearing on
modification requests not associated with a plat application must be mailed at
least ten days before the date of the hearing to all owners of property
abutting the property that is the subject of the modification request (see §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required notices).
         (d)   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission must act
to approve the modification, approve the modification with conditions or deny
approval of the modification. If the modification is approved or conditionally
approved, the Planning Commission must state the reasons for such approval,
which must be included in the official minutes of the meeting.
   (D)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   The Planning Commission is authorized to approve modifications of
these regulations when they determine that the purpose of these regulations
will be served to a greater or at least the same extent by an alternative
proposal.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may not approve modifications that will:
         (a)   Be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare;
         (b)   Be injurious to other property or improvements; or
         (c)   Impair the spirit, purposes or intent of applicable zoning
regulations or comprehensive plan policies.
   (E)   Decision. Modifications may be approved by the Planning Commission or
approved with conditions only upon an affirmative vote of at least 75% of the
members of the Planning Commission who are present and voting. The Planning
Commission must state the reasons for approval of the modification, which must
be included in the official minutes of the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.286 DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (A)   Purpose. Development plans are required with some property owner-
initiated rezonings and are optional with other property owner-initiated
rezonings. Their purpose is to depict a property owner’s generalized plan for
the type, amount and character of development proposed on the subject property.
By providing greater certainty about development proposals, development plans
provide review and decision-making bodies with additional information on which
to base rezoning decisions.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Mandatory. Development plans are required (mandatory) for planned
development (PD) zoning map amendments and for major amendments to existing
planned unit developments (PUDs). They are also mandatory when the provisions
of this UDO expressly state that they are required. In acting on mandatory
development plans, the Planning Commission is authorized to recommend, and the
City Council is authorized to approve use and development limitations that
comply with, are more restrictive than or are less restrictive than the base
zoning district regulations and otherwise applicable regulations of this UDO.
      (2)   Optional. Property owners may elect to submit a development plan
with any zoning map amendment application. In acting on optional development
plans, the Planning Commission is authorized to recommend and the City Council
is authorized to approve use and development limitations that are at least as
restrictive or are more restrictive than the base zoning district regulations
and otherwise applicable regulations of this UDO. Optional development plans
may not be used to obtain relief from otherwise applicable zoning regulations.
   (C)   Application filing. Complete applications for development plan
approval must be filed with the City Clerk concurrently with a zoning map
amendment application.
   (D)   Review and recommendation - Community Development Director. Following
receipt of a complete application, including the required development plan, the
Community Development Director must prepare a report and recommendation. The
report must evaluate the proposed development plan in light of all applicable
standards and approval criteria. The report must also include a description of
any development plan modifications or conditions of approval that would help
ensure the development plan complies with applicable standards and approval
criteria. The Community Development Director’s report must be transmitted to
the Planning Commission before the required public hearing.
   (E)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Planning Commission’s required public
hearing must be provided as follows (see §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required newspaper,
mail and posted notices).
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice must be published in the newspaper at
least 15 days before the scheduled public hearing.
      (2)   Mailed notice. Notice must be mailed to the owner of the subject
property and all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property at
least 15 days before the scheduled public hearing. Notice for straight zoning
constitutes notice for optional development plans.
      (3)   Posted notice. Notice (signs) must be posted at least 15 days
before the scheduled public hearing.
   (F)   Hearing and recommendation - Planning Commission.
      (1)   Within 60 days of the date of filing of a complete application for
development plan approval, the Planning Commission must hold a public hearing
to consider the proposed development plan. Following the close of the public
hearing, the Planning Commission must act to recommend that the proposed
development plan be approved, approved with modifications, or denied.
      (2)   A development plan application recommended for approval or approval
with modifications must be transmitted, with the report and recommendation of
the Planning Commission, to the City Council within 15 days of the date of
Planning Commission action.
      (3)   A development plan application recommended for denial by the
Planning Commission, will be deemed denied and will not be considered further
unless the applicant, within 15 days of the date of the Planning Commission’s
action, files a written request with the City Clerk and with the Recording
Secretary of the Planning Commission for a public hearing by the City Council.
The request for hearing must be accompanied by the payment of the required
filing fee. Upon notice of a request for a public hearing before the City
Council, the Planning Commission must transmit the development plan application
and its report and recommendations to the City Council.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application
must be forwarded to the City Council with a notation of the tie vote.
   (G)   Final action - City Council.
      (1)   Following receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the
City Council must hold a public hearing on the development plan and act to
approve the proposed development plan, approve the proposed development plan
with modifications or deny the proposed development plan. The City Council is
also authorized to remand the proposed development plan back to the Planning
Commission for further consideration.
      (2)   Development plans may be approved by a simple majority vote, except
that any accompanying zoning map amendment may require a super-majority vote,
as stated in §
152.282(G) of this chapter.
   (H)   Requirement for filing of site plan.
      (1)   Unless a longer time period or a phasing plan is approved at the
time of approval of a mandatory development plan, a complete application for
site plan approval must be filed within five years of the date of mandatory
development plan approval. If an application for site plan approval is not
filed within the time required, no further site plans may be approved for the
project until the subject property owner has filed the original or amended
development plan for re-review and reconsideration by the Planning Commission
and City Council. Such re-review and reconsideration must follow the mandatory
development plan review procedures of this UDO. Following re-review and
reconsideration, the Planning Commission is authorized to recommend and the
City Council is authorized to approve any of the following actions based on
surrounding land use patterns and other relevant information presented at the
time of reconsideration by the Planning Commission and City Council:
         (a)   An extension of time for filing a site plan;
         (b)   An amendment to the approved mandatory development plan; or
         (c)   Rezoning to another zoning district in accordance with the
zoning map amendment procedures of §
152.282 of this chapter.
      (2)   The site plan filing deadline established in division (H)(1) of
this section does not apply to optional development plans.
   (I)   Amendments to approved development plans.
      (1)   Minor amendments.
         (a)   The Planning Commission is authorized to approve amendments to
approved development plans as minor amendments if the Planning Commission
determines that substantial compliance is maintained with the approved
development plan. The following is a non-exhaustive list of changes that may be
considered as minor amendments:
            1.   Any deviation expressly authorized at the time of development
plan approval;
            2.   The relocation or addition of customary accessory uses and
structures;
            3.   Adjustment of internal development area boundaries, provided
the allocation of land to particular uses and the relationship of uses within
the project are not substantially altered;
            4.   Limitation or elimination of previously approved uses,
provided the character of the development is not substantially altered;
            5.   Modification of the internal circulation system that would not
increase points of access from adjacent streets, change access to another
street or increase projected traffic volumes;
            6.   Lot splits that modify a recorded plat and that have been
reviewed and approved, as required by the subdivision regulations;
            7.   Modifications to approved signage, provided the size,
location, number and type of signs is not substantially altered;
            8.   Modification to approved screening and landscaping plans,
provided the modification is not a substantial deviation from the original
approved plan;
            9.   Changes reducing the number of permitted dwelling units, the
amount of nonresidential floor area or the area covered by buildings or paved
areas; and
            10.   Reductions in off-street parking or loading by more than 10%
or one space, whichever results in a greater reduction.
         (b)   In those cases when the City Council has expressly imposed a
condition more restrictive than recommended by the Planning Commission, any
amendment of that City Council-imposed condition must be reviewed and approved
by the City Council.
         (c)   Notice of the Planning Commission’s public hearing on a
development plan minor amendment request must be provided at least ten days in
advance of the hearing by mailing written notice to all owners of property
within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property.
Notice (signs) must also be posted on the subject property at least ten days
before the scheduled public hearing.
         (d)   If the Planning Commission determines that the proposed
development plan amendment, if approved, will result in a significant departure
from the approved development plan or otherwise significantly change the
character of the subject area or that the cumulative effect of a number of
minor amendments substantially alters the approved development plan, then the
amendment must be deemed a major amendment to the development plan and
processed as a new development plan following the development plan approval
procedure of this section, including all requirements for fees, notices and
hearings.
      (2)   Appeal of development plan minor amendment decisions. An appeal
from any development plan minor amendment decision by the Planning Commission
may be taken by any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer,
department, board or bureau of the city. Appeals are made to the City Council
by filing notice of appeal with the City Clerk and with the Recording Secretary
of the Planning Commission within ten days of the date of the decision being
appealed. The appeal must specify the grounds of the appeal. No bond or deposit
for costs are required for an appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal, the
Planning Commission must transmit to the City Council, the original or
certified copies of all the papers constituting the record in the case,
together with the decision of the Planning Commission. The City Council must
notify the applicant and all interested parties, as recorded in the minutes of
the Planning Commission, of the appeal hearing location, date and time.
      (3)   Major amendments. Any amendment to an approved development plan
that is not authorized as a minor amendment must be processed as a new
development plan following the development plan approval procedure of this
section, including all requirements for fees, notices and hearings.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.287 SITE PLANS.
   (A)   Applicability. Site plan approval is required before the issuance of
any permits for development or construction on any property included within the
boundaries of any approved development plan and whenever a provision of this
UDO expressly states that site plan approval is required.
   (B)   Application filing. Complete applications for site plan approval must
be filed with the City Clerk. At a minimum, the application must include a site
plan, landscape plan and sign plan.
   (C)   Review and action by Community Development Director; appeals.
      (1)   Unless otherwise required by the City Council as a condition of
approval of a development plan, the Community Development Director is
authorized to review and take action on-site plans. The Community Development
Director must approve the site plan if it complies (as applicable) with an
approved development plan, all conditions of development plan approval and all
applicable regulations of this UDO. If the submitted site plan does not comply
with an approved development plan, any conditions imposed on that plan or
applicable regulations of this UDO, the Community Development Director must
disapprove the site plan and advise the landowner in writing of the specific
reasons for disapproval.
      (2)   (a)   If the Community Development Director does not approve the
site plan, the landowner may either:
            1.   Resubmit the site plan to correct the plan’s inconsistencies
and deficiencies; or
            2.   Within 60 days of the date of notice of disapproval, appeal
the decision of the Community Development Director by filing a notice of appeal
with the Recording Secretary of the Planning Commission.
         (b)   If such an appeal is filed, the site plan must be reviewed by
the Planning Commission following the hearing and notice requirements that
apply to minor amendments of approved development plans (see §
152.286(I)(1)(c) of this chapter). The Planning Commission’s decision may be
appealed following the procedures of §
152.286(I)(2) of this chapter.
   (D)   Effect of approval. Approval of a site plan must occur before any
building permits are issued. Site plan approval, in and of itself, does not
constitute effective dedication of rights-of-way or any other public
improvements, nor will the site plan be the equivalent of or an acceptable
alternative to the final platting of land prior to the issuance of building
permits.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.288 ZONING CLEARANCE PERMITS.
   (A)   Applicability. Property owners or their authorized agent must obtain a
zoning clearance permit from the Community Development Director before
constructing, moving, or structurally altering any building or structure or
establishing or changing the use of any building or lot. A zoning clearance
permit is not a building permit and does not authorize construction; it
certifies that the land and/or structure is in conformance with the terms of
this UDO.
   (B)   Application. Zoning clearance permit applications must be accompanied
by a legal description of the lot and a plan drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the building
to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to satisfy the
requirements of these regulations, as determined by the Community Development
Director.
   (C)   Action. Within five days of receipt of a complete application for a
zoning clearance permit, the Community Development Director must review and
take action on the permit. If the proposed development and construction
complies with all applicable provisions of this UDO, the permit must be issued.
If the proposed development and construction does not comply with one or more
provisions of this UDO, the permit must be denied. The applicant must be
notified of the action taken, and if the permit is denied, notified of the
specific reasons for denial.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.289 ZONING INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   Day-to-day responsibility for administering and interpreting the
provisions of this UDO, including the zoning map, rests with the Community
Development Director, whose decisions may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment, in accordance with the procedures of §
152.293 of this chapter.
      (2)   Occasionally, the UDO may not sufficiently address an issue that
arises in administering or interpreting the UDO. In those cases, the Community
Development Director may elect to issue, or a citizen may file an application
for, a written zoning interpretation to guide in future decision-making. The
procedures of this section govern the issuance of such interpretations.
   (B)   Authority. The Community Development Director is authorized to issue
written interpretations pursuant to this section. The Community Development
Director is also authorized to refer the matter to the Board of Adjustment for
an interpretation or for guidance in making an interpretation.
   (C)   Application. A complete application for a written interpretation
request must be submitted to the Community Development Director.
   (D)   Action. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the
Community Development Director must:
      (1)   Review and evaluate the interpretation request in light of the
provisions that are the subject of the interpretation request and any other
relevant documents;
      (2)   Consult with affected staff; and
      (3)   Prepare a written interpretation.
   (E)   Form. The interpretation must be provided to the applicant in writing
and filed in the official record of interpretations.
   (F)   Official record. The Community Development Director must maintain an
official record of written interpretations. The record of interpretations must
be available for public inspection in the office of the Community Development
Director during normal business hours.
   (G)   Appeal of decision. Appeals of written interpretations issued pursuant
to this section may be taken to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
appeal procedures of §
152.293 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.290 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. Administrative adjustments are intended to provide a
streamlined approval procedure for minor (de minimis) modifications of selected
zoning regulations. Administrative adjustments are further intended to:
      (1)   Allow development and construction that is in keeping with the
general purpose and intent of zoning regulations and the established character
of the area in which the development or construction is located;
      (2)   Provide flexibility that will help promote rehabilitation and reuse
of existing buildings when such flexibility will not adversely affect nearby
properties or neighborhood character; and
      (3)   Provide flexibility for new construction when such flexibility is
in keeping with the general purpose and intent of zoning regulations and will
not adversely affect nearby properties or surrounding neighborhood character.
   (B)   Authorized administrative adjustments.
      (1)   Administrative adjustments may be granted only as expressly
identified in this section.
         (a)   The Community Development Director is authorized to grant an
administrative adjustment reducing minimum required street setbacks by up to
five feet.
         (b)   The Community Development Director is authorized to grant an
administrative adjustment reducing minimum required side and rear setbacks in
any R District by up to 20%.
         (c)   The Community Development Director is authorized to grant an
administrative adjustment of build-to-zone regulations by up to 20%.
         (d)   The Community Development Director is authorized to approve an
administrative adjustment reducing minimum building transparency requirements
by up to ten square feet or 20%, whichever is greater.
         (e)   The Community Development Director is authorized to approve an
administrative adjustment reducing minimum lot width and lot frontage
requirements by up to 10%.
      (2)   The administrative adjustment procedures may not be used to vary,
modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or requirement imposed by
an authorized decision-making body.
   (C)   Authority to file. Administrative adjustment applications may be filed
by the owner of the subject property or by the property owner’s authorized
agent.
   (D)   Application filing. Complete applications for administrative
adjustments must be filed with the City Clerk. Applications must be accompanied
by a letter of deficiency issued by the Community Development Director.
   (E)   Notice of filing/intent to approve. The applicant is responsible for
delivering written notice of application filing to all owners of property
abutting the subject lot. The written notice must describe the nature of the
requested administrative adjustment. It must also indicate the date on which
the Community Development Director will take action on the application and that
the application will be available for review and comment until that date. Any
interested party may submit written comments concerning the application to the
Community Development Director.
   (F)   Action by Community Development Director.
      (1)   The Community Development Director must review each application for
an administrative adjustment and act to approve the application, approve the
application with conditions, deny the application or refer the application to
the Board of Adjustment for consideration as a variance.
      (2)   The Community Development Director may not take final action to
approve or deny an administrative adjustment application until at least five
days after the required notices have been mailed.
      (3)   The Community Development Director decision to approve or deny an
administrative adjustment must be based on the approval criteria and standards
of division (G) of this section and accompanied by written findings of fact.
      (4)   At least once per calendar year, the Community Development Director
must provide to the Board of Adjustment a list of all administrative adjustment
decisions.
   (G)   Standards and review criteria. Administrative adjustments may be
approved only when the Community Development Director determines that the
following general approval criteria and any specific criteria associated with
the authorized administrative adjustment have been met:
      (1)   The requested administrative adjustment is consistent with all
relevant purpose and intent statements of this UDO and with the general purpose
and intent of the comprehensive plan;
      (2)   The requested administrative adjustment will not have a substantial
or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the area or
the public health, safety and general welfare; and
      (3)   Any adverse impacts resulting from the administrative adjustment
will be mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. In granting an administrative adjustment, the
Community Development Director is authorized to impose conditions upon the
subject property that are necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially
adverse impacts on other property in the surrounding area, and to carry out the
stated purpose and intent of this UDO.
   (I)   Lapse of approval. An approved administrative adjustment will lapse
and become void three years after it is granted by the Community Development
Director, unless a building permit for the work or improvements authorized has
been issued and the project has commenced and is diligently pursued to
completion. If no building permit is required, the improvement that is the
subject of the administrative adjustment must be in place within the three-year
period.
   (J)   Transferability. Approved administrative adjustments run with the land
and are not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership or management.
   (K)   Amendments. A request for changes in the specific nature of an
approved administrative adjustment or changes to any conditions attached to an
approved administrative adjustment must be processed as a new administrative
adjustment application, including all requirements for fees and notices.
   (L)   Appeals. The applicant or any interested party may appeal the
administrative adjustment decision of the Community Development Director in
accordance with §
152.293 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.291 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Authorized special exceptions. Only those special exceptions expressly
authorized in this UDO may be approved as special exceptions.
   (B)   Authority to file. Applications for special exception approval may be
filed only by the owner of the subject property or by the property owner’s
authorized agent.
   Figure 43: Special Exception Process (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2430.jpg]
   (C)   Application filing. Complete applications for special exception
approval must be filed with the City Clerk.
   (D)   Review and report - Community Development Director. Following receipt
of a complete application, the Community Development Director must prepare a
report on the proposed special exception. The report must be transmitted to the
Board of Adjustment before the required public hearing.
   (E)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Board of Adjustment’s required public
hearing on a special exception application must be provided as follows (see §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required newspaper,
mail and posted notices).
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice must be published in the newspaper at
least ten days before the scheduled public hearing.
      (2)   Mailed notice. Notice must be mailed to the owner of the subject
property and all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property at
least ten days before the scheduled public hearing.
      (3)   Posted notice. For uses that require special exception approval,
notice (signs) must be posted at least ten days before the scheduled public
hearing. Posting of signs is not required for non-use matters.
   (F)   Hearing and final decision - Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment must hold a public hearing on the special
exception application. Following the close of the public hearing, the Board of
Adjustment must act to approve the proposed special exception, approve the
special exception with conditions and/or modifications or deny the special
exception. Approval of a special exception requires an affirmative vote of at
least three members of the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   In approving a special exception, the Board of Adjustment is
authorized to impose such conditions and restrictions as the Board of
Adjustment determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards
of division (G) of this section, to reduce or minimize the effect of the
special exception upon other properties in the area, and to better carry out
the general purpose and intent of this UDO.
   (G)   Approval criteria. A special exception may be approved only if the
Board of Adjustment makes each of the following findings:
      (1)   That the special exception will be in harmony with the spirit and
intent of this UDO; and
      (2)   That the special exception will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
   (H)   Lapse of approval.
      (1)   An approved special exception will lapse and become void three
years after it is granted by the Board of Adjustment, unless a building permit
has been issued and the project has commenced and is diligently pursued to
completion. If no building permit is required, the use, improvement or activity
that is the subject of the special exception must be in place within the three-
year period.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment may extend the expiration period by up to
one year at the time of approval of the special exception or any time before
expiration of the approval. Requests for extensions after the special exception
is approved must be processed in accordance with the special exception
procedures, including applicable fees, notices and public hearings.
   (I)   Transferability. Approved special exceptions run with the land and are
not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
   (J)   Amendments.
      (1)   Amendments to approved special exceptions must be processed as new
special exception applications, including all requirements for fees, notices
and public hearings, provided that the Community Development Director is
authorized to approve the following:
         (a)   Any structures or uses authorized to be approved by the
Community Development Director at the time of special exception approval; and
         (b)   The addition or relocation of customary accessory uses and
structures.
      (2)   Applications for amendments to approved special exceptions must be
filed in a form established by the Community Development Director.
   (K)   Appeals. Board of Adjustment decisions on special exceptions may be
appealed to District Court in accordance with §
152.306(K) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-12) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.292 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   A variance is a grant of relief to a property owner from strict
compliance with the zoning regulations of this UDO.
      (2)   The intent of a variance is not to simply remove an inconvenience
or financial burden that may result from compliance with applicable zoning
requirements.
      (3)   Variances are intended to help alleviate an unnecessary hardship or
practical difficulty that would be caused by strict enforcement of the subject
UDO requirements. They are intended to provide relief when the requirements of
this UDO render property very difficult or impossible to put to reasonable use
because of some unique or special characteristics of the property itself.
   Figure 44: Variance Process
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2432.jpg]
   (B)   Authorized variances. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to grant a
variance to any regulation in this UDO in accordance with the variance
procedures of this section, except that the variance procedures of this section
may not be used to do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow a principal or an accessory use in a zoning district that is
not otherwise allowed in that zoning district (i.e., “use variances” are
prohibited);
      (2)   Allow an accessory use on a lot that is not occupied by the
principal use that such accessory use serves;
      (3)   Waive, modify or amend any definition or use classification;
      (4)   Waive, modify or otherwise vary any of the review and approval
procedures of this chapter;
      (5)   Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval
or requirement imposed by an authorized decision-making body or the State or
Federal government;
      (6)   Waive, vary or modify applicable residential density regulations,
provided that this provision is not intended to prohibit variances to minimum
lot area or width requirements that apply to lots occupied by a single dwelling
unit; or
      (7)   Waive, vary or modify applicable subdivision design and improvement
regulations of §§
152.235 through
152.251 of this chapter. Modifications of the regulations of §§
152.235 through
152.251 of this chapter require review and approval in accordance with the
subdivision modification procedures of §
152.285 of this chapter.
   (C)   Authority to file. Variance applications may be filed only by the
owner of the subject property or by the property owner’s authorized agent.
   (D)   Application filing. Complete applications for variances must be filed
with the City Clerk.
   (E)   Review and report - Community Development Director. Following receipt
of a complete application, the Community Development Director must prepare a
report on the requested variance. The report must be transmitted to the Board
of Adjustment before the required public hearing.
   (F)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Board of Adjustment’s required public
hearing on a variance application must be provided as follows (see §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required newspaper and
mail notices).
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice must be published in the newspaper at
least ten days before the scheduled public hearing.
      (2)   Mailed notice. Notice must be mailed to the owner of the subject
property and all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property at
least ten days before the scheduled public hearing.
   (G)   Hearing and final decision - Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Following receipt of a complete variance application, the Board of
Adjustment must hold a public hearing to consider the requested variance.
Following the close of the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment must act to
approve the requested variance, approve the variance with modifications and/or
conditions, or deny the variance request based on the standards and review
criteria of division (H) of this section. Approval of a variance requires an
affirmative vote of at least three members of the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   In approving a variance, the Board of Adjustment is authorized to
impose such conditions and restrictions as the Board determines to be necessary
to ensure compliance with the standards of division (H) of this section, to
reduce or minimize the effect of the variance upon other properties in the
area, and to better carry out the general purpose and intent of this UDO.
   (H)   Standards and review criteria.
      (1)   No variance may be approved unless the Board of Adjustment
determines that the following facts, favorable to the property owner, have been
established:
         (a)   That the physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the subject property would result in unnecessary hardships or
practical difficulties for the property owner, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
         (b)   That literal enforcement of the subject UDO provision is not
necessary to achieve the provision’s intended purpose;
         (c)   That the conditions leading to the need of the requested
variance are unique to the subject property and not applicable, generally, to
other property within the same zoning classification;
         (d)   That the alleged practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
was not created or self-imposed by the current property owner;
         (e)   That the variance to be granted is the minimum variance that
will afford relief;
         (f)   That the variance to be granted will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair use or development of adjacent property;
and
         (g)   That the variance to be granted will not cause substantial
detriment to the public good or impair the purposes, spirit, and intent of this
UDO or the comprehensive plan.
   (I)   Lapse of approval.
      (1)   An approved variance will lapse and become void three years after
it is granted by the Board of Adjustment, unless a building permit for the work
or improvements authorized has been issued and the project has commenced and is
diligently pursued to completion. If no building permit is required, the
improvement that is the subject of the variance must be in place within the
three-year period.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment may extend the expiration period by up to
one year at the time of approval of the variance or any time before expiration
of the approval. Requests for extensions after the variance is approved must be
processed in accordance with the variance procedures, including applicable
fees, notices and public hearings.
   (J)   Transferability. Approved variances run with the land and are not
affected by changes of tenancy, ownership or management.
   (K)   Amendments. A request for changes in the specific nature of the
approved variance or changes to any conditions attached to an approved variance
must be processed as a new variance application, including all requirements for
fees, notices and public hearings.
   (L)   Appeals. Board of Adjustment decisions on variances may be appealed to
District Court in accordance with §
152.306(K) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-13) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.293 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to hear and decide
all appeals where it is alleged there has been an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Community Development
Director or any other administrative official in the administration,
interpretation or enforcement of this UDO.
   Figure 45: Appeals of Administrative Decisions (Generally)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2434.jpg]
   (B)   Right to appeal. Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by
any person aggrieved by the administrative official’s decision or action. The
Board of Adjustment is authorized to make determinations about whether
individuals filing appeals are “aggrieved” by the decision or action.
   (C)   Application filing.
      (1)   Complete applications for appeals of administrative decisions must
be filed with the City Clerk and the administrative official who made the
decision being appealed.
      (2)   Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed within 30 days of
the date of the decision being appealed.
   (D)   Effect of filing. The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the Community
Development Director or the administrative official who made the decision being
appealed certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the appeal is filed, that,
because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause immediate
peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings will not be stayed
unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment
or by a court of record based on due cause shown.
   (E)   Record of decision. Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal,
the Community Development Director or other administrative official whose
decision is being appealed must transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers
constituting the record related to decision being appealed.
   (F)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the Board of Adjustment’s required public
hearing must be provided as follows (see §
152.280(E) of this chapter for additional information on required newspaper and
mail notices).
      (1)   Newspaper notice. Notice must be published in the newspaper at
least ten days before the scheduled public hearing.
      (2)   Mailed notice. When an appeal affects a specific property, notice
must be mailed to the owner of the subject property and all owners of property
within 300 feet of the subject property at least ten days before the scheduled
public hearing.
   (G)   Hearing and final decision.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment must hold a public hearing on the appeal.
      (2)   Following the close of the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment
must make its findings and take action on the appeal.
      (3)   In exercising the appeal power, the Board of Adjustment has all the
powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The Board
of Adjustment may affirm or may, upon the concurring vote of at least three
members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision being appealed.
      (4)   In acting on the appeal, the Board of Adjustment must grant to the
official’s decision a presumption of correctness, placing the burden of
persuasion of error on the appellant.
   (H)   Review criteria. The decision being appealed may be reversed or wholly
or partly modified only if the Board of Adjustment finds that the Community
Development Director or other administrative official erred.
   (I)   Appeals. Board of Adjustment decisions may be appealed to District
Court in accordance with §
152.306(K) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-15-14) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.305 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Composition. There is hereby created within and for the city a
Planning Commission, which must consist of five members and two alternates, as
provided in this section. Each member of the Planning Commission must be a
resident of the city at the time of appointment and remain a city resident
throughout the member’s term. If a Planning Commission member ceases to be a
city resident, the position of the member will become vacant and a new
appointment must be made.
   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor is authorized to appoint the members of the
Planning Commission, except for the ex officio member. Mayoral appointments to
the Planning Commission are subject to approval and confirmation by the City
Council.
   (C)   Ex officio members. The building official of the city is appointed as
an ex officio member of the Planning Commission without voting powers. The
building official receives no separate compensation apart from that of the
salary received in the capacity of the building official position with the
city.
   (D)   Term; vacancies. Members of the Planning Commission hold office for a
term of three years. When a vacancy occurs on the Commission, an appointment
must be in accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Quorum. A majority of the members of the Planning Commission
constitutes a quorum for the transaction of business. Except as otherwise
expressly stated in this chapter, when a quorum is present a vote by a simple
majority of the Planning Commission members present is required for the
transaction of Planning Commission business.
   (F)   Meetings, organization and rules.
      (1)   Meetings of the Planning Commission are held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Planning Commission may determine.
      (2)   The provisions of the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act, as the Act now
exists or as it may be amended by the state legislature applies to all public
meetings of the Planning Commission.
      (3)   The members of the Planning Commission must, in June of each year,
elect from their members a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and Secretary, who
will serve in their elected office for a period of one year.
      (4)   The members of the Planning Commission must adopt from time to time
such bylaws, rules and regulations and amendments thereto as may be necessary
to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
   (G)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   General powers, duties and authority. The Planning Commission is
authorized to prepare from time to time plans for the systematic development
and betterment of the city as a place of residence or for business. It may
consider and investigate any subject matter pertaining to development and
betterment of the city and make recommendations as it may deem advisable to any
department of the municipal government, and for any purpose make or cause to be
made surveys, maps or plans. The Planning Commission must inure to such other
powers and be obligated to the performance of such other duties as prescribed
to it by the ordinances of the city or laws of the state.
      (2)   Employment of staff, payment of expenses. The Planning Commission
is authorized to employ engineers, attorneys, clerks and a secretary, or other
personnel or consultants as it deems reasonable and necessary for the
performance of its powers and duties subject to approval of such employment of
personnel or consultants by the City Council and upon such terms of employment
as the City Council may approve. The compensation of such personnel or
consultants will be paid out of the city treasury as other officers, employees
or consultants. The necessary expenses incurred by the Planning Commission
incurred in the performance of its powers and duties must be appropriated and
paid out of the city treasury as other legally incurred expenses of the
municipality, but in no event may the Planning Commission be authorized to
create a deficiency.
      (3)   Comprehensive plan. The Planning Commission shall conduct a
complete formal review of the comprehensive plan that is in effect not later
than the last day (June 30) of the next fiscal year after the fiscal year in
which this section is passed and approved by the City Council. After formal
review of the comprehensive plan, as specified in the preceding sentence, the
Planning Commission must conduct and complete periodic formal reviews of the
comprehensive plan on a schedule of ten-year intervals with each subsequent
formal review to be completed no later than the last day of the tenth fiscal
year following each preceding formal review.
      (4)   Public projects. Before final action may be taken by the City
Council, or any department of the city on the location, construction or design
of any public building, statue, memorial, park, parkway, boulevard, street and
alley, playground, public ground, or bridge, or the change in the location or
grade of any street or alley, the question shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for investigation and report of its findings and recommendations to
the City Council. The report of the Planning Commission’s findings and
recommendation shall be completed and submitted to the City Council within 60
days of the date such question was submitted to the Planning Commission for
investigation and report, or such other time period as may be prescribed or
allowed by the City Council.
      (5)   Subdivision of land.
         (a)   The Planning Commission has jurisdiction over the subdivision of
land within the corporate limits of the city.
         (b)   The Planning Commission must adopt regulations governing the
subdivision of land within its jurisdiction, which regulations do not become
effective until they are approved by the City Council and published as provided
by law for the publication of ordinances.
         (c)   All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots or blocks,
and the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same, intended to be
dedicated to public or private use, within the corporate limits of the city,
must first be submitted to the Planning Commission for its approval or
rejection. Before such plans, plats or replats are recorded in the office of
the County Clerk, they must be approved by the City Council.
         (d)   Any plat filed without the endorsed approval of the City Council
does not import notice nor impose any obligation or duties on the city.
         (e)   The disapproval of any such plan, plat or replat by the City
Council is deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
   (H)   Zoning Commission. The Planning Commission must act as the Zoning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 10-16-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord. 2025-8, passed -
-2025; Ord. 2025-9, passed - -2025)
§ 152.306 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Composition. The Board of Adjustment must consist of five members.
   (B)   Appointments. Board of Adjustment members must be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
   (C)   Terms. Members of the Board of Adjustment serve three-year staggered
terms.
   (D)   Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of
the Board of Adjustment for any reason, an appointment for the remainder of the
vacant term must be made in the same manner as regular appointments.
   (E)   Removal. A Board of Adjustment member may be removed for cause by the
City Council after notice, written charges and public hearing.
   (F)   Compensation. Members of the Board of Adjustment serve without
compensation.
   (G)   Officers. The Board of Adjustment must elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson.
   (H)   Rules of procedure. The Board of Adjustment must adopt rules necessary
for the conduct of its affairs.
   (I)   Meetings. Meetings are held at the call of the Chairperson and at
other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in
the Chairperson’s absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and
compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment must be
conducted in compliance with the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act. The Board of
Adjustment must keep records of its proceedings and official actions, all of
which must be open to the public in compliance with the Oklahoma Open Records
Act.
   (J)   Powers and duties. The Board of Adjustment has the powers and duties
that are expressly identified in this UDO, including hearing and acting on
applications for variances and special exceptions.
   (K)   Appeals to District Court.
      (1)   Procedure.
         (a)   An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order
of the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons who were
entitled, pursuant to any provision of this UDO, to mailed notice of the public
hearing before the Board of Adjustment, by any person or persons whose property
interests are directly affected by such action, decision, ruling, judgment or
order of the Board of Adjustment, or by the City Council to the District Court
of the county by filing with the City Clerk and with the Clerk of the Board of
Adjustment within ten days of the date of such action, a notice of appeal that
specifies the grounds for the appeal. No bond or deposit for costs is required
for such an appeal.
         (b)   Upon filing of the notice of appeal, the Board of Adjustment
must transmit to the Clerk of the Mayes County District Court, the original or
certified copies of all papers constituting the record in the case, together
with the order, decision or ruling of the Board of Adjustment.
         (c)   The appeal is heard and tried de novo in the District Court of
the county. An appeal from the action of the District Court may be taken as in
all other civil actions. All issues in any proceedings under this section have
preference over all other civil actions and proceedings.
         (d)   Costs are not allowed against the Board of Adjustment unless the
court finds that the Board of Adjustment, in making its decision, acted with
gross negligence, in bad faith or with malice.
      (2)   Stay of proceedings. During the pendency of such an appeal, the
effectiveness of a decision of the Board of Adjustment may not be suspended
unless a party applies to the District Court for a stay pending the District
Court’s determination of the merits of the appeal and the District Court issues
the stay. Stays in appeals from the Board of Adjustment to the District Court
may be obtained only as set forth in 11 O.S. § 44-110.
(Prior Code, § 10-16-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.307 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   The Community Development Director is responsible for:
   (A)   The interpretation, administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter;
   (B)   Issuing permits as required with respect to this chapter;
   (C)   Carrying out those powers and duties expressly identified in this
chapter; and
   (D)   Performing such other duties as directed by the Mayor and City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-16-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 152.320 GENERAL.
   (A)   Intent. The adoption and amendment of the UDO text and map, beginning
with the adoption of the city’s first UDO has resulted in some lots, uses and
structures becoming nonconforming (i.e., established in compliance with
regulations in effect at the time of their establishment, but prohibited under
subsequently adopted regulations). The nonconformity regulations of this
chapter are intended to explain the effect of this nonconforming status and
help differentiate nonconformities, which have legal status under this UDO,
from zoning violations, which are illegal and subject to penalties and
enforcement action. The regulations of this chapter are also intended to:
      (1)   Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property for uses that were lawfully established;
      (2)   Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing
buildings; and
      (3)   Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential
to adversely affect surrounding properties.
   (B)   Authority to continue. Any nonconformity that existed on the effective
date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter or any lot, structure use or situation that becomes
nonconforming upon adoption of any amendment to this UDO or any amendment of
the zoning map subsequent to the effective date specified in §
152.003 of this chapter may be continued, subject to the regulations of this
chapter.
   (C)   Determination of nonconforming status.
      (1)   The burden of proving that a nonconformity exists (as opposed to a
UDO violation) rests entirely with the subject owner.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine whether
reliable evidence of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject
owner.
      (3)   Building permits, zoning clearance reports, lawfully recorded
plats, lawfully recorded instruments of conveyance, aerial photography owned by
a governmental agency and other official government records that indicate
lawful establishment of the use, lot or structure constitute conclusive
evidence of nonconforming status. If such forms of conclusive evidence are not
available, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to consider whether other
forms of evidence provided by the owner are reliable and adequate to document
nonconforming status. Common examples of evidence that may be determined to be
reliable and adequate include:
         (a)   Professional registrations or business licenses;
         (b)   Utility billing records;
         (c)   Rent records;
         (d)   Advertisements in dated publications;
         (e)   Listings in telephone or business directories; and
         (f)   Notarized affidavits affirming the date of lawful establishment
of the use or structure.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator’s determination of nonconforming status
may be appealed in accordance with §
152.293 of this chapter.
   (D)   Repairs and maintenance.
      (1)   Repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a nonconformity in
sound condition are permitted unless the work increases the extent of the
nonconformity or is otherwise expressly prohibited by this UDO.
      (2)   If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by any
duly authorized official by reason of physical condition, it may not thereafter
be used, restored, or repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the
provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent nonconformities from
being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance
with an order from a duly authorized public official.
   (E)   Change of tenancy or ownership. Nonconforming status runs with the
land and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership or management.
(Prior Code, § 10-17-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.321 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming lot is a lot that does not comply with
the applicable minimum lot area, minimum lot width or minimum street frontage
requirements of the subject zoning district and that meets at least one of the
following criteria:
      (1)   The lot was a lot of record on or before January 1, 1988;
      (2)   The lot is located within a subdivision approved by the Planning
Commission; or
      (3)   The lot is a lot of record for which a recorded instrument of
conveyance bears the endorsement of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Use of nonconforming lots. Buildings and uses allowed by the subject
zoning district regulations may be established on nonconforming lots, subject
to compliance with other lot and building regulations of the district and
applicable use regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10-17-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.322 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming structure is a structure, other than a
sign, that was lawfully established but that no longer complies with applicable
setback, coverage or height regulations because of the adoption or amendment of
the UDO after the structure was established.
   (B)   Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the
zoning district in which the structure is located, including a lawfully
established nonconforming use.
   (C)   Movement. A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part
to another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not
create additional or new nonconformities. A nonconforming structure may be
moved to another lot only if the structure would comply with the zoning
regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot.
   (D)   Alterations, enlargements and expansions. Alterations, including
enlargements and expansions, are permitted if the proposed alteration or
expansion complies with all applicable lot and building regulations and does
not increase the extent of the nonconformity. A building with a nonconforming
street setback, for example, may be expanded to the rear as long as the rear
expansion complies with applicable rear setback regulations and all other
applicable lot and building regulations. Horizontal and vertical extensions of
an exterior wall that is nonconforming with regard to applicable setbacks may
be approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter, provided the extensions are not located closer to the
lot line than the existing structure.
   (E)   Restoration or re-establishment of damaged or destroyed structures.
      (1)   If a nonconforming structure is damaged or partially destroyed by
any means to the extent of 50% or less of its replacement cost at time of
damage it may be restored as a nonconforming structure.
      (2)   If a nonconforming structure is damaged or partially destroyed by
any means to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at time of
damage, it may be restored as a nonconforming structure only if approved in
accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter. In order to approve a special exception for re-
establishment of a nonconforming structure, the Board of Adjustment must find
that restoration as a conforming structure cannot reasonably be made in view of
the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the nature and extent of the
damages.
      (3)   Re-establishment as a nonconforming structure may not increase the
extent of nonconformity, except that the Board of Adjustment is authorized to
approve a special exception for building additions that increase the extent of
nonconformity if the Board of Adjustment determines that such additions:
         (a)   Do not increase the habitable or leasable floor area of the
building; and
         (b)   Are required to be provided because of Building or Energy Code
amendments adopted after construction of the original building.
      (4)   In all cases, any permits required to restore the damaged structure
must be obtained within two years of the date of damage. If required permits
are not obtained within two years, the structure’s nonconforming status is
lost.
(Prior Code, § 10-17-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.323 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming use is a use that was lawfully
established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of
its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the
zoning district in which the use is located. Lawfully established uses that do
not comply with separation distance (spacing) requirements are also deemed to
be nonconforming uses.
   (B)   Change of use.
      (1)   A nonconforming use in a Residential Zoning District may be changed
only to a use that is allowed in the subject zoning district. Once changed to a
conforming use, the nonconforming use may not be re-established.
      (2)   A nonconforming use located in a zoning district other than a
Residential Zoning District, may be changed to a use that is allowed in the
subject zoning district, in which case the nonconforming use may not be re-
established. A nonconforming use located in a zoning district other than a
Residential Zoning District, may be changed to another nonconforming use only
if approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter. The change of a use to another use included within the
same use category does not constitute a “change of use” within the meaning of
this section. In order to approve a special exception for a nonconforming use
substitution, the Board of Adjustment must find that the proposed use
substitution will not result in any increase in adverse impacts on the
surrounding area when compared to the previous nonconforming use of the
property. In making such a determination, the Board of Adjustment must consider
all of the following factors, as applicable:
         (a)   Traffic to and from the site;
         (b)   Hours of operation;
         (c)   Outdoor display, storage and work activities; and
         (d)   Other factors likely to have an effect on the surrounding area.
   (C)   Expansion of use. A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may
be expanded or extended into the remaining portions of the building if the
Zoning Administrator determines that the areas of the building in which the
expansion is proposed were manifestly arranged and designed for the use.
Nonconforming use may not be expanded or extended in any other way unless the
expansion reduces or eliminates the nonconformity.
   (D)   Movement. A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not
create additional or new nonconformities. A nonconforming use may be moved to
another lot only if the use would comply with the zoning regulations that apply
to that (relocation) lot.
   (E)   Loss of nonconforming status.
      (1)   If a structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or
partially destroyed to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at
time of damage, the nonconforming use may be re-established only if approved in
accordance with the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter. In order to approve a special exception for re-
establishment of a nonconforming use, the Board of Adjustment must find that
re-establishment will not result in any increase in adverse impacts on the
surrounding area when compared to the previous nonconforming use of the
structure. In making such a determination, the Board of Adjustment must
consider all of the following factors, as applicable:
         (a)   Traffic to and from the site;
         (b)   Hours of operation;
         (c)   Outdoor display, storage and work activities; and
         (d)   Other factors likely to have an effect on the surrounding area.
      (2)   If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, no matter
how short the period of time, all nonconforming use rights are lost and re-
establishment of the nonconforming use is prohibited.
      (3)   If a nonconforming use of a building is discontinued for six
consecutive months or for 12 months during any four-year period, the
nonconforming use may not be re-established. Periods of time when governmental
action impedes access to or the use of the premises are not counted as periods
of discontinuance.
   (F)   Nonconforming use of unimproved land. Nonconforming uses of unimproved
land are land uses and activities that meet the definition of a nonconforming
use but that include structures that are all accessory or incidental to the use
and in the aggregate do not cover more than 10% of the lot area devoted to the
nonconforming use. Common examples include storage yards, construction debris
sites, used vehicle sales lots, vehicle impound yards, auto wrecking,
junkyards, and similar open-air uses. Nonconforming uses of unimproved land are
subject to the nonconforming use regulations of this section, except as
modified by the following specific regulations:
      (1)   No nonconforming use of unimproved land may be changed to another
nonconforming use, nor enlarged, increased or moved to another portion of the
lot, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
time that the use became nonconforming.
      (2)   No additional structure (other than fences) may be erected in
connection with a nonconforming use of unimproved land.
      (3)   If any nonconforming use of unimproved land ceases for any reason
for a period of more than 30 days, (except when government action impedes
access to or use of the premises) any subsequent use of such land must conform
in all respects to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
(Prior Code, § 10-17-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.324 NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURES.
   (A)   Description. A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a
development, other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure,
nonconforming use or nonconforming sign, that was lawfully established in
accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment
but that no longer complies with one or more applicable zoning regulations.
Common examples are off-street parking areas that contain fewer spaces than
required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current
landscaping, screening or lighting regulations.
   (B)   General. Nonconforming development features may remain except as
otherwise expressly stated in this UDO, but the nature and extent of
nonconforming development features may not be increased.
(Prior Code, § 10-17-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.335 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Administrator and any other officials or agencies designated by
the Mayor have responsibility for enforcing this UDO. All departments,
officials, agencies and employees vested with the authority to review,
recommend or issue development approvals, permits or licenses must act in
accordance with the provisions of this UDO.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.336 VIOLATIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this UDO or state law, any violation
of a provision of this UDO, including any of the following, are subject to the
remedies and penalties provided for in this UDO:
   (A)   To use land, buildings or other structures in any way that is not
consistent with the requirements of this UDO;
   (B)   To erect a building or other structure in any way not consistent with
the requirements of this UDO;
   (C)   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this UDO;
   (D)   To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, the use or
installation of a sign, or any other activity requiring one or more permits or
approvals under this UDO without obtaining such required permits or approvals;
   (E)   To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, the use or
installation of a sign, or any other activity for which a permit or approval
has been granted under this UDO or under previous zoning regulations of the
city in any way inconsistent with such permit or approval or any conditions
imposed on the permit or approval;
   (F)   To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this UDO
or under previous zoning regulations of the city or any condition imposed on
the permit or approval;
   (G)   To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted under
this UDO;
   (H)   To violate any lawful order issued by any authorized public official;
or
   (I)   To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.337 CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate violation of this
UDO.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.338 REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT POWERS.
   The city has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law, including,
without limitation, all of the following.
   (A)   Fines. Any person violating any provisions of this UDO or failing to
comply with any of its requirements may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine.
   (B)   Withhold permit.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator may deny or withhold all permits,
certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or
improvements upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of
this UDO or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval
or other authorization previously granted by the city. This enforcement
provision may be used regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is
responsible for the violation in question.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator may deny or withhold all permits,
certificates or other forms of authorization on any land where an uncorrected
violation exists. The Zoning Administrator may also withhold all permits,
certificates or other forms of authorization on any other land owned by the
owner of land on which an uncorrected violation exists. This enforcement
provision may be used regardless of whether the property for which the permit
or other approval is sought is the property in violation.
      (3)   Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization,
the Zoning Administrator may grant such authorization subject to the condition
that the violation be corrected.
   (C)   Revoke permits.
      (1)   A permit, certificate or other form of authorization required under
this UDO may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator when the Zoning
Administrator determines:
         (a)   That there are unapproved significant, material departures from
approved plans or permits;
         (b)   That the development permit was procured by false representation
or was issued by mistake; or
         (c)   That any of the provisions of this UDO or approval previously
granted by the city are being violated.
      (2)   Written notice of revocation must be served upon the owner, the
owner’s agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or
structure for which such permit was issued. If no persons can reasonably be
served with notice, the notice must be posted in a prominent location.
   (D)   Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the Zoning Administrator
may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this UDO or of a permit or other form
of authorization issued under this UDO or previous zoning regulations.
   (E)   Injunctive relief. The city may seek an injunction or other equitable
relief in court to stop any violation of this UDO or of a permit, certificate
or other form of authorization granted under this UDO or previous zoning
regulations.
   (F)   Forfeiture and confiscation of signs on public property. Any sign
installed or placed on public property, except in compliance with the
regulations of this UDO will be considered forfeited to the public and subject
to confiscation. In addition to other remedies and penalties of this chapter,
the city has the right to recover from the sign owner or person who placed the
sign, the full costs of sign removal and disposal.
   (G)   Abatement. The city may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus,
abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a
violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in
which they existed prior to the violation.
   (H)   Other penalties, remedies and powers. The city may seek such other
penalties and remedies as are provided by law.
   (I)   Continuation of previous enforcement actions. Nothing in this UDO
prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the
city pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.339 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The remedies and enforcement powers established in this UDO are cumulative,
and the city may exercise them in any combination or order.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.340 PERSONS SUBJECT TO PENALTIES.
   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof,
and any architect, builder, contractor or agent, or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violations may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and be subject to penalties, remedies and
enforcement actions.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.341 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Non-emergency matters. In the case of violations of this UDO that do
not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention, the Zoning
Administrator must give notice of the nature of the violation to the property
owner by personal service, U.S. first class mail or by posting notice on the
premises. Notices of violation must state the nature of the violation and the
time period for compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the
nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not
be corrected.
   (B)   Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this UDO that
constitute an emergency situation as a result of public health or safety
concerns if not remedied immediately, the city may use the enforcement powers
available under this UDO without prior notice, but the Zoning Administrator
must attempt to give notice to the property owner simultaneously with beginning
enforcement action.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.342 APPEALS.
   A determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative
officials that a UDO violation has occurred may be appealed by the affected
party in accordance with §
152.293 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-18-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
MEASUREMENTS
§ 152.355 FRACTIONS AND ROUNDING.
   When calculations required under this UDO result in fractions, the results
must be rounded as follows.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. When a regulation is expressed in terms of a
minimum requirement, any fractional result must be rounded up to the next
consecutive whole number. For example, if a minimum requirement of one tree for
every 30 feet is applied to a 50-foot strip, the resulting fraction of 1.67 is
rounded up to two required trees.
   (B)   Maximum limits. When a regulation is expressed in terms of maximum
limits, any fractional result must be rounded down to the preceding whole
number. For example, if a maximum limit of one dwelling unit for every 3,750
square feet of lot area is applied to an 8,000 square foot lot, the resulting
fraction of 2.13 is rounded down to two allowed dwelling units.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.356 LOT AREA.
   Lot area is measured as the total ground-level surface area contained within
the property lines of a lot.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.357 LOT AREA PER UNIT.
   Lot area per unit is a measure of residential density. It governs the amount
of lot area required for each dwelling unit on the subject lot. To determine
the number of dwelling units allowed on a lot, divide the area of the lot by
the minimum lot-area-per-unit requirement, and round any fractional result down
to a whole number. If, for example, a minimum lot-area-per-unit requirement of
1,750 feet is applied to a 10,000 square foot lot, a maximum of five units
would be allowed on that lot (5.71 rounded down to 5). In applying minimum lot-
area-per-unit requirements to fraternity, sorority and rooming/boarding house
uses, each 600 square feet of floor area is counted as one dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.358 FLOOR AREA.
   The floor area of a building is measured as the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of all floors within the building, including basements, as measured from
the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
separating two buildings. The floor area of enclosed required off-street
parking areas is not included in the measurement of floor area.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-4) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.359 LOT WIDTH.
   Lot width is measured as the average (mean) horizontal distance between the
side property lines of a lot.
   Figure 46: Lot Width Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2436.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 10-19-5) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.360 FRONTAGE OR STREET FRONTAGE.
   (A)   Street frontage is measured between side property lines of a lot along
the property line that abuts the street.
   (B)   For purposes of determining compliance with zoning district lot and
building regulations, the frontage of a lot that abuts a cul-de-sac or
similarly curved non-arterial street may be measured along the required setback
line.
   Figure 47: Street Frontage Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2438.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 10-19-6) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.361 SETBACKS.
   (A)   Measurement. Required setbacks are measured from the applicable lot
line or right-of-way line. Building setbacks are measured to the nearest
exterior building wall. Minimum setbacks that apply to other features (parking
areas, fences, storage areas) are measured from the nearest point of the area
or feature for which a setback is required. See division (C) of this section
for information on structures and building features that are allowed to occupy
setback and yard areas in R Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise expressly
stated, no part of any structure may be located within the street right-of-way.
      (1)   Street setbacks are measured from the actual right-of-way line of
the street (other than an alley).
      (2)   Interior setbacks are measured from a side lot line that does not
abut a street.
   Figure 48: Side (Interior) Setback Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2440.jpg]
      (3)   Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line, except on
double-frontage lots. On double-frontage lots, street setbacks apply from all
property lines that abut streets.
   Figure 49: Rear Setback Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2442.jpg]
   (B)   Setbacks on irregular lots. Setbacks are measured from lot lines
towards the center of the lot, as follows:
      (1)   Generally, setbacks are measured as set out in division (A) of this
section.
      (2)   When lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks must be measured parallel
to the curvilinear lot line.
   Figure 50: Setbacks From Curvilinear Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2444.jpg]
      (3)   When there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback must be
measured from each of rear lot lines.
   Figure 51: Setbacks From Multiple Rear Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2446.jpg]
      (4)   When there is no rear lot line, the rear setback must be measured
as a radial distance from the intersection of side lot lines at the rear of the
lot.
   Figure 52: Rear Setback Measurement When There Is No Rear Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2448.jpg]
   (C)   Permitted setback obstructions in R Zoning Districts. Setbacks in R
Zoning Districts must be unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground to the sky
except as indicated in Table 18 of this section:
Table 18
Permitted Setback Obstructions in R Zoning Districts
Obstruction Setback
            Street Side Rear
Table 18
Permitted Setback Obstructions in R Zoning Districts
Obstruction                                                    Setback
                                                               Street Side Rear
Accessory buildings (see also §                               No     No   Yes
152.130(F))
Air conditioning units                                         No     Yes  Yes
Arbors and trellises                                           Yes    Yes  Yes
Awnings, canopies, light shelves and architecturally
integrated solar shading devices projecting no more than 2     Yes    Yes  Yes
feet into the setback
Barbeque pits and outdoor fireplaces                           No     No   Yes
Bay windows projecting no more than 2 feet into the setback    Yes    Yes  Yes
Carports                                                       Yes    Yes  Yes
Chimneys and flues projecting no more than 2 feet into the     Yes    Yes  Yes
setback
Clotheslines                                                   No     Yes  Yes
Decks, patios and other features and structures less than 30   Yes    Yes  Yes
inches in height above grade
Eaves and gutters projecting no more than 2 feet into the      Yes    Yes  Yes
setback
Fences and walls                                               Yes    Yes  Yes
Fire escapes projecting no more than 4.5 feet into the setback Yes    Yes  Yes
Flagpoles and similar features                                 Yes    Yes  Yes
Geothermal heat pumps and geothermal heat exchange system      No     No   Yes
equipment up to 4 feet in height above grade
Greenhouses and hoop houses                                    No     No   Yes
Insulation added to the outside of the exterior wall of an     Yes    Yes  Yes
existing building
Plants and cold frames                                         Yes    Yes  Yes
Rainwater harvesting equipment projecting no more than 4.5     Yes    Yes  Yes
feet into the setback
Recreational equipment (e.g., swing sets, playground           No     No   Yes
equipment, tree houses and the like)
Satellite dish antennas                                        See §
                                                               152.138
Signs (see also §§
152.210 through                                                Yes    Yes  Yes
152.222)
Sills, belt courses, cornices and similar architectural        Yes    Yes  Yes
features projecting no more than 2 feet into the setback
Solar energy systems, building-mounted                         No     Yes  Yes
Solar energy systems, ground-mounted                           No     No   Yes
Swimming pools and tennis courts                               No     No   Yes
Vehicle parking/storage, inoperable                            No     No   Yes
Wheelchair lifts and ramps that meet federal, state and local  Yes    Yes  Yes
accessibility standards
 
   (D)   Contextual setbacks. When existing buildings on one or more abutting
lots are closer to the street (front or street side) property line than the
otherwise required setback, additions to existing buildings or construction of
new buildings on the subject lot may comply with the average street yard depth
that exists on the nearest two lots on either side of the subject lot instead
of complying with the zoning district’s minimum street setback requirement.
Existing yard depths must be based on the front corners of the buildings on the
lots used in the contextual setback determination that are nearest to the
subject lot.
   Figure 53: Contextual Setbacks (1)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2450.jpg]
      (1)   If one or more of the lots required to be included in the averaging
calculation is vacant, that vacant lot will be deemed to have a street yard
depth equal to the minimum street setback requirement of the subject zoning
district.
   Figure 54: Contextual Setbacks (2)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2452.jpg]
      (2)   Lots with frontage on a different street than the subject lot or
that are separated from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in
computing the average.
   Figure 55: Contextual Setbacks (3)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2454.jpg]
      (3)   When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average street yard depth
will be computed on the basis of the nearest two lots with frontage on the same
street as the subject lot.
   Figure 56: Contextual Setbacks (4)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2456.jpg]
      (4)   When the subject lot abuts a corner lot with frontage on the same
street, the average street yard depth will be computed on the basis of the
abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots with frontage on the same street
as the subject lot.
   Figure 57: Contextual Setbacks (5)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2458.jpg]
      (5)   These contextual setback provisions may not be used to reduce the
setback of a street-facing garage door to less than 20 feet.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-7) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.362 PARKING SETBACKS.
   (A)   All off-street parking spaces must be located behind any applicable
parking setback line. This requirement applies whether such spaces are located
in a surface (open-air) parking lot or in a parking structure. Parking setbacks
do not apply to on-street parking spaces, parking spaces located in an
underground structure or parking spaces located above the ground floor.
   (B)   Parking setbacks are measured in accordance with §
152.361(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-8) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.363 BUILD-TO-ZONE.
   (A)   The build-to zone is the area on the lot where all or a portion of the
street-facing building facade must be located, established as a minimum and
maximum setback range, measured in accordance with the setback measurement
provisions of §
152.361(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   The street-facing building facade must be located in and extend along
the length of the build-to-zone for a minimum distance equal to a percentage of
the width of the lot, as required by specific provisions of this UDO. The
required minimum percentage is calculated by dividing the width of the building
facade located within the build-to-zone by the width of the lot. For purposes
of this calculation, the width of the lot is the narrowest width of the lot
within the build-to-zone.
   Figure 58: Build-To-Zone
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2460.jpg]
   (C)   On corner lots, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to designate
which street is the primary street and which street is the secondary or side
street. The primary street designation must be based on consideration of the
following criteria:
      (1)   The street with the highest functional street classification;
      (2)   The street that the lot takes its address from; and
      (3)   The street parallel to an alley within the block.
   (D)   On corner lots, the building must be within the required build-to-zone
for the first 25 feet extending from the intersection of the two street rights-
of-way.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-9) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.364 BUILDING COVERAGE.
   (A)   Building coverage is the total area of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings.
   (B)   Only building areas beneath a roof are counted for purposes of
measuring building coverage.
   (C)   A porch with a roof, for example, is counted, but an uncovered deck
structure is not considered building coverage.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-10) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.365 CEILING HEIGHT.
   Ceiling height is measured from the finished floor to the ceiling
immediately above. At least 50% of the enclosed ground floor area must comply
with established floor-to-ceiling height requirements and all of the first 30
feet of building depth, measured from the principal street-facing facade, must
comply with established ceiling height requirements. Buildings in existence or
that were the subject of an approved building permit before the effective date
specified in §
152.003 of this chapter are exempt from ceiling height requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-11) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.366 TRANSPARENCY.
   (A)   Transparency regulations govern the percentage of a street-facing
building facade that must be covered by glazed elements (e.g., transparent
windows and doors).
   (B)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the transparency of a ground floor
facade is measured between three feet and eight feet above the adjacent curb.
   Figure 59: Ground Floor Transparency Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2462.jpg]
   (C)   (1)   The transparency of an upper story facade is measured from top
of the finished floor to the top of the finished floor above.
      (2)   When there is no floor above, upper story transparency is measured
from the top of the finished floor to the top of the wall plate.
   Figure 60: Upper Floor Transparency Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2464.jpg]
   (D)   Glazed elements used to satisfy minimum transparency requirements must
be clear and non-reflective and not be painted or tinted (transparent, low-
emissivity glass is permitted).
(Prior Code, § 10-19-12) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.367 STREET-FACING BUILDING ENTRANCES.
   (A)   Required street-facing building entrances must provide ingress and
egress for residents and customers. Additional entrances off another street,
pedestrian area or internal parking area are also permitted.
   (B)   An angled entrance may be provided at any corner of a building along
the street to meet street-facing entrance requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-13) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.368 BUILDING HEIGHT.
   (A)   Measurement.
      (1)   Building height is measured as the vertical distance from the
average ground elevation along the exterior building wall to the highest point
of the subject building.
      (2)   For purposes of measuring height:
         (a)   The average ground elevation is the mid-point between the
highest and lowest ground elevations along the exterior building wall; and
         (b)   The highest point of the building is the coping of a flat roof,
the top of a mansard roof or shed roof, or the peak of the highest gable of a
gambrel or hip roof. For buildings without a roof, height is measured to the
highest point of the structure.
   Figure 61: Building Height Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2466.jpg]
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Farm buildings and farm-related structures are not subject to
building height limits.
      (2)   Chimneys, elevators, equipment penthouses, monitors, cooling towers
and ventilators may exceed maximum building height limits, provided they are
not intended for human occupancy and they do not extend more than 20 feet above
the top of the principal structure to which they are attached. This 20 foot-
limit may be increased through the special exception procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
      (3)   Belfries, clock towers, cupolas, domes, flag poles and spires may
exceed maximum building height limits, provided they are not intended for human
occupancy and they are not more than 150% taller than the applicable height
limit. This 150% limit may be increased through the special exception
procedures of §
152.291 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-14) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.369 OTHER HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS.
   (A)   Fences and walls.
      (1)   The height of fences and walls is measured as vertical distance
from the average finished grade on the inside of the fence to the top of the
fence or wall.
      (2)   Fences atop walls or landscape features (e.g., raised beds) are
measured to average finished grade at the base of the wall or landscape
feature.
      (3)   Fence posts may exceed the height of the highest connected portion
of the fence by up to 12 inches.
   (B)   Other structures.
      (1)   The height of structures other than buildings, fences or walls is
measured as vertical distance from the average finished grade at the base of
the structure to the highest point of the structure.
      (2)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the height of a structure may
not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the subject zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-15) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.370 OCCUPANCY.
   For the purpose of determining compliance with standards or requirements
based on building occupancy or capacity, calculations must be based on the
Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 10-19-16) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
DEFINITIONS
§ 152.385 GENERAL.
   Words and terms expressly defined in this UDO have the specific meanings
assigned unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words and terms
that are not expressly defined in this UDO have their ordinary dictionary
meaning.
(Prior Code, § 10-20-1) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.386 USE DEFINITIONS.
   See §§
152.085 through
152.094 of this chapter for an explanation of the use categorization system
used in this UDO and for use type definitions.
(Prior Code, § 10-20-2) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.387 MEASUREMENT-RELATED TERMS.
   See §§
152.355 through
152.370 of this chapter for an explanation of various lot and building
regulation terms, such as “lot area”, “building height”, “setbacks” and “build-
to-zone”.
(Prior Code, § 10-20-3) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018)
§ 152.388 DEFINED TERMS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUT or ABUTTING. To touch or share a contiguous boundary or border, except
that in the context of hearing notice and screening or enclosure requirements,
ABUTTING includes properties that are contiguous or separated only by a non-
arterial street, alley or railroad right-of-way.
   ACCESSORY USE BAR. A commercial establishment open to the public that sells
and serves intoxicating beverages or beer for consumption on the premises, but
that is incidental and subordinate to and that occupies no more than 25% of the
floor area of a principal use restaurant or assembly and entertainment use. In
order to be classified as an ACCESSORY USE BAR, the bar must occupy the same
principal building and contiguous tenant space as the principal use and not
contain a separate exterior public entrance (i.e., it must be served solely by
the customer entrance that serves the principal use restaurant, hotel/motel or
assembly and entertainment use).
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure that meets the criteria
established in §
152.130(B) of this chapter.
   ADJACENT. Lying near or in the immediate vicinity.
   AGENT. A person duly authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the subject
property.
   ALL-WEATHER SURFACE (OR MATERIAL). A hard surface, dustless material
capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding without substantial
deterioration, normal weather conditions. Gravel, rock or screenings alone,
without use of a road surface binder, does not meet the definition of an ALL-
WEATHER SURFACE.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way that affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting property and which may also be used for public utility
purposes.
   APPLICANT. The owner of the subject property or an agent authorized by the
subject property owner to submit an application on the owner’s behalf.
   AVERAGE GROUND ELEVATION. See §
152.368(A)(2)(a) of this chapter.
   AWNING. A roof-like structure typically made of cloth, metal or other
material attached to a frame that extends from and is supported by a building.
AWNINGS are typically erected over a window, doorway or building front and they
may be raised or retracted to a position adjacent to the building.
   BASE (ZONING) DISTRICT. Any zoning district that is not an overlay district.
   BEER. Beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation
of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
   BIORETENTION. The use of soil and plants to remove pollutants from
stormwater runoff.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land, intended to be used for development and that is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public
walks, parks or green strips, rural land or drainage channels, or a combination
of such features.
   BLOCK FACE. All lots abutting one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA). The Board of Adjustment of the City of Pryor
Creek.
   BUILD-TO-ZONE (OR BUILD-TO LINE). See §
152.363 of this chapter.
   BUILDING. A structure that is permanently affixed to the land; with or
without a roof, or walls on all sides; and used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
   BUILDING COVERAGE. See §
152.364 of this chapter.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. See §
152.368 of this chapter.
   CALIPER. The diameter of the tree trunk measured at a point six inches above
the root ball or soil level.
   Figure 62: Caliper (Tree) Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2468.jpg]
   CARPORT. Any parking space or spaces having a roof, but not enclosed by
walls, and accessory to a dwelling or dwellings. Parking garages and parking
structures are not CARPORTS.
   CHARACTER. Any letter of the alphabet or any numeral.
   CITY. The City of Pryor Creek, Oklahoma.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Pryor Creek.
   COFFEE ROASTING. Applying heat to green coffee beans to produce darker
roasted beans that can be used to brew coffee.
   COLD FRAME. An unheated structure no more than four feet in height used for
protecting seedlings and plants from the cold.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign, wording, logo or other representation that
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service or other commercial activity.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The City of Pryor Creek’s official comprehensive plan,
as adopted by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
   COVENANT (RESTRICTIVE). Written covenants, running with the land that
restrict or regulate the use of the property or the kind, character and
location of buildings or other structures that may be located on the subject
property.
   CURB LEVEL. The average (mean) level of the established curb at the frontage
of the subject lot. Where no curb has been established, the Zoning
Administrator is authorized to establish such curb level or its equivalent.
   DECISION-MAKING BODY. The entity that is granted authority to make a final
decision on a matter, pursuant to the procedures of §§
152.280 through
152.293 of this chapter.
   DEDICATION. The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for general and
public use reserving to the landowner no rights that are incompatible with the
full exercise and enjoyment of the public use to which the property has been
devoted.
   DESIGNATED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AREA. An area specifically designated for
residential development by conditions imposed in a PUD or PD District.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity, acting as a
unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. See §
152.286 of this chapter.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh). The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a
point four and one-half feet above ground level at the base of the tree.
   Figure 63: Diameter at Breast Height (dbh)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2470.jpg]
   DRIPLINE. The periphery of the area underneath a tree that would be
encompassed by perpendicular lines extending from the exterior edges of the
crown of the tree.
   Figure 64: Dripline (of a Tree)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2472.jpg]
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a
habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities, for not more
than one household living independently of any other household.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation or
persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE.
      (1)   Any vehicle that is licensed and registered for operation on public
and private highways, roads and streets; either partially or exclusively, on
electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source, that is stored on-board
via a battery.
      (2)   ELECTRIC VEHICLE includes:
         (a)   Battery electric vehicles; and
         (b)   Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CHARGING STATION. A public or private parking space
that is served by battery charging station equipment.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PRIVATE (RESTRICTED-ACCESS). An EV
charging station that is not available for use by the general public. Examples
include electric vehicle charging stations that serve residential homeowners or
renters, executive parking areas, designated employee parking areas and fleet
parking areas.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION, PUBLIC. An EV charging station that is
accessible to and available for use by the general public.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE. Any parking space that is clearly identified
to be used exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle.
   ELECTRICAL FENCE CHARGER SYSTEM. A labeled circuit arrangement, whether
energized by a battery or other electrical power source that is or is designed
or intended to impart an electrical shock to any person or animal coming in
contact with such un-insulated conductors.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE (OR EMERGENCY SERVICE VEHICLE). Vehicles such as
ambulances, police cars or firefighting equipment used to respond to emergency
situations.
   FLOOR AREA. See §
152.358 of this chapter.
   FLOOR-TO-CEILING HEIGHT. See §
152.365 of this chapter.
   FOOT-CANDLE. A measure of illumination, the amount of light falling onto a
surface. One lumen of light, shining evenly across one square foot of surface,
illuminates that surface to one FOOT- CANDLE.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A public or private marginal access roadway generally
paralleling and contiguous to a street or highway and designed to promote
safety by eliminating unlimited ingress and egress to such street or highway
providing points of ingress and egress at more-or-less uniformly spaced
intervals.
   GARAGE SALE. The sale of tangible personal property at retail by a person
who is not in the business or does not hold himself or herself out to be in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail, when such sale occurs
on residentially-zoned property (including in a garage, on a driveway, patio or
porch, in the yard or in the residential structure) and is open to the public.
Also referred to as yard sale, estate sale, moving sale, occasional sale and
the like.
   GEOTHERMAL HEAT EXCHANGE SYSTEM. Equipment that exchanges thermal energy
between the ground (or a water source) and a building. This includes vertical
closed loop, horizontal closed loop, water body closed loop system and open
loop systems. Also known as ground source heat pumps and geothermal heat pumps.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface
after site grading work is completed in accordance with an approved plan.
   GREEN ROOF. An extension of an above-grade building roof that includes at
least a water-proof membrane, a root repellent system, a drainage system, a
filtering layer, soil with a minimum depth of three inches and native or
naturalized plants. Also commonly referred to as a VEGETATED ROOF.
   GROUND-FLOOR LEVEL. The lowest level of a building that is at or above grade
for at least 50% of its interior floor-to-ceiling height.
   HEIGHT, BUILDING. See §
152.368 of this chapter.
   HEIGHT, SIGN. See §
152.221(B) of this chapter.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for business or
commercial purposes. HOME OCCUPATIONS are subject to the regulations of §
152.136 of this chapter.
   HOOP HOUSE. A temporary or permanent structure typically made of flexible
pipe or other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a
“half-round” or “hoop” shape, for the purposes of protecting and cultivating
plants. A HOOP HOUSE is considered more temporary than a greenhouse.
   HOUSEHOLD. Any number of persons who inhabit a single dwelling unit, as a
single housekeeping unit, who are related by blood, marriage, adoption,
fosterage, or legal guardianship, plus up to two unrelated inhabitants.
HOUSEHOLD also expressly includes community-based residential facilities
licensed by or contracted with the state’s Department of Human Services that
provide care or supervision by a responsible adult for no more than eight
individuals with developmental or physical disabilities as a single
housekeeping unit.
   IMPROVEMENTS, PRIVATE. The same types of improvements as defined under
public improvements, except that ownership and/or maintenance and repair is the
responsibility of a private entity.
   IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC. Any structure or facility constructed to serve the
residents of a subdivision or the public, such as parks; streets or roads;
sidewalks, curbs and gutters; street lighting; utilities; and systems for water
supply, sewage disposal, and drainage.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN. The maps or drawings prepared by a registered engineer
accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with all
applicable requirements of the city and the Planning Commission as a condition
of the approval of the plat.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of seven
days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or in which the
engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise modified
so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE does not include a motor vehicle that has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power,
solely to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   INTERSECTION, SIGNALIZED. The area where motor vehicle traffic is regulated
by an official traffic-control signal or light, which is also embraced within
the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the
lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets that join one another at
or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles travel upon
different streets joining at any other angle that may conflict, whether or not
one such street or roadway crosses the other.
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGES. All beverages containing more than 3.2% alcohol by
weight and all mixed beverage coolers, as defined in 37 O.S. § 1-103v2,
regardless of percent of alcohol content.
   LAND DIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel of land into two or
more lots or parcels or a change in boundaries between two or more lots or
parcels or the consolidation of multiple lots or parcels into a fewer number of
lots or parcels.
   LANDSCAPED AREA. The unpaved area of a lot that contains grass, shrubs,
flowers, ground cover, trees or plant materials and that may include decorative
fixtures such as rock, pools and planters. Areas of a lot containing artificial
plants, artificial trees or other artificial vegetation are not considered
LANDSCAPED AREA.
   LAWFULLY ESTABLISHED. A use, structure, lot or sign (as the context
indicates) that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning
regulations in effect at the time of its establishment.
   LESS INTENSIVE ZONING DISTRICT. A zoning district classification that is
identified as being less intensive than another zoning district within the same
grouping of districts, as indicated in the zoning district regulations of this
chapter.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light that is emitted into an unintended area.
   LOT. A lot of record.
   LOT AREA. See §
152.356 of this chapter.
   LOT AREA PER UNIT. A measurement of allowed residential density. See §
152.357 of this chapter.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection or
upon two segments of the same street, when such segments form an interior angle
of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of street rights-of-way
lines is the corner. Also known as a THROUGH LOT.
   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. An interior lot with frontage on more than one street
or a corner lot with frontage on more than two streets.
   LOT, FLAG. A lot with two distinct parts:
      (1)   The FLAG, which is located behind another lot; and
      (2)   The FLAG POLE, which connects the flag to the street and is at any
point less than the minimum lot width required by zoning or other regulations.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. Any boundary of a lot.
   Figure 65: Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2474.jpg]
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary of a lot that abuts the street. Unless
otherwise expressly stated, the owner of the subject property may select which
lot line is the front lot line on corner lots.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot that is most distant from and most
nearly parallel to the front lot line.
   Figure 66: Rear Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2476.jpg]
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot that is not a street lot line or a
rear lot line.
   Figure 67: Side Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2478.jpg]
   LOT LINE, STREET. The boundary of a lot that abuts a street. A lot may have
more than one street lot line, and a street lot line may also be a front lot
line.
   Figure 68: Street Lot Line
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2480.jpg]
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which is
recorded in the County Clerk’s office; a parcel of land, the conveyance of
which is recorded in the County Clerk’s office; or the balance of a parcel of
land where the conveyance of another portion of that parcel is recorded in the
County Clerk’s office.
   LOT WIDTH. See §
152.359 of this chapter.
   LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID). An approach to land development (or
redevelopment) that works with nature to manage stormwater as close to its
source as possible. LID employs principles such as preserving and recreating
natural landscape features, minimizing impervious area to create functional and
appealing site drainage features that treat stormwater as a resource rather
than a waste product. Common LID practices include bioretention facilities,
rain gardens, green roofs, rain barrels or cisterns, and permeable paving.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee posted by the developer and
approved by the city, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of required
infrastructure and improvements required to be installed pursuant to these
regulations.
   MASSAGE THERAPY. The manipulation of soft or connective tissues of the human
body conducted by a physician or licensed massage therapist to alleviate pain,
enhance circulation, improve joint mobilization, relieve stress or muscle
tension.
   MOBILE STORAGE UNIT, TEMPORARY. A mobile, fully enclosed container that is
specifically designed and used for the temporary storage of household goods,
wares and materials for the purpose of moving, relocation or temporary storage
during construction. This definition does not include a shipping or cargo
container, modified or otherwise.
   MONUMENT (PERMANENT MONUMENT). A structure placed in the ground that is
exclusively identifiable as a monument to a survey point expressly placed for
surveying reference.
   MULTI-TENANT DEVELOPMENT. A development typically under unified ownership
and control consisting of two or more business establishments, which may be on
the same lot or on separate lots. The tenants of multi-tenant development
typically share vehicle access and parking facilities.
   n/a (or —). Not applicable or no requirement.
   NIT. A unit of illuminative brightness equal to one candela per square
meter, measured perpendicular to the rays of the source.
   NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES. Improvements designed and intended
primarily for the use, safety and comfort of pedestrians, cyclists, and other
users of nonmotorized means of travel. Examples include sidewalks, trails, bike
lanes, equestrian trails and related appurtenances, such as signs, signals and
wheelchair ramps.
   NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT FEATURE. See §
152.324(A) of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. See §
152.321(A) of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. See §
152.322(A) of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. See §
152.323(A) of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMITY. A nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming
structure, nonconforming development feature or nonconforming sign.
   NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any principal building other than a residential
building.
   NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AREA. An area designated for nonresidential
development on an approved development plan, such as in a PUD or PD District.
   NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT or NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT. Any zoning
district other than an R (Residential) District.
   OPEN-AIR USES. Uses of land that do not involve buildings or that involve
buildings that are incidental and accessory to the open-air use of the lot.
Typical examples include storage yards, vehicle impound yards, auto wrecking
and junkyard uses.
   OUTDOOR CUSTOMER SEATING/DINING AREA. The area of all unenclosed areas used
or intended to be used for seating and dining by customers and guests,
including standing table areas.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A zoning district that over-lays one or more base zoning
districts and imposes requirements in addition to those of the base district or
modifies the regulations otherwise applicable in the base zoning district.
   PARAPET or PARAPET WALL. A wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof that acts
as a vertical extension of an exterior building wall extending above the roof
height of the building. PARAPETS may serve as a safety or architectural
feature.
   PARENT TRACT. The parcel of land from which a new lot or tract of land is
being taken from.
   PARKING AREA. The vehicular driving surfaces and parking area which includes
the parking spaces, the maneuvering areas necessary to enter and exit the
spaces and the drives providing access to the parking spaces and maneuvering
areas from a public or private street or other PARKING AREAS.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A space on a lot intended and reserved for the
parking of an automobile.
   PARKING SPACE, REQUIRED OFF-STREET. A space on a lot reserved for parking
required by this UDO.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee posted by the developer and
approved by the city, guaranteeing that all improvements, facilities or work
required by these regulations will be completed in compliance with these
regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a development.
   PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A foundation that meets the requirements of the
Building Code.
   PHASING PLAN. A detailed plan for final platting and development of a
subdivision in two or more phases.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL. A semiconductor device that converts solar energy into
electricity.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. See §
152.009(I)(4) of this chapter.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of a subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets
and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of a proposed subdivision showing the character and
proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability
of the proposed subdivision of land.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building or combination of buildings of chief
importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use is carried out
in the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   PRINCIPAL USE. A use or activity or combination of which are of chief
importance on the lot; one of the main purposes for which the land, buildings
or structures are intended, designed or ordinarily used.
   PROOF GALLON. One liquid gallon of beverage grade spirits that is 50%
alcohol by volume at 60°F. Note: spirits bottled at 80 proof (40% alcohol)
would be eight-tenths proof gallons per gallon of liquid. At 125 proof, a
gallon of liquid would be 1.25 proof gallons.
   RAINWATER HARVESTING EQUIPMENT. A rain barrel, cistern or similar container
that collects and stores rainwater or other water that would otherwise be lost
as runoff.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A trailer, boat trailer, travel trailer, camping
trailer, truck camper, camper shell, motor home, tent trailer, boat, houseboat
or similar vehicle or unit. Camper shells that are attached to a pickup truck
are not considered a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL BINS. A container or drop box with a capacity of more
than one and one-half cubic yards or a height of more than four and one-half
feet that is provided for receiving and temporary storing of recyclable paper,
cans, glass and plastics as well as clothing, shoes, books and toys. RECYCLABLE
MATERIAL BINS include both containers used by uses located on the subject site
and those used by consumers who bring their recyclables from other (off-site)
locations.
   REQUIRED IMPROVEMENT. Improvement required by the Planning Commission as
condition to approval of the plat.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A detached house, townhouse, duplex or apartment/condo
building (see also building types described in § 152.085 of this chapter).
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AREA. An area designated for residential development
on an approved development plan, such as in a PUD or PD District.
   REVIEW AGENCIES. Local, state and federal agencies; utilities; and other
agencies who have regulatory responsibility or directly related interests in
proposed land divisions, as determined by the Community Development Director
based on the location and nature of the subject application.
   ROOMER. An occupant of a rooming unit who is not a member of the household
occupying the principal residential building.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms that
is an accessory use to a household living use and forming a single unit with
facilities that are used or intended to be used primarily for living and
sleeping but not for cooking.
   SETBACK. An open, unobstructed area that is required to be provided by this
UDO. See §
152.361 of this chapter.
   SITE PLAN. A detailed plan or set of plans depicting the arrangement of
buildings, parking, landscaping, lighting, walls, grading, elevations, building
materials, signs and other information necessary to determine compliance with
applicable regulations (see also §
152.287 of this chapter).
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal,
mechanical or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED. A solar energy system that is an
integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate
mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural
part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited
to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing
materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural
components.
   Figure 69: Building-integrated Solar Energy System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2485.jpg]
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH-MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is mounted
flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six inches in height
above that surface.
   Figure 70: Flush-Mounted Solar Energy System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2482.jpg]
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED. A solar energy system mounted on the
ground and not attached to any other structure other than structural supports.
   Figure 71: Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2487.jpg]
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, STRUCTURE-MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is
mounted on the facade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure.
   Figure 72: Structure-Mounted Solar Energy System
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2489.jpg]
   SOLAR PANEL. A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. Panels are
assembled on-site into solar arrays.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A temporary event or group of related temporary events
typically involving a mass gathering of people on public right-of-way or public
property; or on private property in a manner that results in significant
impacts on public property or right-of-way.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. A use or a design element or characteristic of a use or
development that is not permitted by right because of potential adverse effect,
but that if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the
neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the Board of
Adjustment. In order to be approved as a SPECIAL EXCEPTION, the SPECIAL
EXCEPTION must be expressly authorized by this UDO and reviewed in accordance
with the substantive and procedural standards of this UDO.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any and all of the following:
      (1)   Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   STREET. The entire width of whatever nature between the property lines when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the
purpose of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic, and wherever designated as
a street, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, land,
place, cul-de-sac or however otherwise designated.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A major street that is designated on to carry intra-city
traffic and connect the various neighborhoods within the city.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic
and having one closed end terminated by a turnaround.
   STREET-FACING BUILDING ENTRANCE. See §
152.367 of this chapter.
   STREET FRONTAGE. See §
152.360 of this chapter.
   STREET, LOCAL OR MINOR. Any street not otherwise classified whose primary
purpose is to provide direct access to abutting properties.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A service road or other roadway normally running
parallel to or with an arterial street for the purpose of intercepting traffic
from abutting property or intersecting streets for the purpose of limiting
access to the arterial street main roadway.
   STREET, PERIMETER. A public street that abuts the exterior boundary of a
residential or nonresidential development.
   STREET WALL. The wall or part of the building nearest the abutting street.
   STREET YARD. See definition of YARD, STREET.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, and
includes buildings, parking areas, walks, fences, canopies and signs.
   SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of land into two or more lots,
tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for
development, or the provision or vacation or dedication of a public or private
right-of-way or easement, whether shown on a map or chart, or described by
metes and bounds.
   TASTING ROOM. A room that is ancillary to the production of beer at a
microbrewery or large brewery where the public can purchase and/or consume only
the beer produced on-site.
   TENT. Any structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or other
pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents
protected by the material.
   TOP PLATE. The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a roof or
the rafters.
   Figure 73: Top Plate
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2491.jpg]
   TRAFFIC CALMING FEATURES. Design features and strategies intended to reduce
vehicle traffic speeds on a particular street, thereby encouraging safer, more
responsible driving.
   TRANSITION TIME. The duration or interval of time between which each
individual advertisement or message is displayed on any dynamic display.
   TRANSPARENCY. See §
152.366 of this chapter.
   TREE. A woody plant having one or more defined stems or trunks.
   TREE, LARGE. A tree that will attain a mature height of over 60 feet and a
spread or canopy that is at least 35 feet in width.
   TREE, MEDIUM. A tree that will attain a mature height of between 30 feet and
60 feet and a spread or canopy that is at least 25 feet in width.
   TREE, SMALL. A tree that will attain a mature height of less than 30 feet
and a spread or canopy that is at least 15 feet in width.
   UTILITY-SCALE ENERGY PRODUCTION. An energy production facility that produces
electric energy for widespread distribution through the electric power grid.
   VARIANCE. See §
152.292 of this chapter.
   VEHICLE FUELS, ALTERNATIVE. Electricity, CNG (compressed natural gas), LNG
(liquefied natural gas), LPG (liquefied petroleum gas), and hydrogen.
   VEHICLE FUELS, CONVENTIONAL. Gasoline and diesel fuel.
   WALKABILITY. The extent to which the built environment is safe and inviting
for pedestrians and for the presence of people living, shopping, visiting,
enjoying or spending time in an area.
   WALKWAY. A clearly defined path for non-motorized movement between
buildings, structures, destinations or other WALKWAYS on or adjacent to a site.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM. A device that directly converts wind energy
into usable thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy, including such devices
as windmills and wind turbines. The SYSTEM includes towers and supporting
structures and directly connected facilities such as generators, alternators,
inverters, batteries and associated control equipment.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, SMALL. A wind energy conversion system with a
power-related capacity of no more than 100 kilowatts (100 kW) that is primarily
intended to produce power for on-site consumption, as a supplement to utility
power or in lieu of utility power. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS are often
connected to the electric utility for the purpose of “net metering”.
   YARD. An actual (as opposed to “required”) open, unoccupied space that
exists on a lot between a building and a lot line.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines
between the side lot lines.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines.
   Figure 74: Rear Yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2493.jpg]
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard
and the rear yard.
   Figure 75: Side Yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2495.jpg]
   YARD, STREET. Any yard abutting a street.
   Figure 76: Street Yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/968d00d165cd3e953b5e64e144c8b48c46bfd58c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2497.jpg]
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. See §
152.009(I)(6) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, §§ 10-20-4 through 10-20-29) (Ord. 2018-16, passed 12-4-2018; Ord.
2019-8, passed 3-19-2019)
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
Pursuant to §
37.01 of this code of ordinances and for purpose of providing a clear and
concise listing of the fees and charges authorized by the provisions of this
code of ordinances in payment for licenses, permits and services performed in
accordance with the regulations and controls upon which the licenses and
permits are conditioned and to provide uniformity in the supervision and
administration of the issuance of licenses and permits and the collection of
the amounts prescribed, a schedule of fees and charges, or fee schedule, is
hereby set forth in this appendix. The heading gives the titles of the
appropriate chapters and articles as applicable.
Credit and debit card payments shall require a minimum charge/payment as
provided in §
37.01(A)(2) of this code of ordinances.
(Res. 2019-2, passed 2-5-2019)
Code Section Description Fee
Code        Description                                                                     Fee
Section
   ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
           City Records:
36.17(C)    Copies of open records                                                          No fee
            When multiple copies requested for free public distribution, or when the record
            custodian determines that the cost of charging and handling exceeds the cost of
            providing a copy without charge.
36.18(B)    Copying fee, per page                                                           Maximum $0.25 per
                                                                                            page
36.18(C)    Fee for mechanical reproduction                                                 Actual cost to the
                                                                                            city
36.18(D)    Search fee                                                                      Actual cost to the
                                                                                            city
36.18(E)    Prepayment of fees whenever estimated amount exceeds                            $20
   FINANCE AND TAXATION
38.008      Return check fee                                                                As set by Council
           Sales Tax:
38.027      Sales Tax                                                                       4%
            (Ord. 2017-6, passed 5-16-2017)
           Telephone Exchange Tax:
38.090      Fee levied on Telephone Exchange
              Percent of gross revenue for current year                                 2%
           Utilities Tax:
38.105      Tax levied on sale of power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water
              Percent of gross receipts                                                 2%
   LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
           Occupational License Fees:
                                                                                            $1 as set by Council
110.01      License fee levied on certain occupations, minimum of                           by motion or
                                                                                            resolution
110.01      Business Occupation Tax                                                         Per   Per Day
                                                                                            Annum
           Agents or solicitors selling insurance, or taking orders for insurance          $50   $10
            policies, each
           Agents or solicitors selling or taking orders for sale of books, magazines,     $50   $5
            periodicals or publications of any description, each
           Carnival, circus, or menagerie where admission is charged, each                 —   $50
           Collection agents, each                                                         $50   $5
           Concessions, games and amusements not a part of an organized carnival where a   $50   $15
            fee is charged, each
           Fortune tellers, each                                                           $50   $10
           Palm readers, each                                                              $50   $10
           Persons selling or undertaking to sell unsolicited services not specifically    —   $7.50
            listed herein
           Photographers, each                                                             $50   $25
           Real estate agents, each                                                        $50   $5
           Shows, including tent shows, other than circuses and menageries, where          $50   $25
            admission is charged, each
           Salesmen, solicitors, vendors or peddlers, selling or taking orders for sale of $50   $5
            goods and merchandise at retail not heretofore listed, each
           License fees prorated after May 1, minimum of                                         $1
           Transient/Itinerant Vendors And Merchants:
111.06      Transient/itinerant vendor and transient/itinerant merchant license fee         $50
           Permit For Mobile Food Service Establishment:
112.03,     Processing fee, per application, whether application approved or not approved   $20
112.05
           1 day permit, pursuant to an approved application                               $25
           1 year permit, pursuant to an approved application                              $100
           Special event permit, pursuant to an approved application                       $50
            (Res. 2016-11, passed 12-6-2016)
           Residential Sales And Auctions:
113.02(A)   Auction sales, license fee for goods offered for sale in city, per day          $5
           Amusement Centers, Devices And Pool Halls:
114.04(A)   Fee for family amusement center
              Annual fee                                                                $100
              If issued after November 1 and before April 30                            $50
114.04(B)   Fee required for each location of a family amusement center                     See above
114.21,     Coin operated amusement devices
114.24
              Each device, annually                                                     $20
114.22      Special license for coin operated amusement devices
              Any number of 30-day periods less than a full year, for each license      1/10 of the annual
                                                                                            rate
114.43      Pool halls, annual fee
              Per 5 tables                                                              $250
              Each additional table                                                     $10/more
           Pawnbrokers:
115.02      Regulatory fee for pawnbrokers                                                  $50
           Junk And Junkyards:
116.05      License fee for junk dealers
              Each shop or yard, per year                                               $10
            (Per minutes dated 11-4-2003)
           Tree Trimmers Licensing:
117.03      Tree trimming license
              First year                                                                $25
              Each year thereafter                                                      $15
            (Per minutes dated 11-4-2003)
           Taxicabs:
119.04      License fee for taxicabs
              First taxicab                                                             $25
              Each additional taxicab                                                   $15
119.07      Liability insurance required for:
              Each person                                                               $100,000
              Each accident for personal injuries                                       $300,000
              Property damage for each taxicab                                          $50,000
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
           Alcoholic Beverages And Taxes:
         Occupation tax, each location in city, for:
120.03(A)
              Brewer*                                                                   $1,250
              Distiller                                                                 $3,125
              Winemaker                                                                 $625
              Oklahoma winemaker                                                        $75
              Rectifier                                                                 $3,125
              Wholesaler                                                                $3,500
              Class B wholesaler*                                                       $625
              Package store retailer                                                    $500
              Mixed beverage license:
                 Initial tax                                                         $500
                 Renewal tax                                                         $250
              Caterer license:
                 Initial tax                                                         $1,000
                 Renewal tax                                                         $900
              Special event license, tax per day                                        $50
              Service organizations exempt under Internal Revenue Code for bottle club  $250
            license
               *If also holding license from state to manufacture or wholesale
           nonintoxicating malt beverage                                                   Reduce by 75%
            (Ord. 2004-16, passed 6-15-2004)
           Nonintoxicating Beverages:
120.22(A)   License nonintoxicating beverages:
              Occupation tax, for on or off premises                                    $20
              License fee, annual in original package and for consumption off the premis$10
   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
           Fire Department And Service:
         Individual (single family) fire subscription for fire protection services per   $60 per year
32.07(C)    property outside of the corporate city limits (July 1 to June 30 no proration)
            Schedule of fees charged for fire protection and emergency services as follows
           (fees stated are for maximum of 2 hours on site; additional hours on site incur
            the stated fee per hour for time in excess of 2 hours):
              Response fee                                                              $500
              Ladder truck                                                              $250
              Fire engine                                                               $200
              Tanker                                                                    $200
              Rescue                                                                    $150
              Support                                                                   $100
              Brush truck                                                               $100
              Command vehicle                                                           $100
              Rescue boat                                                               $100
              Manpower, each person                                                     $25
              Damaged equipment                                                         TBD based upon actual
                                                                                            damage
              Supplies, equipment used                                                  TBD based upon actual
            (Res. 2017-2, passed 2-7-2017)                                                  usage
           Fire Code:
                                                                                            Mayor and Fire Chief
91.07       New materials, processes or occupancies may require permit                      to determine and
                                                                                            specify
           Nuisances:
93.06       Health nuisances abatement not complied with are added to city utility bill if  Actual cost
            applicable
93.08(A)    Summary abatement of nuisances - statement to owner                             Actual cost
           Weeds, Trash, Dead Animals And Grass:
93.32       Open burning permit application:
              Residential permit                                                        $25
              Commercial permit                                                         $100
              Agricultural permit                                                       $75
            (Ord. 2013-3, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 2017-3, passed 4-18-2017)
   COURT
           Municipal Court:
40.06(B)    Bond of Court Clerk                                                                $10,000
40.12       Traffic Violations Bureau accepts fines (copy kept in Clerk’s office) in lieu    As set by Judge
            of court appearance
40.15       Traffic bail or bond                                                               Bail fixed by
                                                                                            Judge
         Deferred sentence imposed:
40.18(B)
              Administrative fee for costs, minimum of                                     $150
              Administrative fee for costs, maximum of                                     $500
            (Ord. 2010-11, passed 5-4-2010)
         Witness fees:
40.20
              Per day                                                                   $1.50
              Per mile                                                                  $0.08
         Compensation of jurors, per day                                                 $15
40.21(C)
                                                                                            $30 for each case
                                                                                            filed, plus all
                                                                                            statutory fees
                                                                                            required, plus fees
                                                                                            and mileage for
                                                                                            witnesses and jurors
                                                                                         and $10 for use of
40.22(A)    Fines and costs                                                                 police training and
                                                                                            capital outlay less
                                                                                            all remittances
                                                                                            required by law.
                                                                                            However, fine may not
                                                                                            exceed amount set
                                                                                            forth in §
                                                                                            10.04
         Cost of incarceration, per day                                                  $22
40.22(C)    (Ord. 2009-7, passed 10-20-2009)
         Penalty assessment                                                              $10
40.23
   ANIMALS
           Dog And Cat Vaccination, Tags And Tax:
   
92.02(A),   Dog or cat registration (more than 6 months of age)                                $5
(B)
         Lost tags replaced                                                                 As set by Council
92.02(G)
           Animal Control Shelter:
         Quarantine of animals for observation reclaimed by owner                           Related charges
92.03(C)                                                                                    for confinement
         Restriction of animals under crisis period. Licensed veterinarian may treat for    Owner’s expense
92.03(E)(2) rabies
         Surrender fee per animal for resident of city                                      $30
92.07(E)(1)
           Surrender fee per animal for nonresident of city                                   $40
           Impoundment fee per animal in all instances inclusive of due to incarceration      $30
            of owner
           Keeping/boarding fee during period of impoundment per animal                       $5 per day
         Spay or neuter deposit for release of dog or cat for adoption                      $125
92.07(H)(1)
         Intact dog or cat permit fee                                                       $100
92.14(C)(2)
         Renewal fee for intact permit                                                      $10
92.14(C)(3)
         Adoption of animal, spayed or neutered agreement deposit                           $35
92.07(I)    (Ord. 2008-3, passed 9-16-2008)
         Keeping of wild, exotic or dangerous animals. Annual permit (needs written         As set by Council
92.12       approval of Police Department)
           Temporary permit for infant animal native to area                                  As set by Council
   OFFENSES
           Fireworks:
         Public display                                                                     $250 per event
132.02
           Residential discharge                                                              $25 per location
            (Ord. 2012-3, passed 6-5-2012)
   FINGERPRINTING
           Fees For Fingerprinting:
         Nonresident (any person not living or being able to provide proof of living     $25 for 2 cards and
32.39       within the corporate city limits of the city)                                   $5 for each
                                                                                            additional card
            Resident (those living within the corporate city limits of the city and         $10 for 2 cards and
           providing proof)                                                                $5 for each
            (Ord. 2012-5, passed 6-5-2012)                                                  additional card
   TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
           Golf Carts And Utility Vehicles:
         Permit fee to operate upon the streets of the city                                 $20 per year
76.01(B)    (Ord. 2012-9, passed 12-4-2012)
           Impoundment Of Vehicles:
                                                                                         All impoundment costs
70.47       Impounded vehicle release                                                       and accrued storage
                                                                                            charges
   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
           Excavations:
         Cash deposit for excavation in streets                                          As set by city
151.26
            Deposit in cash a sum to cover the cost of replacement and repair of any such
           street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, pavement or other public ground and the
            surface thereof by the city in the same condition as the same was prior to the
            time of doing any work
           Drainage Ditches:
         Drainage pipes or culvert installation permit                                      No fee
151.48
           Parks And Recreation:
         Fee for recreational privileges                                                 As set by city
98.03
           Cemetery:
         Price of gravesites:
100.04(A)
              Fairview and Graham Memorial Cemeteries, each                                $500
              Babyland, each                                                               $100
            (Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-2024)
         Interment fee (Monday through Friday):
100.04(B)
              Fairview or Graham Memorial, each                                            $325
              Babyland, each                                                               $125
              Cremains                                                                     $150
              Disinterment fee                                                             $1,000
            (Res. 2000-5, passed 10-3-2000; Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-2024)
              Cremation disinterment                                                       $400
              Babyland disinterment                                                        $200
               (Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-2024)
           Additional fees:
           Saturday Service Fees:
         7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.                                                          $600
100.04(C)
           Cremation 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.                                                $300
           After 5:00 p.m.                                                                 $150/hour
            Fee for setting aboveground grave, mausoleum, vault or ledger stone, monument
           or marker (one-time fee)                                                           $40
            (Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-2024)
         Fee for aboveground full cover (old Fairview Cemetery only) to be paid with the    $250
100.05(A)   interment fee, each
           Marker/monument locating fee, each (no locating fee for veterans’ markers)       $40
            (Res. 2000-5, passed 10-3-2000; Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-2024)
           Cremains in bench                                                               $50
           Deed transfers                                                                     $40
            (Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-2024)
   UTILITIES
           Utility Systems Generally:
                                                                                            Refer to the
50.01       Rates charged for electric service                                              Municipal Utility
                                                                                            Department
                                                                                            Refer to the
           Rates charged for natural gas                                                   Municipal Utility
                                                                                            Department
                                                                                            Refer to the
           Sewer system user charge schedule                                               Municipal Utility
                                                                                            Department
           Refuse and Garbage Services:
         Refuse and garbage services, annual permit fee                                  $600
51.02(E)    (Ord. 2010-13, passed 5-18-2010)
         Refuse and garbage services:
51.08
              Contractor charges for refuse services
              City approves fees
              The fees charged by contractor are:
                                                                                          Monthly Fee
           401 Residential curbside                                                        $11.40
           420 Residential houseside                                                       $14.99
           430 Low income/disabled                                                         $7.88
           440 Commercial regular                                                          $15.91
           441 Commercial medium                                                           $21.62
           442 Commercial heavy                                                            $28.40
           451 2 yard container
              Pick ups per week:
           452 4 yard container
              Pick ups per week:
           453 6 yard container
              Pick ups per week:
           454 8 yard container
              Pick ups per week:
           465 Pryor public schools (exempt by B. Dinsmore)                                $1,650
           467 Prairie Village Apartments                                                  $582.11
           469 Whitaker Training Center - OKARNG                                           $1,216.38
           470 Kirkhart BBQ, LLC a.k.a. JL’s BBQ
              10 yards x 3 pick ups                                                     $296.90
           471 Mayes County Medical Center
              10 yards x 6 pick ups                                                     $651.22
           600 Twin Villa Apartments (Per correspondence dated 3-2010)                     $426.01
   BUILDING REGULATIONS AND CODES
Ch. 150     Fee Schedule Applicable To Ch. 150:
           General municipal building/construction permit issuance fees applicable to
            residential and commercial:
                                                                                            $0.15 per square foot
              A. New construction                                                       with minimum of
                                                                                            $20.50
                                                                                            $0.15 per square foot
              B. Construction of building addition                                      with minimum of
                                                                                            $20.50
                                                                                            $0.15 per square foot
              C. Construction of accessory building                                     with minimum of
                                                                                            $20.50
                                                                                            $0.15 per square foot
              D. Construction remodel project                                           remodel area with
                                                                                            minimum of $20.50
              E. Fire protection system                                                 $20.50
              F. Swimming pool                                                          $20.50
              G. Storm shelter                                                          $20.50
              H. Roofing replacement or repair                                          $20.50
              I. Demolition of improvements                                             $20.50
              J. Mobile home placements/removals (moving)                               $20.50
              K. Placement of temporary structure used in construction work or for      $20.50
            temporary purposes/mobile construction trailers
              L. Construction or placement of sign                                      $20.50
               M. Replacement of damaged, destroyed, deficient, worn, or inoperable
           electrical, plumbing or mechanical building components or installation of       $20.50
            components only, not involving “construction” and to which issuance of a permit
            applies
              N. Connection to public sanitary sewer system see § 150.166(A)              $20.50
           Construction trade permit fees applicable to each construction project for
            which a general municipal building/construction permit is required:
              A. Plumbing permit                                                        $45.50
              B. Mechanical permit                                                      $45.50
              C. Electrical permit                                                      $45.50
           Inspection fees applicable to each inspection made by the city (rough-in,
            final, re-inspection):
              A. Rough-in                                                               $50
              B. Final                                                                  $50
              C. Re-inspection fee (each re-inspection)                                 $50
           OUBCC - State and municipal fees applicable/assessed to each permit issued in
            addition to scheduled fees:
              A. State fee                                                              $4
              B. Municipal fee                                                          $0.50
           Other Fees Applicable Under Ch. 150:
              A. Zoning clearance review/zoning clearance letter                        $50
               B. Building plan review (applicable to commercial - new construction,
           addition, or remodel - plan review fees include 50% and 100% completion
            inspection of project by City Engineer):
                  1. Preliminary plan review (Note: Preliminary plan review is for purposes
           of City Engineer making determination of level of plan review required on the   $125
            project)
                 2. Level 1 plan review                                              $250
                 3. Level 2 plan review                                              $400
                  4. Resubmittal plan review (resubmittal occurs when City Engineer   Level 1 - $250/Level
           determines that plans must be resubmitted for review for failure to comply with 2 $400
            requirements of first comments letter - additional charges for resubmittal)
              C. Fire Code plan review:
                  1. Initial plan review fee paid at time of permit application submittal.
           (Note: This fee is based on full review anticipating inclusion of fire          $0.15 per square foot
            suppression system. In event no fire suppression system is required there will
            be a refund based on no requirement for fire suppression system)
                 2. No fire suppression system                                       $0.12 per square foot
                 3. Fire suppression system                                          $0.15 per square foot
                                                                                            $0.12 per square foot
                  4. Resubmittal plan review (resubmittal occurs when reviewer determiif no fire
           that plans must be resubmitted for review for failure to comply with            suppression system.
            requirements of first comments letter - additional charges for resubmittal)     $0.15 per square foot
                                                                                            if fire suppression
                                                                                            system involved
              D. Sign permits (plan review fee includes inspection upon completion of
            construction):
                 1. Plan review                                                      $85
                  2. Resubmittal plan review (resubmittal occurs when reviewer determines
           that plans must be resubmitted for review for failure to comply with            $85
            requirements of first comments letter - additional charges for resubmittal)
                                                                                            $25 (Note:
                                                                                            Certificate issued
                                                                                            following completion
                                                                                            of construction and
                                                                                            all final
              E. Certificate of occupancy (applicable to residential and commercial new inspections. See fees
            construction, addition, or remodel)                                             for inspections for
                                                                                            costs of inspections.
                                                                                            Certificate issued
                                                                                            when project has
                                                                                            passed all final
                                                                                            inspections)
                                                                                            $0.35 per square foot
               F. Fee applicable to fee in lieu pursuant to § 150.010(C)                of increased
           (Res. 2017-14, passed 12-19-2017)                                               impervious area added
                                                                                            to the property under
                                                                                            development
              G. Application fee applicable to fee in lieu pursuant to § 150.010(C)    $250
            (Res. 2018-7, passed 5-1-2018)
           Utilities Construction Permits:
         Utility construction permits                                                       No fee
150.027
           Plumbing Code:
         Plumbers, registration, permits and fees:
150.047(F)
              First year registration                                                   $80
              Each year thereafter                                                      $40
           Electrical Code:
         Temporary electrical permits for 30 days                                           $50
150.071
           If at the end of 30 days the installation is still incomplete, another permit
            must be taken out for each succeeding 30 days
150.072(A)  Electrician’s registration required:
              First year                                                                $80
              Thereafter                                                                $40
           Mechanical Code:
         Contractor’s certificate of registration:
150.092(A)
              First year (expires June 30)                                              $80
              Second year annual fee                                                    $40
           Housing Code:
         Rooming house permit                                                               No fee
150.105
              Expires at the end of 1 year following its date of issuance, unless
            suspended or revoked
           Housing Board of Appeals, when notice is filed                                     $100
            (Res. 2017-9, passed 8-1-2017)
   ZONING REGULATIONS
           Board of Adjustment:
10-2-3B     Appeals to Board of Adjustment filing fee                                       $10 plus costs
           Enforcement and Amendment:
   10-6-2Application for amendment of zoning restrictions applicable to property         $10 plus costs
           Districts And Requirements:
10-9C-7A    Mobile home 48 hour temporary permit for storage of unoccupied mobile homes on  As set by Council
            private property
10-9C-7B    Mobile home park permit, expires April 30                                       As set by Council
           Renewal applications                                                            As set by Council
           Telecommunication Tower, Antenna and Facilities:
10-15-5A1   Telecommunication tower application fee                                            $100
10-15-6B    Annual information report fee                                                      $200
10-15-8B1   Annual review fee for telecommunication towers capable of collocation              $200 per year
10-15-8B2   Review fee for telecommunication towers incapable of collocation                   $500
            (Ord. 2009-6, passed 10-6-2009)
   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   11-3-1Preliminary plat submission, per lot                                            As set by Council
           Final plat submission (when only portion of preliminary was submitted) within 5 No additional filing
            years                                                                           fee
   11-5-1Improvement surety bonds                                                        100% of estimated
                                                                                            cost
   FLOOD CONTROL
   12-4-4Variance filing fee                                                             $25
           The following fees shall not exceed $500 for any 1 service:
              Notice of intent fee                                                      $25 maximum
              Floodplain development permit application review                          $100
              Floodplain development permit fee                                         $25
              Inspection fee, per inspection                                            $25
 
(Ord. 2011-7, passed 8-2-2011; Res. 2019-11, passed 11-19-2019; Res. 2019-12,
passed 11-19-2019; Res. 2019-13, passed 11-19-2019; Res. 2024-3, passed 5-21-
2024)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
 
O.S. Code Section Code Section
O.S. Code Section             Code Section
11 O.S.                       152.002
11 O.S. 16-112                38.025
11 O.S. 22-111                93.28
11 O.S. 22-112C1              32.07
11 O.S. 22-112.1C11B          32.07
11 O.S. 22-112.4E1            32.07
11 O.S. 27-101                40.01
11 O.S. 27-102                40.01
11 O.S. 27-111                40.06
11 O.S. 27-123                40.18
11 O.S. 27-124                40.18
11 O.S. 44-110                152.306
11 O.S. 49-103 et seq.        33.02
19 O.S. 531                   40.19
20 O.S. 1313.2C               40.23
20 O.S. 1313.2(D)             40.23
20 O.S. 1313.2(E)             40.23
20 O.S. 1313.2G               40.23
21 O.S.                       133.10
21 O.S. 533                   40.19
22 O.S. 979A                  40.22
22 O.S. 1115.1 through 1115.5 40.11
25 O.S. 311                   30.03
37 O.S. 1-103v2               152.388
37 O.S. 163.2                 120.26
37 O.S. 501 et seq.           120.03
37 O.S. 537(B)(2)             95.01
37 O.S. 600.3                 136.25
37 O.S. 600.4                 136.25
37 O.S. 600.8                 136.25
37 O.S. 600.9                 136.25
37 O.S. 600.11(C)             136.25
37A O.S.                      120.02
37A O.S. 1-101 et seq.        120.01
37A O.S. 3-124(B) and (C)     120.07
43A O.S. 1-103                40.19
47 O.S.                       76.01
47 O.S. Article VI, Chapter 7 70.32
47 O.S. 7-204                 70.32
47 O.S. 7-503                 70.32
47 O.S. 7-606                 70.32
47 O.S. Chapter 11            70.03
47 O.S. Chapter 12            70.03
47 O.S. Chapter 10            70.03
47 O.S. Chapter 13            70.03
47 O.S. Chapter 14            70.03
47 O.S. 15-112                73.24
47 O.S. 40-105G               72.031
47 O.S. 1102                  72.056
50 O.S. 12                    93.07
50 O.S. 14                    93.07
50 O.S. 15                    93.07
50 O.S. 16                    93.03;
                              93.08
50 O.S. 17                    93.08
51 O.S. 121 et seq.           33.01
59 O.S. 353.1                 38.028
59 O.S. 1001 et seq.          150.047
62 O.S. 541                   Charter § 83
63 O.S. 1-1011                93.06
63 O.S. 2-101                 133.04;
                              133.21
63 O.S. 2-101 et seq.         133.21
63 O.S. 2-101.1               133.04
63 O.S. 2-313                 133.21
63 O.S. 2-701                 40.24
63 O.S. 2-701(A)              40.24
63 O.S. 420 through 426       133.04
68 O.S. 205 et seq.           38.038
68 O.S. 205                   38.073;
                              38.133
68 O.S. 205.1                 40.22
68 O.S. 217                   38.034;
                              38.129
68 O.S. 220                   38.034;
                              38.129
68 O.S. 227                   38.035;
                              38.135
68 O.S. 301                   136.16
68 O.S. 1350 et seq.          38.021
68 O.S. 1401                  38.122
68 O.S. 1408                  38.132
68 O.S. 1621 through 1634     132.02
68 O.S. 1622                  132.02
68 O.S. 2701 et seq.          38.021
68 O.S. 6001 through 6004     38.028
75 O.S. 309 through 317       40.04
82 O.S.                       152.002
82 O.S. 1601 through 1618     152.266
                              
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Code Section
Prior Code               Code Section
1-1-1                    10.01
1-1-2                    10.02
1-1-3                    10.03
1-1-4                    10.04
1-1-5                    10.05
1-2-1                    10.20
1-2-2                    10.21
1-2-3                    10.22
1-2-4                    10.23
1-3-1                    10.35
1-3-2                    10.36
1-3-3                    10.37
1-4-1                    10.99
1-4-2                    10.99
1-4-3                    10.99
1-4-4                    10.99
1-5-1                    30.01
1-5-2                    30.02
1-5-3                    30.03
1-5-4                    30.04
1-5-5                    30.05
1-5-6                    30.06
1-5-7                    30.07
1-5-8                    30.08
1-5-9                    30.09
1-5-10                   30.10
1-5A-1                   34.01
1-5A-2                   34.02
1-5A-3                   34.03
1-5A-4                   34.04
1-5A-5                   34.05
1-5A-6                   34.06
1-5A-7                   34.07
1-5A-8                   34.08
1-5A-9                   34.09
1-5A-10                  34.10
1-5A-11                  34.11
1-5A-12                  34.12
1-6-1                    31.001
1-6-2                    31.002
1-6-3                    31.003
1-6-4                    31.004
1-6-5                    31.005
1-6-6                    31.006
1-6A-1                   31.020
1-6A-2                   31.021
1-6A-3                   31.022
1-6B-1                   31.035
1-6B-2                   31.036
1-6B-3                   31.037
1-6C-1                   31.050
1-6C-2                   31.051
1-6C-3                   31.052
1-6D-1                   31.065
1-6D-2                   31.066
1-6D-3                   31.067
1-6E-1                   31.080
1-6E-2                   31.081
1-6E-3                   31.082
1-6E-4                   31.083
1-6E-5                   31.084
1-6E-6                   31.085
1-6E-7                   31.086
1-6E-8                   31.087
1-6E-9                   31.088
1-6E-10                  31.089
1-7-1                    33.01
1-7-2                    33.02
1-7-3                    33.03
1-7-4                    33.04
1-7-5                    33.05
1-8-1                    35.01
1-9-1                    35.15
1-9-2                    35.16
1-10-1                   36.01
1-10-2                   36.02
1-10-3                   36.03
1-11-1                   37.01
1-12-1                   36.15
1-12-2                   36.16
1-12-3                   36.17
1-12-4                   36.18
1-13-1                   36.30
1-13-2                   36.31
1-13-3                   36.32
1-13-4                   36.33
1-13-5                   36.34
1-13-6                   36.35
1-13-7                   36.36
1-13-8                   36.37
1-13-9                   36.38
1-13-10                  36.39
1-13-11                  36.40
1-13-12                  36.41
1-13-13                  36.42
2-1-1                    38.001
2-1-2                    38.002
2-1-3                    38.003
2-1-4                    38.004
2-1-5                    38.005
2-1-6                    38.006
2-1-7                    38.007
2-1-8                    38.008
2-1-9                    38.999
2-2-1                    38.020
2-2-2                    38.021
2-2-3                    38.022
2-2-4                    38.023
2-2-5                    38.024
2-2-6                    38.025
2-2-7                    38.026
2-2-8                    38.027
2-2-9                    38.028
2-2-10                   38.029
2-2-11                   38.030
2-2-12                   38.031
2-2-13                   38.032
2-2-14                   38.033
2-2-15                   38.034
2-2-16                   38.035
2-2-17                   38.036
2-2-18                   38.038
2-2-19                   38.039
2-2-20                   38.040
2-2A-1                   38.055
2-2A-2                   38.056
2-2A-3                   38.057
2-2A-4                   38.058
2-2A-5                   38.059
2-2A-6                   38.060
2-2A-7                   38.061
2-2A-8                   38.062
2-2A-9                   38.063
2-2A-10                  38.064
2-2A-11                  38.065
2-2A-12                  38.066
2-2A-13                  38.067
2-2A-14                  38.068
2-2A-15                  38.069
2-2A-16                  38.070
2-2A-17                  38.071
2-2A-18                  38.072
2-2A-19                  38.073
2-2A-20                  38.074
2-2A-21                  38.075
2-2A-22                  38.076
2-2A-23                  38.077
2-3-1                    38.090
2-3-2                    38.091
2-4-1                    38.105
2-4-2                    38.106
2-4-3                    38.107
2-4-4                    38.108
2-4-5                    38.109
2-5-1                    38.120
2-5-2                    38.121
2-5-3                    38.122
2-5-4                    38.123
2-5-5                    38.124
2-5-6                    38.125
2-5-7                    38.126
2-5-8                    38.127
2-5-9                    38.128
2-5-10                   38.129
2-5-11                   38.130
2-5-12                   38.131
2-5-13                   38.132
2-5-14                   38.133
2-5-15                   38.134
2-5-16                   38.135
2-5-17                   38.136
2-6-1                    38.150
2-6-2                    38.151
2-6-3                    38.152
3-1-1                    110.01
3-1-2                    110.02
3-1-3                    110.03
3-1-4                    110.04
3-1-5                    110.05
3-1-6                    110.06
3-1-7                    110.07
3-2-1                    111.01
3-2-2                    111.02
3-2-3                    111.03
3-2-4                    111.04
3-2-5                    111.05
3-2-6                    111.06
3-2-7                    111.07
3-2-8                    111.08
3-2-9                    111.09
3-2-10                   111.10
3-2-11                   111.11
3-2-12                   111.99
3-2A-1                   112.01
3-2A-2                   112.02
3-2A-3                   112.03
3-2A-4                   112.04
3-2A-5                   112.05
3-2A-6                   112.06
3-2A-8                   112.08
3-2A-9                   112.09
3-2A-10                  112.10
3-2A-11                  112.11
3-2A-12                  112.12
3-2A-13                  112.13
3-2A-14                  112.14
3-3-1                    113.01
3-3-2                    113.02
3-3-3                    113.03
3-4A-1                   114.01
3-4A-2                   114.02
3-4A-3                   114.03
3-4A-4                   114.04
3-4A-5                   114.05
3-4A-6                   114.06
3-4A-7                   114.07
3-4B-1                   114.20
3-4B-2                   114.21
3-4B-3                   114.22
3-4B-4                   114.23
3-4B-5                   114.24
3-4B-6                   114.25
3-4C-1                   114.40
3-4C-2                   114.41
3-4C-3                   114.42
3-4C-4                   114.43
3-4C-5                   114.44
3-4C-6                   114.45
3-5-1                    115.01
3-5-2                    115.02
3-5-3                    115.03
3-5-4                    115.04
3-5-5                    115.05
3-6-1                    116.01
3-6-2                    116.02
3-6-3                    116.03
3-6-4                    116.04
3-6-5                    116.05
3-6-6                    116.06
3-7-1                    117.01
3-7-2                    117.02
3-7-3                    117.03
3-7-4                    117.04
3-7-5                    117.05
3-8-1                    118.01
3-8-2                    118.02
3-8-3                    118.03
3-8-4                    118.04
3-8-5                    118.05
3-8-6                    118.06
3-8-7                    118.07
3-8-8                    118.08
3-9-1                    119.01
3-9-2                    119.02
3-9-3                    119.03
3-9-4                    119.04
3-9-5                    119.05
3-9-6                    119.06
3-9-7                    119.07
3-10A-1                  120.01
3-10A-2                  120.02
3-10A-3                  120.03
3-10A-4                  120.04
3-10A-5                  120.05
3-10A-6                  120.06
3-10A-7                  120.07
3-10A-8                  120.08
3-10A-9                  120.09
3-10B-1                  120.20
3-10B-2                  120.21
3-10B-3                  120.22
3-10B-4                  120.23
3-10B-5                  120.24
3-10B-6                  120.25
3-10B-7                  120.26
3-10B-8                  120.27
3-11-1                   110.99
3-12-1                   121.01
3-12-2                   121.02
4-1A-1                   32.01
4-1A-2                   32.02
4-1A-3                   32.03
4-1A-4                   32.04
4-1A-5                   32.05
4-1A-6                   32.06
4-1A-7                   32.07
4-1A-8                   32.08
4-1B-1                   32.20
4-1B-2                   32.21
4-1B-3                   32.22
4-1B-4                   32.23
4-2-1                    91.01
4-2-2                    91.02
4-2-3                    91.03
4-2-4                    91.04
4-2-5                    91.05
4-2-6                    91.06
4-2-7                    91.07
4-2-8                    91.08
4-2-9                    91.99
4-3A-1                   39.01
4-3A-2                   39.02
4-3A-3                   39.03
4-3A-4                   39.04
4-3A-5                   39.05
4-3B-1                   39.20
4-3B-2                   39.21
4-3B-3                   39.22
4-3B-4                   39.23
4-3B-5                   39.24
4-3B-6                   39.25
4-4-1                    93.01
4-4-2                    93.02
4-4-3                    93.03
4-4-4                    93.04
4-4-5                    93.05
4-4-6                    93.06
4-4-7                    93.07
4-4-8                    93.08
4-4-9                    93.09
4-5-1                    93.20
4-5-2                    93.21
4-5-3                    93.99
4-5-4                    93.22
4-5-5                    93.23
4-5-6                    93.24
4-5-7                    93.25
4-5-8                    93.26
4-5-9                    93.27
4-5-10                   93.28
4-5-11                   93.29
4-5-12                   93.30
4-5-13                   93.31
4-5-14                   93.32
4-6-1                    94.01
4-6-2                    94.02
4-6-3                    94.03
4-6-4                    94.99
4-7-1                    95.01
4-7-2                    95.02
4-7-3                    95.03
4-7-4                    95.04
4-7-5                    95.05
4-7-6                    95.99
4-7-7                    95.06
4-8-1                    90.01
4-8-2                    90.02
4-8-3                    90.99
5-1-1                    32.35
5-1-2                    32.36
5-1-3                    32.37
5-1-4                    32.38
5-2-1                    40.01
5-2-2                    40.02
5-2-3                    40.03
5-2-4                    40.04
5-2-5                    40.05
5-2-6                    40.06
5-2-7                    40.07
5-2-8                    40.08
5-2-9                    40.09
5-2-10                   40.10
5-2-11                   40.11
5-2-12                   40.12
5-2-13                   40.13
5-2-14                   40.14
5-2-15                   40.15
5-2-16                   40.16
5-2-17                   40.17
5-2-18                   40.18
5-2-19                   40.19
5-2-20                   40.20
5-2-21                   40.21
5-2-22                   40.22
5-2-23                   40.23
5-2-24                   40.24
5-3-1                    92.01
5-3-2                    92.02
5-3-3                    92.03
5-3-4                    92.04
5-3-5                    92.05
5-3-6                    92.06
5-3-7                    92.07
5-3-8                    92.08
5-3-9                    92.09
5-3-10                   92.10
5-3-11                   92.11
5-3-12                   92.12
5-3-14                   92.13
5-3-15                   92.99
5-3-16                   92.14
5-3-17                   92.15
5-4A-1                   130.01
5-4A-2                   130.02
5-4A-3                   130.03
5-4A-4                   130.04
5-4A-5                   130.05
5-4A-6                   130.06
5-4A-7                   130.07
5-4A-8                   130.08
5-4A-9                   130.09
5-4A-10                  130.10
5-4A-11                  130.11
5-4B-1                   131.01
5-4B-2                   131.02
5-4B-3                   131.03
5-4B-4                   131.04
5-4B-5                   131.05
5-4B-6                   131.06
5-4B-7                   131.07
5-4B-8                   131.08
5-4B-9                   131.09
5-4B-10                  131.10
5-4B-11                  131.11
5-4B-12                  131.12
5-4B-13                  131.13
5-4B-14                  131.14
5-4B-15                  131.15
5-4B-16                  131.16
5-4B-17                  131.17
5-4C-1                   132.01
5-4C-2                   132.02
5-4C-3                   132.03
5-4C-4                   132.04
5-4C-5                   132.05
5-4C-6                   132.06
5-4C-7                   132.07
5-4C-8                   132.08
5-4C-9                   132.09
5-4C-10                  132.10
5-4C-11                  132.11
5-4C-12                  132.12
5-4C-13                  132.13
5-4D-1                   133.01
5-4D-2                   133.02
5-4D-3                   133.03
5-4D-4                   133.04
5-4D-5                   133.05
5-4D-6                   133.06
5-4D-7                   133.07
5-4D-8                   133.08
5-4D-9                   133.09
5-4D-10                  133.10
5-4D-11                  133.11
5-4D-12                  133.12
5-4D-13                  136.01
5-4D-14                  136.02
5-4D-15                  133.13
5-4D-16                  133.14
5-4D-17                  133.15
5-4D-18                  133.16
5-4D-19                  133.17
5-4D-20                  133.18
5-4D-21                  133.19
5-4D-22                  133.20
5-4D-23                  133.21
5-4E-1                   134.01
5-4F-1                   135.01
5-4F-2                   135.02
5-4F-3                   135.03
5-4F-4                   135.04
5-4F-5                   135.05
5-4F-6                   135.06
5-4F-7                   135.07
5-4F-8                   135.08
5-4F-9                   135.09
5-4F-10                  135.10
5-4G-1                   130.99
5-5-1                    136.15
5-5-2                    136.16
5-5-3                    136.17
5-5-4                    136.18
5-5-5                    136.19
5-5-6                    136.20
5-5-7                    136.21
5-5-8                    136.22
5-5-9                    136.23
5-5-10                   136.24
5-5-11                   136.25
5-6-1                    96.01
5-6-2                    96.02
5-6-3                    96.03
5-7-1                    97.01
5-7-2                    97.02
5-7-3                    97.03
5-7-4                    97.04
5-7-5                    97.05
5-7-6                    97.06
5-7-7                    97.07
5-7-8                    97.08
5-7-9                    97.09
5-7-10                   97.10
5-7-11                   97.11
5-7-12                   97.12
5-8-1                    136.40
5-8-2                    136.41
5-8-3                    136.42
5-9-1                    133.22
5-9-2                    133.22
5-10-1                   32.39
5-11-1                   32.40
6-1-1                    70.01
6-1-2                    70.02
6-1-3                    70.03
6-1-4                    70.04
6-1-5                    70.05
6-2-1                    70.20
6-2-2                    70.21
6-2-3                    70.22
6-2-4                    70.23
6-2-5                    70.06
6-2-6                    70.07
6-2-7                    70.24
6-2-8                    70.25
6-2-9                    70.26
6-2-10                   70.08
6-2-11                   70.09
6-2-12                   70.27
6-2-13                   70.28
6-2-14                   70.29
6-2-15                   70.30
6-2-16                   70.31
6-2-17                   70.32
6-2-18                   70.33
6-2-19                   76.01
6-3-1                    71.01
6-3-2                    71.02
6-3-3                    71.03
6-3-4                    71.04
6-3-5                    71.05
6-3-6                    71.06
6-4-1                    72.001
6-4-2                    72.002
6-4-3                    72.003
6-4-4                    72.004
6-4-5                    72.005
6-5-1                    72.020
6-5-2                    72.021
6-5-3                    72.022
6-5-4                    72.023
6-5-5                    72.024
6-5-6                    72.025
6-5-7                    72.026
6-5-8                    72.027
6-5-9                    72.028
6-5-10                   72.029
6-5-11                   72.030
6-5-12                   72.031
6-5-13                   72.032
6-5-14                   72.033
6-5-15                   72.034
6-5-16                   72.035
6-5-17                   72.036
6-5-18                   72.037
6-5-19                   72.038
6-5-20                   72.039
6-5-21                   72.040
6-5-22                   72.041
6-5-23                   72.042
6-5-24                   72.043
6-5-25                   72.044
6-5-26                   72.045
6-5-27                   72.046
6-5-28                   72.047
6-5-29                   72.048
6-5-30                   72.049
6-5-31                   72.050
6-5-32                   72.051
6-5-33                   72.052
6-5-34                   72.053
6-5-35                   72.054
6-5-36                   72.055
6-5-37                   72.056
6-6-1                    72.070
6-6-2                    72.071
6-6-3                    72.072
6-6-4                    72.073
6-6-5                    72.074
6-6-6                    72.075
6-6-7                    72.076
6-6-8                    72.077
6-6-9                    72.078
6-6-10                   72.079
6-6-11                   72.080
6-6-12                   72.081
6-7-1                    73.01
6-7-2                    73.02
6-7-3                    73.03
6-7-4                    73.04
6-7-5                    73.05
6-7-6                    73.06
6-7-7                    73.07
6-7-8                    73.08
6-7-9                    73.09
6-7-10                   73.10
6-7-11                   73.11
6-7-12                   73.12
6-7-13                   73.13
6-7-14                   73.14
6-7-15                   73.15
6-7-16                   73.16
6-7-17                   73.17
6-7-18                   73.18
6-7-19                   73.19
6-7-20                   73.20
6-7-21                   73.21
6-7-22                   73.22
6-7-23                   73.23
6-7-24                   73.24
6-7-25                   73.25
6-8-1                    74.01
6-8-2                    74.02
6-8-3                    74.03
6-8-4                    74.04
6-8-5                    74.05
6-8-6                    74.06
6-9-1                    72.095
6-9-2                    72.096
6-9-3                    72.097
6-9-4                    72.098
6-9-5                    72.099
6-9-6                    72.100
6-9-7                    72.101
6-9-8                    72.102
6-10-1                   75.01
6-10-2                   75.02
6-10-3                   75.03
6-10-4                   75.04
6-10-5                   75.05
6-10-6                   75.06
6-10-7                   75.07
6-10-8                   75.08
6-10-9                   75.09
6-10-10                  75.10
6-11-1                   76.15
6-11-2                   76.16
6-11-3                   76.17
6-11-4                   76.18
6-12-1                   70.45
6-12-2                   70.46
6-12-3                   70.47
6-12-4                   70.48
6-12-5                   70.49
6-12-6                   70.50
6-12-7                   70.51
6-12-8                   70.52
6-12-9                   70.53
6-12-10                  70.54
6-12-11                  70.55
6-12-12                  70.56
6-12-13                  70.57
6-12-14                  70.58
6-13-1                   70.99
6-13-2                   70.99
7-1-1                    151.01;
                         151.99
7-1-2                    151.02
7-1-3                    151.03
7-1-4                    151.04
7-1-5                    151.05
7-1-6                    151.06
7-1-7                    151.07
7-1-8                    151.08
7-1-9                    151.09
7-1-10                   151.10
7-1-11                   151.11
7-1-12                   151.99
7-1-13                   151.12
7-2-1                    151.25
7-2-2                    151.26
7-2-3                    151.27
7-2-4                    151.28
7-2-5                    151.29
7-2-6                    151.30
7-2-7                    151.31
7-3-1                    151.45
7-3-2                    151.46
7-3-3                    151.47
7-3-4                    151.48
7-4-1                    98.01
7-4-2                    98.02
7-4-3                    98.03
7-4-4                    98.04
7-4-5                    98.05
7-4-6                    98.06
7-4-7                    98.07
7-4-8                    98.08
7-4-9                    98.99
7-5-1                    99.01
7-5-2                    99.02
7-5-3                    99.03
7-5-4                    99.04
7-5-5                    99.05
7-6-1                    100.01
7-6-2                    100.02
7-6-3                    100.03
7-6-4                    100.04
7-6-5                    100.05
7-6-6                    100.06
7-6-7                    100.07
7-6-8                    100.99
7-7-1                    77.01
7-7-2                    77.02
7-7-3                    77.03
7-8-1                    98.20
7-9-1                    151.60
7-9-2                    151.61
7-9-3                    151.62
7-9-4                    151.63
7-9-5                    151.64
7-9-6                    151.65
8-1-1                    50.01
8-1-2                    50.02
8-1-3                    50.03
8-1-4                    50.04
8-1-5                    50.99
8-2-1                    51.01
8-2-2                    51.02
8-2-3                    51.03
8-2-4                    51.04
8-2-5                    51.05
8-2-6                    51.06
8-2-7                    51.07
8-2-8                    51.08
8-2-9                    51.09
8-2-10                   51.10
8-2-11                   51.11
8-2-12                   51.12
8-2-13                   51.13
8-2-14                   51.14
8-2-15                   51.15
8-2-16                   51.16
9-1A-1                   150.001
9-1A-2                   150.002
9-1A-3                   150.003
9-1A-4                   150.004
9-1A-5                   150.005
9-1A-6                   150.006
9-1A-7                   150.007
9-1A-8                   150.008
9-1A-9                   150.009;
                         150.999
9-1A-10                  150.999
9-1A-11                  150.010
9-1A-12                  150.011
9-1B-1                   150.025
9-1B-2                   150.026
9-1B-3                   150.027
9-1B-4                   150.028
9-1B-5                   150.029
9-1B-6                   150.999
9-1B-7                   150.030
9-2-1                    150.045
9-2-2                    150.046
9-2-3                    150.047
9-2-4                    150.048
9-2-5                    150.049
9-2-6                    150.050
9-3-1                    150.065
9-3-2                    150.066
9-3-3                    150.067
9-3-4                    150.068
9-3-5                    150.069
9-3-6                    150.070
9-3-7                    150.071
9-3-8                    150.072
9-3-9                    150.073
9-3-10                   150.074
9-3-11                   150.075
9-3-12                   150.076
9-4-1                    150.090
9-4-2                    150.091
9-4-3                    150.092
9-4-4                    150.093
9-4-5                    150.094
9-5-1                    150.105
9-5-2                    150.106
9-6-1                    150.120
9-6-2                    150.121
9-7-1                    150.135
9-7-2                    150.136
9-8-1                    150.150
9-8-2                    150.151
9-9-1                    150.165
9-9-2                    150.166
9-9-3                    150.167
9-9-4                    150.168
9-9-5                    150.169
9-9-6                    150.170
9-9-7                    150.171
9-9-8                    150.172
9-9-9                    150.173
9-9-10                   150.174
9-9-11                   150.175
9-9-12                   150.176
9-9-13                   150.177
9-9-14                   150.178
9-9-15                   150.999
9-10-1                   150.999
9-10-2                   150.999
9-11-1                   150.190
9-12-1                   150.205
9-12-2                   150.206
10-1-1                   152.001
10-1-2                   152.002
10-1-3                   152.003
10-1-4                   152.004
10-1-5                   152.005
10-1-6                   152.006
10-1-7                   152.007
10-1-8                   152.008
10-1-9                   152.009
10-1-10                  152.010
10-1-11                  152.011
10-1-12                  152.012
10-1-13                  152.013
10-2-1                   152.025
10-2-2                   152.026
10-2-3                   152.027
10-2-4                   152.028
10-2-5                   152.029
10-3-1                   152.040
10-3-2                   152.041
10-3-3                   152.042
10-3-4                   152.043
10-4-1                   152.055
10-4-2                   152.056
10-4-3                   152.057
10-5-1                   152.070
10-5-2                   152.071
10-5-3                   152.072
10-6-1                   152.085
10-6-2                   152.086
10-6-3                   152.087
10-6-4                   152.088
10-6-5                   152.089
10-6-6                   152.090
10-6-7                   152.091
10-6-8                   152.092
10-6-9                   152.093
10-6-10                  152.094
10-7-1                   152.105
10-7-2                   152.106
10-7-3                   152.107
10-7-4                   152.108
10-7-5                   152.109
10-7-6                   152.110
10-7-7                   152.111
10-7-8                   152.112
10-7-9                   152.113
10-7-10                  152.114
10-7-11                  152.115
10-7-12                  152.116
10-7-13                  152.117
10-7-14                  152.118
10-7-15                  152.119
10-8-1                   152.130
10-8-2                   152.131
10-8-3                   152.132
10-8-4                   152.133
10-8-5                   152.134
10-8-6                   152.135
10-8-7                   152.136
10-8-8                   152.137
10-8-9                   152.138
10-8-10                  152.139
10-8-11                  152.140
10-9-1                   152.155
10-9-2                   152.156
10-9-3                   152.157
10-9-4                   152.158
10-9-5                   152.159
10-10-1                  152.170
10-10-2                  152.171
10-10-3                  152.172
10-10-4                  152.173
10-10-5                  152.174
10-10-6                  152.175
10-10-7                  152.176
10-10-8                  152.177
10-10-9                  152.178
10-10-10                 152.179
10-11-1                  152.190
10-11-2                  152.191
10-11-3                  152.192
10-11-4                  152.193
10-11-5                  152.194
10-11-6                  152.195
10-11-7                  152.196
10-11-8                  152.197
10-12-1                  152.210
10-12-2                  152.211
10-12-3                  152.212
10-12-4                  152.213
10-12-5                  152.214
10-12-6                  152.215
10-12-7                  152.216
10-12-8                  152.217
10-12-9                  152.218
10-12-10                 152.219
10-12-11                 152.220
10-12-12                 152.221
10-12-13                 152.222
10-13-1                  152.235
10-13-2                  152.236
10-13-3                  152.237
10-13-4                  152.238
10-13-5                  152.239
10-13-6                  152.240
10-13-7                  152.241
10-13-8                  152.242
10-13-9                  152.243
10-13-10                 152.244
10-13-11                 152.245
10-13-12                 152.246
10-13-13                 152.247
10-13-14                 152.248
10-13-15                 152.249
10-13-16                 152.250
10-13-17                 152.251
10-14-1                  152.265
10-14-2                  152.266
10-14-3                  152.267
10-14-4                  152.268
10-15-1                  152.280
10-15-2                  152.281
10-15-3                  152.282
10-15-4                  152.283
10-15-5                  152.284
10-15-6                  152.285
10-15-7                  152.286
10-15-8                  152.287
10-15-9                  152.288
10-15-10                 152.289
10-15-11                 152.290
10-15-12                 152.291
10-15-13                 152.292
10-15-14                 152.293
10-16-1                  152.305
10-16-2                  152.306
10-16-3                  152.307
10-17-1                  152.320
10-17-2                  152.321
10-17-3                  152.322
10-17-4                  152.323
10-17-5                  152.324
10-18-1                  152.335
10-18-2                  152.336
10-18-3                  152.337
10-18-4                  152.338
10-18-5                  152.339
10-18-6                  152.340
10-18-7                  152.341
10-18-8                  152.342
10-19-1                  152.355
10-19-2                  152.356
10-19-3                  152.357
10-19-4                  152.358
10-19-5                  152.359
10-19-6                  152.360
10-19-7                  152.361
10-19-8                  152.362
10-19-9                  152.363
10-19-10                 152.364
10-19-11                 152.365
10-19-12                 152.366
10-19-13                 152.367
10-19-14                 152.368
10-19-15                 152.369
10-19-16                 152.370
10-20-1                  152.385
10-20-2                  152.386
10-20-3                  152.387
10-20-4 through 10-20-29 152.388
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
76-10    7-6-1976    Charter §
                     47
88–7   - -         Charter §
                     5
                     Charter §§
90-19    - -         53;
                     55—
                     58
98-6     7-7-1998    32.38
2006-4   8-1-2006    Charter §
                     36
                     Charter §
2011-5   7-5-2011    3; Charter §
                     6;
                     35.01
2019-2   2-5-2019    37.01
2024-3   5-21-2024   App. A
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed               Code Section
94-3      6-7-1994                  97.01—
                                    97.12
95-1      3-7-1995                  38.002
95-2      9-19-1995                 39.05
95-6      12-19-1995                38.002
95-8      12-19-1995                136.01
96-1      2-6-1996                  150.009;
                                    150.999
96-4      8-6-1996                  38.007
97-5      10-21-1997                38.002
                                    136.19;
97-6      11-4-1997                 136.21;
                                    136.23;
                                    136.25
98-1      1-6-1998, eff. 1-1-1998   30.03
98-2      4-7-1998                  132.10
98-3      5-19-1998                 31.005
98-4      5-19-1998                 38.055—
                                    38.077
98-6      6-2-1998                  31.051
98-5      6-19-1998                 38.057
2000-1    3-21-2000                 131.06
2000-3    10-3-2000                 136.01
2000-4    10-3-2000                 132.06
2000-5    10-3-2000                 92.10
                                    31.080;
2000-8    10-3-2000                 31.081;
                                    31.083—
                                    31.089
2000-10   11-21-2000                136.41;
                                    136.42
2001-4    2-6-2001                  40.23
2002-1    3-14-2002                 38.021
2002-3    3-19-2002                 100.04
2002-7    8-6-2002                  98.20
2003-6    8-5-2003                  38.057
2003-8    9-2-2003                  98.08
2003-10   9-16-2003                 150.009;
                                    150.999
2003-11   10-7-2003                 30.03
2003-14   11-4-2003                 99.03
2004-9    2-3-2004)                 150.999
2004-10   4-6-2004                  32.05
2004-11   4-6-2004                  73.25
2004-13   5-4-2004                  31.006
2004-15   5-18-2004                 100.06
2005-1    1-18-2005                 132.11
2005-3    3-1-2005                  38.057
2005-5    7-19-2005                 73.20
2005-5(A) 8-16-2005                 92.06
2005-7    9-20-2005, eff. 11-1-2005 72.056
2005-8    10-4-2005                 120.26
                                    31.082;
2006-1    2-7-2006                  31.086;
                                    31.087
2006-3    6-6-2006                  30.03
2006-8    9-19-2006                 150.135;
                                    150.136
2006-14   9-19-2006                 150.150;
                                    150.151
2006-15   9-19-2006                 38.002
2007-1    4-3-2007                  38.124
2007-5    9-18-2007                 40.21
2008-1    2-19-2008                 151.01;
                                    151.99
                                    92.01;
                                    92.03;
2008-3    9-16-2008                 92.04;
                                    92.06;
                                    92.11
2008-5    9-16-2008                 120.26
2009-1    1-6-2009                  150.005
2009-2    1-6-2009                  31.002
2009-3    3-17-2009                 38.002
2009-04   5-5-2009                  36.30—
                                    36.42
2009-7    10-20-2009                40.22
2009-8    10-20-2009                40.23
2009-9    11-3-2009                 120.09
2010-2    1-19-2010                 10.99
2010-3    2-16-2010                 113.03
2010-4    3-2-2010                  92.06
2010-5    3-2-2010                  92.02
2010-6    3-2-2010                  92.05
2010-8    4-20-2010                 150.004
2010-9    5-4-2010                  32.02
2010-11   5-4-2010                  40.18
2010-13   5-18-2010                 51.02
2010-15   6-1-2010                  40.19
2011-2    4-19-2011                 93.01
2011-4    6-21-2011                 133.22
2011-5    6-21-2011                 136.40
2012-3    6-5-2012                  132.02
2012-4    6-5-2012                  32.39
2012-6    6-5-2012                  150.190
2012-8    12-4-2012                 76.01
2012-9    12-4-2012                 76.01
                                    95.01—
2014-1    5-20-2014                 95.06;
                                    95.99
2014-3    11-18-2014                93.08
2015-1    7-21-2015                 98.02
2015-2    7-21-2015                 99.02
2015-3    7-21-2015                 100.02
2015-4    7-21-2015                 150.030
2015-11   8-4-2015                  120.07
2015-12   8-4-2015                  136.01
2015-13   8-18-2015                 151.60—
                                    151.65
2015-14   9-15-2015                 120.01
2015-15   9-15-2015                 120.03
2015-19   12-1-2015                 150.001;
                                    150.002
2015-20   12-1-2015                 150.205;
                                    150.206
2015-21   12-1-2015                 91.01;
                                    91.02
2015-22   12-1-2015                 150.120;
                                    150.121
2015-23   12-1-2015                 150.090;
                                    150.091
2015-25   12-1-2015                 150.105;
                                    150.106
2015-26   12-1-2015                 150.045;
                                    150.046
2016-1    3-1-2016                  151.12
                                    112.01—
2016-3    11-1-2016                 112.06;
                                    112.08—
                                    112.14
2016-4    11-1-2016                 34.01—
                                    34.12
2017-1    2-21-2017                 32.07
2017-2    2-21-2017                 38.004
                                    93.20—
2017-3    4-18-2017                 93.31;
                                    93.99
                                    150.165—
2017-4    5-16-2017                 150.178;
                                    150.999
2017-5    5-16-2017                 70.03
                                    38.025;
2017-6    5-16-2017                 38.026;
                                    38.040
2017-7    6-20-2017                 150.011
2017-8    8-15-2017                 150.121
2018-1    2-6-2018                  30.06—
                                    30.10
2018-2    2-6-2018                  30.05
2018-3    2-6-2018                  136.15
2018-4    2-6-2018                  136.16
2018-5    2-6-2018                  136.22
2018-6    2-6-2018                  136.17
2018-7    2-6-2018                  136.24
2018-8    2-6-2018                  136.17
2018-9    2-20-2018                 136.20
2018-10   2-20-2018                 150.010
2018-11   3-6-2018                  133.21
2018-15   10-2-2018                 133.04
                                    152.001—
                                    152.013;
                                    152.025—
                                    152.029;
                                    152.040—
                                    152.043;
                                    152.055—
                                    152.057;
                                    152.070—
                                    152.072;
                                    152.085—
                                    152.094;
                                    152.105—
                                    152.119;
                                    152.130—
                                    152.140;
                                    152.155—
                                    152.159;
                                    152.170—
2018-16   12-4-2018                 152.179;
                                    152.190—
                                    152.197;
                                    152.210—
                                    152.222;
                                    152.235—
                                    152.251;
                                    152.265—
                                    152.268;
                                    152.280—
                                    152.293;
                                    152.305—
                                    152.307;
                                    152.320—
                                    152.324;
                                    152.335—
                                    152.342;
                                    152.355—
                                    152.370;
                                    152.385—
                                    152.388
2018-17   12-18-2018                93.32
2019-1    3-19-2019                 152.085
2019-2    3-19-2019                 152.085
2019-3    3-19-2019                 152.088
2019-4    3-19-2019                 152.088
2019-5    3-19-2019                 152.089
2019-6    3-19-2019                 152.089
2019-7    3-19-2019                 152.137
2019-12   9-3-2019                  136.40
2020-3    3-3-2020                  92.14
2020-4    3-3-2020                  92.07
2020-05   3-3-2020                  92.02
2020-6    3-3-2020                  92.15
2020-7    3-3-2020                  92.08
2020-8    3-3-2020                  93.24
2021-1    1-5-2021                  150.105;
                                    150.106
2021-4    2-2-2021                  150.135;
                                    150.136
2021-5    2-2-2021                  136.15
2021-6    2-2-2021                  136.16
2021-7    2-2-2021                  136.17
2021-8    2-2-2021                  136.17
2021-9    2-2-2021                  136.19
2021-10   2-2-2021                  136.20
2021-11   2-2-2021                  136.21
2021-12   2-2-2021                  136.22
2021-13   2-2-2021                  136.24
2021-14   2-2-2021                  152.119
2021-15   2-2-2021                  152.085
2021-16   3-2-2021                  152.085
2021-18   11-2-2021                 120.01
2021-19   11-2-2021                 120.02
2021-20   11-2-2021                 120.07
2023-1    2-21-2023                 132.12;
                                    132.13
2023-3    5-2-2023                  152.085
2023-4    7-5-2023                  31.002
2023-5    7-5-2023                  31.005
2023-6    11-21-2023                152.130
2023-7    11-21-2023                31.005
2023-8    12-19-2023                32.40
2023-9    12-19-2023                121.01;
                                    121.02
2023-10   12-19-2023                136.18
2024-1    1-2-2024                  132.02
2024-4    6-4-2024                  112.07
2024-5    6-4-2024                  132.02
2024-7    7-16-2024                 132.02
2025-1    6-3-2025                  98.04
2025-8    - -2025                   152.305
2025-9    - -2025                   152.305
                                   
 
 
