CITY OF WALTERS, OKLAHOMA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 593, passed 7-1-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
DIRECTORY OF CITY OFFICIALS
City Council
Mayor                                         Jonathan Morgan
Vice Mayor                                    Sherri Flanagan
Councilman                                    Byrum E. Edison
Councilman                                    Diana Fincher
Councilman                                    Jim Keesee
City Administration
City Manager                               Matt LaFee
City Clerk                                    Sheri Davis
Billing Clerk/Accounts Receivable/Court Clerk Ashley Williams
Accounts Payable Clerk/Payroll/EM             Karla Eschiti
Code Enforcement Officer                      Amanda Harris
                                              
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2024-584
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF WALTERS. REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Oklahoma empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WALTERS,
OKLAHOMA:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the (Political Subdivision I
State)."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   CHARTER
      Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      10.   General Provisions
      11.   City Standards
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30.   Officers and Employees
      31.   City Organizations
      32.   Municipal Court
      33.   Finance and Taxation
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50.   Utilities Generally
      51.   Water
      52.   Sewer
      53.   Electric
      54.   Solid Waste
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70.   Administration and Enforcement
      71.   Traffic-Control Devices
      72.   Vehicle Equipment
      73.   Pedestrians
      74.   Vehicle Operation
      75.   Driving, Overtaking, Passing
      76.   Parking and Loading
      77.   Recreational Vehicles
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90.   Animals
      91.   Fair Housing
      92.   Fire Prevention
      93.   Nuisances
      94.   Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs
      95.   Streets and Sidewalks
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110.   Alcoholic Beverages
      111.   Food and Restaurants
      112.   Massage Businesses
      113.   Peddlers and Solicitors
      114.   Medical Marijuana
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      130.   Offenses in General
      131.   Offenses Against Property
      132.   Offenses Against the Public
      133.   Offenses Against Health, Welfare, and Morals
      134.   Offenses Against Persons
      135.   Offenses Against Public Authority
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      150.   Building Regulations
      151.   Manufactured Housing
      152.   Floodplain Management
      153.   Closing Public Ways; Easements
      154.   Subdivisions
      155.   Zoning Code
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
      I.   Annexations
      II.   Franchises
      III.   Miscellaneous
      IV.   Streets and Alleys
      V.   Zoning Map
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
   References to Oklahoma Statutes
   References to Prior Code
   References to Resolutions
   References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
This Ordinance passed and approved by unanimous vote of the City Council at a
regular meeting held on the  2  day of  July , 2024.
Emergency clause voted on separately and passed unanimously at a regular
meeting of the City Council held on the  2  day of  July , 2024.
Jonathan Morgan /s/
Jonathan Morgan, Mayor
 
Sheri Davis /s/
Sheri Davis, City Clerk
 
ATTEST
Approved as to form and legal sufficiency
Jack Mackey /s/             Date July 2, 2024
Jack Mackey, City Attorney
Published in the Walters Herald on the  11  Day of  July , 2024
CHARTER
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
   
Section 1   Incorporation.
   
Section 2   Form of government.
   
Section 3   Powers of the city.
ARTICLE II
THE COUNCIL
   
Section 4   Council members: number, election, term, qualifications.
   
Section 5   Mayor and vice mayor.
   
Section 6   Council members: compensation.
   
Section 7   Council: powers.
   
Section 8   Council not to interfere in appointments and removals.
   
Section 9   City clerk.
   
Section 10   Council: induction into office, meetings.
   
Section 11   Council: absences to terminate membership.
   
Section 12   Council members: removal.
   
Section 13   Council: vacancies.
   
Section 14   Council: quorum, rules, yeas and nays.
   
Section 15   Ordinances: enacting clause.
   
Section 16   Ordinances: passage, when in effect.
   
Section 17   Ordinances: emergency.
   
Section 18   Ordinances: adoption by reference.
   
Section 19   Ordinances: codification.
ARTICLE III
CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
   
Section 20   City manager: appointment, term, qualifications, removal.
   
Section 21   Acting city manager.
   
Section 22   City manager: powers and duties.
   
Section 23   Administrative departments, offices and agencies.
   
Section 24   Public library.
ARTICLE IV
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS
   
Section 25   City treasurer: office created, duties.
   
Section 26   Purchases and sales.
   
Section 27   Sale of property valued at more than $10,000.
   
Section 28   Public improvements.
   
Section 29   Fiscal year.
   
Section 30   Independent annual audit.
ARTICLE V
MUNICIPAL COURT
   
Section 31   Municipal court.
ARTICLE VI
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
   
Section 32   One council member elected every year, nonpartisan elections.
   
Section 33   Primary election: filing.
   
Section 34   Primary election: time, when not held, who nominated or elected.
   
Section 35   General election: time, when not held, who elected.
   
Section 36   Political activity of officers and employees.
   
Section 37   State constitution and law to govern.
ARTICLE VII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   
Section 38   Feminine gender.
   
Section 39   Initiative and referendum.
   
Section 40   Merit system.
   
Section 41   Qualifications of officers and employees.
   
Section 42   Nepotism, compatibility of offices.
   
Section 43   Bonds.
   
Section 44   Oath of office.
   
Section 45   Who may administer oaths.
   
Section 46   Removal of officers and employees.
   
Section 47   Acting officers and employees.
   
Section 48   Publicity of records.
   
Section 49   Separability clause.
ARTICLE VIII
AMENDMENT
   
Section 50   Amendment: proposal, ratification, approval.
   
Section 51   Amendment: board of freeholders.
ARTICLE IX
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
   
Section 52   New charter to go into effect when approved by governor.
   
Section 53   Ordinances continued.
   
Section 54   Officers and employees continued.
   
Section 55   Pending actions and proceedings.
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Walters, Oklahoma, exercising the powers of
home rule granted to us by the constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma,
in order to provide for more efficient, adequate and economical government do
hereby amend the heretofore existing charter of the City of Walters, Oklahoma,
by repealing it and substituting in lieu thereof this charter of the City of
Walters; and do hereby ordain, ratify and establish this charter of the City of
Walters, Oklahoma, as the organic law of the city.
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
Section 1 Incorporation.
   The City of Walters, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as now
established or as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a
municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the “City
of Walters, Oklahoma.” It shall succeed to and possess all the property,
rights, privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to the
corporation known as the City of Walters, Oklahoma; and shall be liable for all
debts and other obligations for which the corporation is now legally bound.
Section 2 Form of government.
   The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the
“council-manager government.” All powers of the city shall be exercised in the
manner prescribed by this charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed,
then in such manner as the council may prescribe by ordinance.
Section 3 Powers of the city.
   The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises
and immunities granted to cities by the state constitution and law and all the
implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. Except
as prohibited by the state constitution and law, the city shall have all
municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities of
every name and nature whatsoever.
   The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at
pleasure, to sue and to be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have power to
acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose,
including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or any lesser
interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation or other
legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate,
lease, sell, convey or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests may
require, including public utilities, works and ways. It shall have power to
issue bonds in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by the state
constitution and law. It shall have power, within the limits prescribed by the
state constitution and law, to accept and administer federal and state grants-
in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or purposes for
which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and to enforce
local legislation, consistent with the state constitution and law, for the
proper organization and functioning of the city government, for the
preservation and enforcement of good government and order, for the protection
of health, life, morals and property, for the preservation, summary abatement
and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common
welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend and renew franchises in
accordance with the state constitution and law.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to
be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under the state
constitution and law, it would be competent for this charter specifically to
enumerate.
   Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities
operating under charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are
applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance.
ARTICLE II
THE COUNCIL
Section 4 Council members: number, election, term, qualifications.
   There shall be a council, which shall consist of five (5) council members,
one elected at large and four (4) elected by wards. The electors shall elect
them as hereinafter provided for overlapping three-year terms, to serve until
their successors have been elected and take office. Only qualified electors of
the city who are at least twenty-five (25) years old, and who are freeholders
of the city, shall be qualified to be council members. A freeholder seeking to
represent a particular ward must be a resident of that ward. No council member
may hold any office or position in the city government by appointment by the
city manager. Subsequent to the ratification and approval of this amended
charter and contemporaneously with or prior to the resolution calling for the
1996 city elections, the council shall divide the city into four (4) wards
which shall be as co-equal in population as is reasonably possible; all of the
area in each ward shall be contiguous to the rest of the area in that ward.
Ward One shall include the residence of the council member whose term expires
in 1997. Ward Two shall include the residence of the council member whose term
expires in 1998. Wards Three and Four shall be drawn out of the rest of the
city. After the federal census is published every ten (10) years and
contemporaneously with or prior to the resolution calling for the next city
election, the council shall reapportion the wards so that they shall be as co-
equal in population as ins reasonably possible. If, as a result of
reapportionment, a council member no longer resides in his or her ward, he or
she shall continue to represent the ward until expiration of his or her term.
If a council member moves out of his or her ward and continues to reside within
the city, he or she may continue to represent that ward until the next
regularly-scheduled city election, at which time the office shall be deemed to
be vacant and a successor elected for the balance of the council member’s term.
If a council member moves outside the city, his or her office shall be deemed
vacated immediately, and the remaining council members shall appoint a
successor to serve the balance of that council member’s term.
(Amendment approved September 12, 1995)
Section 5 Mayor and vice mayor.
   Every year, at the first meeting after the time for the beginning of the
term of a newly elected council member or as soon after as practicable, the
council shall elect from its members a mayor and a vice mayor, who shall serve
until the time for the beginning of the term of the next newly elected council
member and until their respective successors have been elected and take office.
   The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall certify to the
correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it. He or she
shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial
purposes and by the governor for the purposes of military law. He or she shall
have no regular administrative duties except that he or she shall sign such
written obligations of the city as the council may require.
   The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the
mayor, and if a vacancy occurs, shall become mayor for the completion of the
unexpired term. If, by succession to office of mayor or otherwise, the office
of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council shall elect another vice mayor.
Section 6 Council members: compensation.
   The salary of each council member shall be increased to $25.00 per month.
(Amendment approved March 7, 2006) (Res. 715, passed 12-6-2005; Res. passed 12-
5-2006)
Section 7 Council: powers.
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city,
including the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the
council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council may:
   1.   Appoint and remove the city manager as provided in this charter;
   2.   By ordinance enact municipal legislation;
   3.   Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate bond elections, the
issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries and
wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to the provisions of
the state constitution and law and this charter;
   4.   Establish or adopt a pension, retirement and/or social security system
or systems for any or all groups of the officers and employees in the service
of the city, either alone or in cooperation with the state or federal
government or both;
   5.   Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the
city, and investigate municipal affairs;
   6.   Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, the members of the
personnel board, the members of the planning commission, the members of the
board of adjustment and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial or advisory
officers and authorities, now or when and if established, or prescribe the
method of appointing or electing and removing them;
   7.   Grant pardons, including the remission of fines and costs, upon the
recommendation of the municipal judge;
   8.   Regulate elections and the initiative and referendum within the limits
prescribed by the state constitution and law and this charter;
   9.   Regulate the organization, powers, duties and functions of the
municipal court and of the minor violations bureau, when and if established,
within the limits prescribed by the state constitution and law and this
charter; and
   10.   Create, change and abolish all offices, departments and agencies of
the city other than the offices, departments and agencies created by this
charter; and assign additional powers, duties and functions to offices,
departments and agencies created by the charter.
Section 8 Council not to interfere in appointments and removals.
   Neither the council nor any of its members may direct or request the
appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office or employment
by the city manager or by any other authority, or, except as provided in this
charter, participate in any manner in the appointment or removal of officers
and employees of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and
its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city
manager; and neither the council nor any member thereof may give orders on
administrative matters to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly
or privately.
Section 9 City clerk.
   At the first meeting after the time for the beginning of the term of a newly
elected council member or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall
appoint a city clerk provided that the council by ordinance may provide instead
that the city treasurer shall be ex-officio city clerk and that an acting city
treasurer shall be ex-officio acting city clerk. In either case, in the absence
from a meeting of the city clerk and acting city clerk if any, the council may
appoint an acting city clerk to serve for that particular meeting.
   The city clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the council;
shall enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose all ordinances and
resolutions passed by it; shall be custodian of such documents, records and
archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be custodian
of the seal of the city; shall attest, and affix the seal to documents when
required in accordance with applicable law or ordinance; and shall perform such
other duties as the charter or the council may prescribe or direct. The city
clerk shall not collect revenue and other money for the city except as may be
incidental to his or her duties as city clerk; in all other cases where the law
or ordinances provide that money shall be paid to the city clerk, it shall be
paid to the city treasurer instead.
Section 10 Council: induction into office, meetings.
   The term of office of a council member shall begin at 7:30 P.M. on the first
Monday in May following his or her election. The council shall hold a meeting
at that time and the council member whose term is beginning shall be inducted
into office. If a council member-elect fails to qualify within one month
thereafter, his or her office shall become vacant. The council shall meet
regularly at least monthly at such times as it may prescribe by ordinance or
otherwise. The mayor or two (2) council members may call special meetings. All
meetings of the council shall be open to the public and the journal of its
proceedings shall be open to public inspection.
Section 11 Council: absences to terminate membership.
   If a council member shall be absent from more than one-half (1/2) of all the
meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any period of four
(4) consecutive months, he or she shall thereupon cease to hold office.
Section 12 Council members: removal.
   The mayor or any other council member may be removed from office for any
cause specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers and by the
method or methods prescribed thereby.
Section 13 Council: vacancies.
   The council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies
in its own membership for the unexpired terms.
Section 14 Council: quorum, rules, yeas and nays.
   A majority of all of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum,
but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day. The council shall determine
its own rules. On the demand of any member, the vote on any question shall be
by yeas and nays and shall be entered in the journal.
Section 15 Ordinances: enacting clause.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, “Be it
ordained by the Council of the City of Walters,” and of all ordinances proposed
by the voters under their power of initiative, “Be it ordained by the People of
the City of Walters.”
Section 16 Ordinances: passage, when in effect.
   Every proposed ordinance shall be read and a vote of a majority of all the
council members shall be required for the final passage of an ordinance. The
vote on final passage of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays and shall be
entered in the journal. The mayor shall have no power to vote. Every ordinance
except an emergency ordinance shall be published by title or in full, within
ten (10) days after its passage, in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance shall become effective
thirty (30) days after its final passage unless it specifies a later time.
Section 17 Ordinances: emergency.
   An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the council
is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health or safety and
which should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary ordinance
would become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain, as a part of its
title, the words, “and declaring an emergency,” and in a separate section,
herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency. The council
shall vote on the emergency section separately and must adopt the section by a
vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the council, which vote
shall be by yeas and nays and be entered in the journal. An emergency ordinance
shall take effect upon passage unless it specifies a later time.
Section 18 Ordinances: adoption by reference.
   The council by ordinance may adopt by reference codes, ordinances and
standards relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and
milk products and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. Such
a code, ordinance or standard so adopted need not be enrolled in the book of
ordinances; but a copy shall be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk.
The city clerk shall keep copies of every such code, ordinance or standard in
force for distribution or sale at their approximate cost.
Section 19 Ordinances: codification.
   The ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in book or
pamphlet form at least every ten (10) years unless the council, by use of a
loose-leaf system and process of amendment, keeps the code up-to-date. Titles,
enacting clauses and emergency sections may be omitted from the code; and
temporary and special ordinances and parts of ordinances may be omitted.
Permanent general ordinances and parts of ordinances which are to be repealed
by the code, shall be omitted from the code. The ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the code may be revised, rearranged and reorganized; and
the code may contain new matter, provisions of the state constitution and law
relating to the city and provisions of this charter. A copy of the published
code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after adoption by the
council, but the code need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances.
ARTICLE III
CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section 20 City manager: appointment, term, qualifications, removal.
   There shall be a city manager. The council shall appoint him or her for an
indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose him
or her solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative
qualifications. At the time of his or her appointment, he or she need not be a
resident of the city or state; but, during his or her tenure of office, he or
she shall reside within the city. Neither the mayor nor any other council
member may be appointed city manager during the term for which he or she shall
have been elected nor within two (2) years after the expiration of his or her
term. The council may suspend or remove the city manager at any time by a vote
of a majority of all its members.
Section 21 Acting city manager.
   To perform his or her duties during his or her temporary absence or
disability, the city manager, by letter filed with the city clerk, may appoint
a qualified administrative officer of the city to be acting city manager. If
the city manager fails to make such designation, if the council suspends the
city manager, or if there is a vacancy in the office of city manager, the
council may appoint an acting city manager to serve until the city manager
returns, until his or her disability or suspension ceases, or until it appoints
another city manager, as the case may be. The council may suspend or remove an
acting city manager at any time.
Section 22 City manager: powers and duties.
   The city manager shall be chief executive officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He or she shall execute the laws
and ordinances and administer the government of the city and shall be
responsible therefor to the council. He or she shall:
   1.   Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, suspend,
demote or remove all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as he or she or the
council by ordinance may authorize the head of a department, an officer or an
agency to appoint and suspend, demote or remove subordinates in such
department, office or agency, subject to such merit system regulations as the
council may ordain;
   2.   Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative
officers, agencies and employees;
   3.   Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible
for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect and recommend to
the council any changes in the budget which he or she deems desirable;
   4.   Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the
finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
   5.   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of
the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him or her desirable; and
   6.   Perform such other duties as this charter may prescribe and such duties
as the council may prescribe, consistent with this charter.
Section 23 Administrative departments, offices and agencies.
   There shall be a department of finance, a police department, a fire
department, a department of law headed by a city attorney and such other
administrative departments, offices and agencies as this charter establishes
and as the council may establish.
Section 24 Public library.
   The public library or libraries shall constitute, or be a part of, an
administrative department; and shall be under the supervision and control of an
officer or of a board established by ordinance and appointed by the city
manager, as the council may ordain.
ARTICLE IV
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS
Section 25 City treasurer: office created, duties.
   There shall be a city treasurer, who shall be an officer of the city
appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of
the department of finance. Subject to such regulations as the council may
prescribe, the city treasurer shall collect or receive revenue and other money
for the city and shall deposit the same in such depositories as the council may
designate. The city treasurer shall maintain a general accounting system for
the city government. He or she shall have such other powers and duties as may
be prescribed by this charter, by applicable law or by the council.
Section 26 Purchases and sales.
   The city manager, subject to any regulations which the council may
prescribe, shall contract for and purchase or issue purchase authorizations for
all supplies, materials and equipment for the offices, departments and agencies
of the city government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount to
be established by ordinance, shall require the prior approval of the council.
The city manager also may transfer to or between offices, departments and
agencies or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment,
subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe.
   Before the purchase of, or contract for any supplies, materials or
equipment, or the sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or
equipment, ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such regulations
and with such exceptions as the council may prescribe, shall be given; but the
council shall not except a particular contract, purchase or sale from the
requirement of competitive bidding.
   The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to
the city manager by this section, relating to purchases and sales, to an
officer appointed by and subordinate to the city manager.
Section 27 Sale of property valued at more than $10,000.
   The sale of any property, real or personal, or of any interest therein, the
value of which is more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be made
only by authority of a special ordinance other than an emergency ordinance.
Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city within ten (10) days after its passage and shall include a
section reading substantially as follows: “Section ______. This ordinance shall
be referred to a vote of the electors of the city if a proper referendum
petition is properly filed within thirty (30) days after its passage; otherwise
it shall go into effect thirty (30) days after its passage.”
Section 28 Public improvements.
   Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by
contract. The council shall award all contracts for such improvements; provided
that the council may authorize the city manager to award such contracts not
exceeding an amount to be determined by the council and subject to such
regulations as the council may prescribe. Every contract for public
improvements of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be awarded to
the lowest and best responsible bidder as the council may prescribe. All bids
may be rejected and further notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may
be given. Such contracts may be altered by mutual consent of the parties.
(Amendment approved April 21, 2015)
Section 29 Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July
and shall end on the last day of June of every calendar year.
Section 30 Independent annual audit.
   The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who
shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of financial
transactions of the department of finance and of all other departments, offices
and agencies keeping separate or subordinate accounts or making financial
transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at least and who shall report
to the council and to the city manager. In lieu of the above, the council may
arrange with an appropriate state authority for such an audit when and if
permitted by law.
ARTICLE V
MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 31 Municipal court.
   There shall be a municipal judge, who shall be an officer of the city
appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. The council may suspend
or remove the municipal judge or acting municipal judge at any time by a vote
of a majority of all its members. The municipal judge shall have original
jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases involving offenses against the
charter and ordinances of the city; provided that the council by ordinance may
create a minor violations bureau with authority to dispose of cases arising out
of designated minor violations, such as minor traffic and parking violations,
on request of accused persons who desire to plead guilty, who are able and
willing to pay fines and costs and who do plead guilty and pay fines and costs.
The municipal judge shall keep a record of all proceedings of the municipal
court, of the disposition of all cases and of all fines and other money
collected. The style of all processes shall be in the name of the city. The
municipal judge may administer oaths, make and enforce all proper orders, rules
and judgments and punish for contempt.
ARTICLE VI
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 32 One council member elected every year, nonpartisan elections.
   In 1996, the electors shall elect a council member at large for a three year
term, a council member for Ward Three to serve an initial term of one year, and
a council member for Ward Four to serve an initial term of two years. In 1997,
the electors shall elect council members to represent Wards One and Three for
three year terms. In 1998, the electors shall elect council members to
represent Wards Two and Four for three year terms. Thereafter, every year, one
council member shall be elected for a three year term to succeed each council
member whose term is expiring. Only electors who reside within a ward shall be
eligible to vote on the representative for that Ward. All electors within the
City shall be eligible to vote for the council member at large. Both the
primary and general election shall be nonpartisan and no party designation or
emblem shall be placed on the ballots.
(Amendment approved September 12, 1995) (Res. 98-664, passed 1-6-1998)
Section 33 Primary election: filing.
   Any qualified person may have his or her name placed on the ballot for the
primary election as a candidate for council member by filing with the secretary
of the Cotton County Election Board, a sworn statement of his or her candidacy
on the first Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of December each year.
(Amendments approved September 12, 1995; March 7, 2006) (Res. 98-664, passed 1-
6-1998; Res. 715, passed 12-6-2005; Res. passed 12-5-2006; Res. 779, passed 7-
20-2012)
Section 34 Primary election: time, when not held, who nominated or elected.
   A primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday in February of each
year to nominate candidates for council member(s); provided that, if only one
person is a candidate for a particular office, he or she shall be not only
nominated, but also elected, ipso facto; and no primary or general election
shall be held for that particular office. The primary election shall be
established by resolution of the Council in accordance with state and federal
laws and regulations.
   In a primary election, the two (2) candidates for a particular office
receiving the greatest number of votes shall be nominated for that office. If
one of the candidates for a particular office receives a majority of all votes
cast for all candidates for that office, he or she alone shall be not only
nominated, but also elected, ipso facto; and no general election shall be held
for that office.
   If one of the two (2) candidates nominated in a primary election dies or
withdraws before the general election, the remaining candidate for that office
shall be elected council member ipso facto; and no general election shall be
held for that office.
(Amendment approved March 7, 2006) (Amendment approved September 12, 1995)
(Res. 99-670, passed 1-5-1999; Res. passed 12-5-2006; Res. 779, passed 7-20-
2012)
Section 35 General election: time, when not held, who elected.
   A general election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April of each year
to elect a council member if candidates for council member remain to be voted
upon. The candidate for council member receiving the greater number of votes
shall be elected. The General Election shall be established by resolution of
the Council in accordance with state and federal laws and regulations.
(Res. 99-670, passed 1-5-1999; Res. 779, passed 7-20-2012)
Section 36 Political activity of officers and employees.
   No officer or employee of the city except the council members, may attempt
to influence the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate for council
member except by the proper exercise of his or her right to vote. Any person
who violates this provision, shall be punished upon conviction thereof, by a
fine not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00) inclusive of costs. Such violation
shall constitute cause for removal from office or employment.
Section 37 State constitution and law to govern.
   The precinct and county election boards shall conduct the primary and
general elections and special elections of the city. The provisions of the
state constitution and law relating to elections, shall govern such elections
insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by
ordinance.
ARTICLE VII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 38 Feminine gender.
   When the masculine gender is used in this charter, it shall also mean the
feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.
Section 39 Initiative and referendum.
   The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of
the city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the state
constitution and law shall be observed.
Section 40 Merit system.
   Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely
on the basis of merit and fitness, and removals and demotions shall be made
solely for the good of the service. Better to achieve these ends, the council
may establish a merit system and provide for its proper organization and
functioning and for proper personnel administration.
Section 41 Qualifications of officers and employees.
   Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed
by this charter and such additional qualifications as the council may prescribe
by ordinance; but the council shall not prescribe additional qualifications for
council members.
Section 42 Nepotism, compatibility of offices.
   Neither the city manager, the council nor any other authority of the city
government, may appoint or elect any person related to any council member, the
city manager or to himself or herself, or in the case of a plural authority, to
one of its members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to
any office or position of profit in the city government.
   Except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance, the
same person may hold more than one office or position in the city government.
The city manager may hold more than one such office or position, through
appointment by himself or herself, by the council or by other city authority
having power to fill the particular office or position, subject to any
regulations which the council may make by ordinance; but he or she may not
receive compensation for service in such other offices and positions. Also the
council by ordinance may provide that the city manager shall hold ex officio
designated administrative offices subordinate to the city manager as well as
other designated compatible city offices.
Section 43 Bonds.
   The city manager, the city treasurer and such other officers and employees
as the council by ordinance may designate, before entering upon their duties,
shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties,
payable to the city, in such form and in such amounts as the council may
prescribe by ordinance, with a surety company authorized to operate within the
state. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
Section 44 Oath of office.
   Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his or her
office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office
prescribed by the state constitution. The oath shall be filed and kept in the
city clerk’s office.
Section 45 Who may administer oaths.
   All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the city clerk,
the city manager, the city treasurer, the heads of all other administrative
departments, the municipal judge and such other officers as the council may
authorize, may administer oaths.
Section 46 Removal of officers and employees.
   Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the power to suspend, demote
and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect; and the city manager or
other appointing or electing authority at any time may suspend, demote or
remove any officer or employee to whom he or she or the other appointing or
electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor.
Section 47 Acting officers and employees.
   The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor
of an officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during the
temporary absence, disability or suspension of such officer or employee, or in
case of vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualifies,
unless the council ordains that a particular superior or subordinate of such
officer or employee shall act. The council by ordinance may provide for a
deputy to act in such cases.
Section 48 Publicity of records.
   All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city
government, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to
defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish, shall be open
to public inspection.
Section 49 Separability clause.
   If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or part of a
section of this charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of
this charter nor the context in which such section or part of a section so held
invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a
section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that section or
part of a section.
   If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this charter invalid or
if a change in the state constitution or law renders a part of this charter
invalid or inapplicable, the council by ordinance may take such appropriate
action as will enable the city government to function properly.
ARTICLE VIII
AMENDMENT
Section 50 Amendment: proposal, ratification, approval.
   This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the council
or by the mayor upon initiative petition of the people as provided by the state
constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the
qualified electors voting thereon and approved by the governor as provided by
the state constitution. If more than one amendment are proposed, all of them
except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified or rejected
together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may vote on them
separately. A proposition to amend this charter may be either in the form of a
proposed amendment to a part or parts of the charter or of a proposed new
charter.
Section 51 Amendment: board of freeholders.
   The council by ordinance may provide for the election of a board of
freeholders to prepare and propose amendments to this charter. When an
amendment proposed by a board of freeholders shall have been submitted by the
council at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the
qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the governor, as provided by
the state constitution, it shall go into effect.
ARTICLE IX
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
Section 52 New charter to go into effect when approved by governor.
   If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the question
vote to ratify this charter in lieu of the heretofore existing charter, this
charter shall go into effect immediately upon approval by the governor as
provided by the state constitution.
Section 53 Ordinances continued.
   All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter,
shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their
own limitations.
Section 54 Officers and employees continued.
   The three (3) council members under the charter prior to its first amendment
shall continue in office under this amended charter until the expiration of the
terms for which they were elected and until their respective successors have
been elected and take office; but their title under this charter shall be
“council member” instead of “councilman.”
   All other officers and employees of the city under the previous charter
shall continue in the offices and employments which they respectively hold,
after this charter goes into effect, and until their services are terminated in
accordance with the provisions of this charter.
(Amendment approved September 12, 1995)
Section 55 Pending actions and proceedings.
   The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise effect any action
or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect, brought by
or against the municipality or any office, department, agency or officer
thereof.
END OF CHARTER
   First amendment to the charter was approved by vote of the people on
September 12, 1995. In addition to the amendments shown above to Sections 4,
32, 33, 34, 35 and 54 of the charter, the proposition also approved that all
references to gender would be neutral and inclusive.
   The amendment to the charter was approved by the Governor on November 27,
1995.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions and notes
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to statutes
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Reference to offices
   
10.11   Errors and omissions
   
10.12   Official time
   
10.13   Reasonable time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.99   General penalty
Statutory reference:
   City ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-101 et seq.
   General powers, see 11 O.S. §§ 22-101 et seq.
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This code may be cited as the “Walters City Code” or other properly
identifying description. When a change or changes have been prepared and
inserted in the code as provided herein below, the words “as amended” may be
added to the citation or title when referring to the code as amended.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption and revision of codes of ordinances, see 11 O.S. §§ 14-108 and 14-
109
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS AND NOTES.
   (A)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
   (B)   Notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or
referring to statutes or to other parts of the code are inserted in the code,
and may be inserted in changes to the code, for the convenience of persons
using the code, and shall have no legal effect.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY, THIS CITY, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Walters, Oklahoma.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Walters.
      COUNTY. Cotton County, Oklahoma.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of the
persons or officers.
      LAW. Applicable federal law, provisions of the state constitution and
state statutes, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the city.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OTHER OFFICIALS or OFFICERS AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made to
officers, agencies, or departments by title only, such as “Clerk,” “City
Clerk,” “City Attorney,” “Fire Chief,” “Police Chief,” and the like, they shall
mean the officers, agencies, or departments of the city.
      PERSON. Includes natural persons, corporations (private and public),
partnerships, and all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates, and
government agencies, except when a contrary intention plainly appears.
      PRECEDING; FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Oklahoma.
      STATUTORY REFERENCES. References to the statutes of the state as they now
are or as they may be amended.
      STREET. Street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct, highway,
court, place, square, curb, or any other public way in the city which is
dedicated and open to public use.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WEEK. Seven days.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender. Words used in the masculine gender in this code or in other
ordinances of the city include the feminine and neuter.
   (D)   Singular and plural. Words used in the singular number in this code or
in other ordinances of the city include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   (E)   Tenses. The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
   (F)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If a part of this code or of any ordinance passed by the City Council after
this code goes into effect is invalid, all valid parts which are severable from
the invalid parts remain in effect. If a part of this code or of any ordinance
passed hereinafter is invalid in one or more of its applications, the part
remains in effect in all valid applications which are severable from the
invalid applications.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO STATUTES.
   Reference to the statutes of the state means the statutes as they are now or
as they may be amended, and a reference to the Oklahoma Statutes for a certain
year also means the comparable provision when included in future codifications.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words were
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.12 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general
nature passed prior to and in effect at the time the code is adopted but not
included in the code are hereby repealed as of the time when the code goes into
effect.
   (B)   Ordinances passed on or after that date shall not be repealed or
amended by the adoption of the code.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature
passed or adopted on and after the most recent ordinance included in this code
of ordinances may be passed or adopted either in the form of amendments to this
code of ordinances or without specific reference to the code, but in either
case, all ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to the
code, and all of the substantive permanent and general parts of the ordinances
and changes made thereby in the code shall be inserted and made in the code
whenever authorized or directed by motion, resolution, or ordinance of the City
Council, as provided hereinafter.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance are listed following the text of the code
section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (11 O.S. § 1-402) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see 51 O.S. §§ 24A.1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city and subsequently amended, the Prior Code section number
shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, § 50.01).”
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this code or in
any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the code or an
ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500, excluding costs. Each day or
any portion of a day during which any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who shall aid, abet, or assist in the violation of any
provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in this
section.
   (C)   All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of
competent jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Fines over $500 required by jury trial, see 11 O.S. § 27-119
   Limited jurisdiction of municipal judges who are not licensed to practice
law, see 11 O.S. § 27-104
   Maximum fine levied, see 11 O.S. § 14-111
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Map of city designated as official map
   
11.02   Ward number and boundaries
   
11.03   Map of city
§ 11.01 MAP OF CITY DESIGNATED AS OFFICIAL MAP.
   The map of the city showing its territorial limits is hereby designated as
the official map of the city, and the corporate limits as shown thereon are
declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all
annexations made to the city through and including the date of July 1, 1984.
(Prior Code, § 11.01)
§ 11.02 WARD NUMBER AND BOUNDARIES.
   Pursuant to the directions in § 4 of the Charter of the City of Walters, as
amended, and until modified after publication of the next federal census, the
boundaries and areas covered by the four Wards are hereby established as
follows.
   (A)   Ward One. Shall consist of all of the city lying north of the
centerline of Missouri Avenue (also known as State Highway 5 and 53, and that
portion of the city lying south of the centerline of West Missouri Avenue and
west of Seventh Street, also the three blocks on the south side of West Ohio
Avenue, the three blocks of West Virginia Avenue and the three blocks of the
north side of West Wyoming Avenue lying west of South Broadway, following the
western boundary of the railroad right-of-way northwest to the centerline of
the alley between West Texas Avenue and West Indiana Avenue, then south to the
centerline of West Ohio Avenue and areas not included in Wards Two, Three, and
Four as hereinafter described.
   (B)   Ward Two. Shall consist of that portion of the city bounded as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of North First Street
and East Nevada Avenue, then north along the centerline of North First Street
to the centerline of East Missouri Avenue, then west along the centerline of
Missouri Avenue to the centerline of North Seventh Street; then south along the
centerline of North Seventh Street to the centerline of West Ohio Avenue, then
east along the centerline of West Ohio Avenue to South Fifth Street, then north
to the centerline of the alley between West Texas Avenue and West Indiana
Avenue, then crossing to the east side of the railroad right-of-way continuing
south to the centerline of the intersection of East Virginia Avenue and South
Broadway Street, then north along the centerline of North Broadway Street to
the centerline of East Nevada Avenue, then east along the centerline of East
Nevada Avenue to the centerline of North First Street to the point of
beginning.
   (C)   Ward Three. Shall consist of that portion of the city bounded as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East South
Boundary and Indian Road, then north along the centerline of Indian Road to the
centerline of the north boundary of Lions Cove Addition, then west along the
north boundary of Lions Cove Addition to the centerline of South Central
Street, then north along the centerline of South Central Street to the
centerline of East Indiana Avenue, then west along the centerlin of East
Indiana Avenue to the centerline of South Broadway then south to the centerline
of West Virginia Avenue, then west to the railroad right-of-way, continue
southeast along the railroad right-of way to the centerline of South Broadway
Street, then South to the centerline of West Wyoming Avenue, then west to the
centerline of South Seventh Street, then south along the centerline of South
Seventh Street to the end of city limits and all points south and east of the
said boundaries that lie within the city limits.
   (D)   Ward Four. Shall consist of all of the city lying south of centerline
of East Missouri Avenue and east and north of Wards Two and Three.
(Prior Code, § 11.02) (Res. 65-655, passed 1-16-1996; Ord. 2014-540, passed 7-
1-2014; Ord. 2023-580, passed 4-4-2023)
§ 11.03 MAP OF CITY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5d4413d3446a99d1f57c56335a8d1a46cb49e84/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2152.jpg]
(Prior Code, § 11.03) (Ord. 2015-545, passed 7-1-2014; Ord. 2023-580, passed 4-
4-2023)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
33.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Government; Administration and Organization
   
30.001   Council-Manager form of government
   
30.002   Time of regular meetings of the Council
   
30.003   Place of meetings of the Council
   
30.004   Call of special Council meetings
   
30.005   City Manager
   
30.006   City Clerk and City Treasurer
   
30.007   Retention and destruction of city records
Other Personnel and Departments
   
30.020   Department of Law; City Attorney
   
30.021   Cooperative Health Department; Director
   
30.022   Officers and employees; number and classes; compensation
   
30.023   Certain personnel to be bonded
   
30.024   Code Enforcement Officer
Social Security
   
30.035   Declaration of policy to come under coverage
   
30.036   Execution of agreement with state agency
   
30.037   Withholdings
   
30.038   Contributions
   
30.039   Records and reports
   
30.040   Exclusions
Fire Pension System
   
30.055   Fund to be operated in accordance with law
   
30.056   Contributions to Fund
Employee Retirement System
   
30.070   Definitions
   
30.071   Created; purpose
   
30.072   Board of Trustees created
   
30.073   Composition of Board of Trustees
   
30.074   Election and term of Chairperson of Board of Trustees
   
30.075   Secretary of Board of Trustees and Treasurer of system designated
   
30.076   Meeting of Board; record of proceedings; quorum
   
30.077   General powers of Board
   
30.078   Funds to be paid to City Treasurer
   
30.079   Investment of funds
   
30.080   Group annuity contracts for purpose of providing benefits
   
30.081   Duties of City Attorney
   
30.082   Contributions by city
   
30.083   Employee contributions generally
   
30.084   Return of withdrawn contributions when employee returns to city
service
   
30.085   Retirement age
   
30.086   Retirement pay
   
30.087   Disability allowances
   
30.088   Death benefits
   
30.089   Rights of employees leaving city for military service
   
30.090   Proration of benefits in event of insufficient funds
   
30.091   Funds not subject to garnishment, attachment, assignment
   
30.092   Certified list of persons entitled to benefits; retirement system book
   
30.093   Annual report
GOVERNMENT; ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION
§ 30.001 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The city is governed by the Council-Manager form of government provided by
the city’s home rule Charter. The powers of the city are vested in the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 30.001)
Charter reference:
   Similar provisions, see Charter §
2
Statutory reference:
   Cities’ adoption of home rule charters, procedures, effect, see 11 O.S. §§
13-101 et seq.
§ 30.002 TIME OF REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   The Council of the city shall hold a regular meeting at 5:00 p.m. on the
first Tuesday of every month. If such Tuesday shall fall on a holiday, the
regular meeting shall be held on the following Thursday at 5:00 p.m. Adjourned
meetings of the Council shall be convened at such times as determined by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 30.002) (Ord. 556, passed 9-18-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Open meeting law requirements, see 25 O.S. §§ 301 et seq.
§ 30.003 PLACE OF MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   Every meeting of the Council shall be held in the City Hall, or at such
other place in the city as the City Council may provide.
(Prior Code, § 30.003)
Charter reference:
   Council to meet at least monthly at times as it may prescribe by ordinance
or otherwise, see Charter §
10
§ 30.004 CALL OF SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or two
Council members. The call for such a meeting shall be in writing, stating the
object and purpose of the meeting and the time of holding the same, and shall
be served personally upon each member of the Council.
   (B)   If all members of the Council are present at any special meeting and
waive the service of such notice, the minutes shall show such fact, and any and
all business coming before the Council may be transacted. When a special
meeting is had upon written call, no business can be transacted except such as
may be stated in the call.
(Prior Code, § 30.004)
Charter reference:
   Mayor or two Council members may call special meetings, see Charter §
10
§ 30.005 CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   City Manager appointment. The Council shall appoint a City Manager for
an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose
him or her solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative
qualifications with special reference to his or her actual experience in, or
his or her knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or
her office.
   (B)   Duties. The City Manager has such duties as are defined by the Charter
and applicable by ordinance and law.
   (C)   Expenditures. The City Manager shall be allowed, empowered and
authorized to make such purchases in an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time and less of such items, services, and products as the City
Manager shall deem necessary for the operations, management, and function of
the city without the need for prior Council approval and formal bidding.
(Prior Code, § 30.005) (Ord. 2010-516, passed 8-3-2010; Ord. 2020-566, passed
5-5-2020)
Charter reference:
   City Manager appointment, term, removal, see Charter §
20
   Duties of City Manager, see Charter §
22
§ 30.006 CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   City Clerk; duties. A City Clerk shall be appointed by the City
Council for an indefinite term, and shall be removable by the Council. The City
Clerk is an officer of the city, and has such duties as are prescribed by the
Charter, applicable law, and ordinance.
   (B)   City Treasurer. There shall be a City Treasurer, who is an officer of
the city and who shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite term.
   (C)   Duties of the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall deposit daily
all funds coming into his or her hands in such depositories as the Council may
designate, and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable
law or ordinance. He or she shall have such other powers, duties, and functions
as may be prescribed by applicable law or by ordinance.
   (D)   City Manager to be ex officio City Treasurer. The duly appointed,
qualified, and acting City Manager is hereby designated and appointed ex
officio City Treasurer, with full power and authority to collect revenue and
other moneys for the city, and to perform all other and further duties, as City
Treasurer, authorized by the Charter, in addition to his or her duties as City
Manager. No further or additional salary or compensation shall be allowed or
paid to the City Manager for his or her services as ex officio City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 30.006)
Charter reference:
   Authority of City Manager to hold other positions in city government, see
Charter §
42
   City Clerk, appointment, service as ex officio Treasurer, see Charter §
9
   City Treasurer, see Charter §
25
   City Treasurer; appointment, duties, see Charter §
25
   Service as ex officio or acting Clerk, see Charter §
9
§ 30.007 RETENTION AND DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
   (A)   The following records shall be retained for the period indicated
thereafter:
      (1)   Employee retirement records: five years;
      (2)   Employee fire pension records: five years;
      (3)   Sanitation contracts: five years from contract expiration date;
      (4)   Council packets containing agendas and minutes: five years;
      (5)   Employee health insurance: five years;
      (6)   Cafeteria plans: five years;
      (7)   Property and liability insurance: ten years;
      (8)   Workers compensation: ten years;
      (9)   Boyer Lake Dam inspection reports: 15 years;
      (10)   Safety meetings: three years;
      (11)   Golf course receipts: ten years;
      (12)   Golf cart shed rental: two years; and
      (13)   Swimming pool receipts: ten years.
   (B)   The following shall be permanently retained: all Sewer and Water
Improvement District records; all records of City Council meetings, minutes,
ordinances, and resolutions; all WPWA meeting minutes; all election, including,
but not limited to, Charter changes and Council members; all grants that were
obtained for sewer, water, or parks; and all records that are subject to
pending litigation.
   (C)   All other records shall be retained or destroyed at the instruction of
the City Manager, which instruction must be consistent with 11 O.S. § 22-131.
(Prior Code, § 30.007) (Ord. 2009-508, passed 8-4-2009)
OTHER PERSONNEL AND DEPARTMENTS
§ 30.020 DEPARTMENT OF LAW; CITY ATTORNEY.
   There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which is the City Attorney,
appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term, and removable by the
Council. The City Attorney is an officer of the city, and has supervision and
control of the Department of Law. The City Attorney is the chief legal adviser
of the Council and all other officers, departments, and agencies of the city
government in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He or she
represents the city in proceedings in the courts, and performs all services
incident to his or her position which may be required by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 30.020)
Charter reference:
   Department of law, City Attorney, see Charter §
23
§ 30.021 COOPERATIVE HEALTH DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR.
   The Cooperative Health Department of the county and its Director shall have
the powers of a City Health Department and City Health Officer respectively for
the city. References to HEALTH DEPARTMENT and HEALTH OFFICER or DIRECTOR OF THE
HEALTH DEPARTMENT in this code and in other ordinances of the city means the
Cooperative Health Department and its Director, unless the context clearly
indicates another meaning.
(Prior Code, § 30.021)
§ 30.022 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; NUMBER AND CLASSES; COMPENSATION.
   The Council, by motion, resolution, or ordinance, may regulate the number of
classes of offices and positions of employment in the various departments,
offices, and agencies of the city government, and may determine or regulate the
compensation to be paid to officers and employees.
(Prior Code, § 30.022)
§ 30.023 CERTAIN PERSONNEL TO BE BONDED.
   Before entering upon their official duties, the members of the Council, City
Manager, City Treasurer, City Clerk, all officers and employees of the city who
handle money belonging to the city, and all police officers of the city shall
provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties, payable to
the city, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state, in such
amount and with such conditions as the Council may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 30.023) (Ord. 442, passed 7-18-1995)
Charter reference:
   Officer’s bond, see Charter §
43
Statutory reference:
   Bonds of officers, Treasurer to give bond and others defined by ordinance,
see 11 O.S. § 8-105
§ 30.024 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Code Enforcement Officer for the city is hereby authorized to issue
citations for violations of the city code. The Code Enforcement Officer for the
city shall carry or display a badge or other emblem of authority as an officer
of the city. Citations issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be enforced
and prosecuted in the same manner as such other citations issued by law
enforcement officers for the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.024) (Ord. 2008-504, passed 9-16-2008)
SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 30.035 DECLARATION OF POLICY TO COME UNDER COVERAGE.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to
extend, at the earliest date, to the eligible employees and officials of the
city the benefits of the system of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as
authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, and all amendments thereto, and
51 O.S. §§ 121 et seq.
   (B)   In pursuance of this policy, the officers and employees of the city
shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws
or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 30.035)
Statutory reference:
   Social Security coverage for local governments, see 51 O.S.
§ 30.036 EXECUTION OF AGREEMENT WITH STATE AGENCY.
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments with the State Department of Human Services to accomplish the
provisions of §
30.035.
(Prior Code, § 30.036)
§ 30.037 WITHHOLDINGS.
   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purposes provided in §
30.035 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may
be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be
paid over to the state or federal agency designated by the laws and
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 30.037)
§ 30.038 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Employer contributions shall be paid from amounts appropriated for these
purposes from available funds to the designated state or federal agency in
accordance with applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 30.038)
§ 30.039 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The city shall keep such records and submit such reports as may be required
by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 30.039)
§ 30.040 EXCLUSIONS.
   Excluded from this subchapter authorizing the extension of Social Security
benefits to city officers and employees are the following:
   (A)   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee, or official now covered or authorized to be covered by any other
ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the
city; or
   (B)   Any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position,
employee, or official for which compensation is on a fee basis, or any
position, employee, or official not authorized to be covered by applicable
state or federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 30.040)
FIRE PENSION SYSTEM
§ 30.055 FUND TO BE OPERATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW.
   The city’s Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement System and Fund shall be
operated in accordance with state law relating to the fund and system.
(Prior Code, § 30.055)
§ 30.056 CONTRIBUTIONS TO FUND.
   (A)   The Clerk shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each paid member
of the Fire Department the amounts which are required by applicable state law.
If the members of the Fire Department, by a majority vote of its paid members,
vote to increase the amount of the deductions, the amounts authorized by this
division (A) shall be increased to reflect the amounts approved by the majority
vote. The Treasurer of the city shall deposit monthly in the State Firefighters
Pension and Retirement Board the amounts deducted pursuant to this division
(A). Any amounts deducted from the salary or wages of a Fire Department member
shall be made at the time of each payroll. The deductions shall be set forth in
the payroll so that each member may be able to ascertain the exact amount which
he or she is contributing.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall deposit monthly with the State Firefighters
Pension and Retirement Board the amounts of money which are required by
applicable state law for each paid member of the Fire Department.
   (C)   For each volunteer member of the Fire Department, the City Treasurer
shall deposit yearly with the State Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board
the amounts of money which are required by applicable state law. These amounts
may be revised according to actuarial studies and amounts as set by the State
Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board.
   (D)   All assets of the city Firefighters’ Pension and Retirement Fund shall
be transferred to the State Firefighters Pension and Retirement Board. Assets
shall be transferred in the form of cash, negotiable securities, and such other
specific assets as permitted by the State Board.
(Prior Code, § 30.056) (Ord. 383, passed 12-3-1974)
Statutory reference:
   Firefighters pension law, see 11 O.S. § 49-122
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 30.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the employee retirement
system of the city, as created by this subchapter.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. Any officer duly elected by the citizens of the city.
   EMPLOYEE.
      (1)   Any official or employee of any department of the city, whether
governmental or proprietary in nature, whose employment is of a permanent
nature; provided that elected officials are specifically excluded from the
definition of EMPLOYEE, and provided further that members of the Police and
Fire Departments who are covered by other pension and retirement systems, and
seasonal and part-time employees, are specifically excluded from the definition
of EMPLOYEE.
      (2)   Any person classified as a temporary employee, after serving 12
consecutive months in the employ of the city, shall be included in the
definition of EMPLOYEE.
   RETIREMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM. The employee retirement system of the city, as
created by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.070)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt pension and retirement systems for officers
and employees, see
    Charter §
7(4)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal retirement systems generally, see 11 O.S. §§ 48-101 et seq.
§ 30.071 CREATED; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby authorized and created, pursuant to the provisions of state
law as amended, the employee retirement system of the city for the purpose of
inducing more meritorious and permanent service among employees.
(Prior Code, § 30.071)
§ 30.072 BOARD OF TRUSTEES CREATED.
   For the purpose of managing and administering the retirement system, there
is hereby created a Board of Trustees, which shall be known as the Board of
Trustees of the employee retirement system of the city.
(Prior Code, § 30.072)
§ 30.073 COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees shall consist of five members as follows: the three
members of the City Council, the City Clerk, and the City Treasurer. If any
such officer ceases to hold office, his or her successor shall succeed him or
her as a member of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30.073)
§ 30.074 ELECTION AND TERM OF CHAIRPERSON OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   As soon as the personnel of the Board of Trustees is completed as provided
in this subchapter, it shall meet and elect a Chairperson from its members, who
shall serve for a term of one year, or until his or her successor is elected.
One year from the date of the first organization meeting, and each year
thereafter, the Board shall elect a Chairperson from its members. In the event
any Chairperson ceases to be a member of the Board, it shall elect from its
members a Chairperson to serve the unexpired term.
(Prior Code, § 30.074)
§ 30.075 SECRETARY OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND TREASURER OF SYSTEM DESIGNATED.
   The City Clerk shall act as the Clerk and Secretary of the Board of
Trustees. The City Treasurer shall act as the Treasurer of the retirement
system.
(Prior Code, § 30.075)
§ 30.076 MEETING OF BOARD; RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS; QUORUM.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall hold monthly meetings on the first Tuesday
of each month and upon call of its Chairperson at such other times as he or she
deems necessary. A majority of the members of the Board may call a meeting at
any time, with or without consent of the Chairperson. The Board shall keep a
record of its proceedings, which record shall be a public record.
   (B)   A majority of all members of the Board shall constitute a quorum and
shall have power to transact business. No funds of the retirement system shall
ever be disbursed for any purpose except upon a vote of a majority of all the
members of the Board, which vote shall be taken by “yeas” and “nays.” The vote
of each member so voting shall be entered upon the proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 30.076)
§ 30.077 GENERAL POWERS OF BOARD.
   The Board of Trustees, in addition to other powers contained in this
subchapter, shall have power to:
   (A)   Compel attendance of witnesses and administer oaths;
   (B)   Provide for payment of all necessary expenses, including actuarial and
necessary services, provided that no compensation shall be made to the members
of the Board;
   (C)   Formulate rules and regulations needed for its guidance in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter; and
   (D)   Receive and administer, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, any gifts or donations to the retirement system.
(Prior Code, § 30.077)
§ 30.078 FUNDS TO BE PAID TO CITY TREASURER.
   All moneys provided for the retirement system shall be paid over to and
received by the City Treasurer for the use and benefit of the retirement system
as a trust fund.
(Prior Code, § 30.078)
§ 30.079 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   The Board of Trustees shall have the power to invest and reinvest any funds
of the system subject to the restrictions imposed by law upon life insurance
companies in the state. The Board shall have the power to purchase and sell all
securities and investments, provided that the proceeds are used for the purpose
of meeting disbursements for retirement pay and other payments as authorized in
this subchapter, or for the purpose of reinvesting the funds in a more
desirable manner, as heretofore provided.
(Prior Code, § 30.079)
§ 30.080 GROUP ANNUITY CONTRACTS FOR PURPOSE OF PROVIDING BENEFITS.
   The Board of Trustees shall have the power to enter into a group annuity
contract or contracts with any legally licensed insurance company authorized to
do business in the state, for the purpose of providing retirement benefits for
employees, and may amend such contract from time to time and make payment to
such company pursuant to the contract, out of the fund created by
appropriations from the city and contributions by employees, in order to
provide the retirement benefits under the contract.
(Prior Code, § 30.080)
§ 30.081 DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Board of Trustees and
shall appear on behalf of the Board in all suits brought by or against the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 30.081)
§ 30.082 CONTRIBUTIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   The City Council may appropriate annually such sum of money as it
deems appropriate to be paid into the fund of the retirement system; provided,
however, that no such appropriation shall exceed 10% of the current annual
salaries of all employees covered by the system. Any appropriation so made
shall be for deferred wages.
   (B)   The account of the retirement system shall be a non-fiscal account,
and it is hereby provided that there is no mandatory requirement upon the part
of the city to make any contribution whatsoever for the benefit of the system.
(Prior Code, § 30.082)
§ 30.083 EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every employee shall contribute to the retirement system, on a
voluntary basis only, a portion of his or her salary as hereinafter set out,
and shall authorize the City Clerk to deduct such sum from his or her salary,
provided that no employee other than those presently on the retirement rolls
and receiving benefits shall receive any of the benefits provided for in this
subchapter, unless he or she shall have contributed as provided herein. Any
employee who is employed by this city after November 24, 1964, as a condition
of his or her employment, shall agree to contribute to the system as follows:
2% of his or her salary for the calendar years 1964 and 1965. The rate for
future years will be determined by November 1 of each year.
   (B)   (1)   Contributions under this section shall be made by payroll
deductions on and after the effective date of the system.
      (2)   If an employee leaves the service of this city for any reason, all
contributions made by him or her to the system shall be refunded. Each employee
shall designate, in writing, a beneficiary, and upon his or her death, any sum
contributed to the system by the deceased employee shall be paid to the
designated beneficiary.
      (3)   No payment shall be made to the designated beneficiary if the
deceased employee leaves surviving him or her a widow, or child or children
under the age of 18 years, or if the employee, his or her widow, or child or
children have received, or are entitled to receive, any payments under the
terms of this subchapter from the funds of the system.
      (4)   Any refunds made by the system to an employee or his or her
beneficiary shall be with interest as prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, § 30.083)
§ 30.084 RETURN OF WITHDRAWN CONTRIBUTIONS WHEN EMPLOYEE RETURNS TO CITY
SERVICE.
   If an employee leaves the service of this city and withdraws his or her
contributions previously made to the system, and later returns to the service,
he or she shall deposit, at that time, with the system the amount that he or
she withdrew when he or she left the service. Such amount may be returned in
equal monthly installments, but such payments shall not exceed 36 months.
(Prior Code, § 30.084)
§ 30.085 RETIREMENT AGE.
   All eligible employees may, at their option, retire at the age of 55 years.
(Prior Code, § 30.085)
§ 30.086 RETIREMENT PAY.
   There shall be paid to employees who are eligible to retire, as provided in
this subchapter, retirement pay equal to the amount both he or she and the city
have contributed to the plan, plus interest earned, either in a lump sum or in
monthly payments, as decided by the Board of Trustees at the time of
retirement.
(Prior Code, § 30.086)
§ 30.087 DISABILITY ALLOWANCES.
   If, at any time after becoming a member of the retirement system, an
employee becomes disabled to work and employment with the city has terminated,
all contributions to the retirement system by the employee and the city on his
or her behalf will be paid to the employee.
(Prior Code, § 30.087)
§ 30.088 DEATH BENEFITS.
   In the event of the death of any employee who is a member of the system, the
spouse of such deceased employee, or the designated beneficiary, shall be paid
an amount not to exceed 100% of the contribution of the employee and the city,
plus earned interest.
(Prior Code, § 30.088)
§ 30.089 RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEE LEAVING CITY FOR MILITARY SERVICE.
   Any employee who leaves the service of this city by reason of being
impressed into the military service of the United States of America may
receive, in a lump sum, total contributions made by him or her and by the city
on his or her behalf under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.089)
§ 30.090 PRORATION OF BENEFITS IN EVENT OF INSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   In the event the funds in the retirement system are insufficient to make
full payment in the amount of retirement benefit allowances to all persons
entitled thereto, such funds shall be prorated among those entitled thereto as
the Board of Trustees may determine to be just and equitable.
(Prior Code, § 30.090)
§ 30.091 FUNDS NOT SUBJECT TO GARNISHMENT, ATTACHMENT, ASSIGNMENT.
   No portion of any funds of the retirement system, either before or after any
order is made by the Board of Trustees for payment to any person entitled to
retirement pay, shall be held, seized, taken, subject to, or detained or levied
on by virtue of any garnishment, attachment, execution, injunction, or other
order or decree or any process or proceeding whatever issued out of or by any
court of this state for the payment or satisfaction, in whole or in part, of
any debt, damage, claim, demand, or judgment against any person entitled to
payment from such funds, nor shall such payments or any claim thereto be
assigned, directly or indirectly. Any attempt to assign or transfer such
payments shall be void. The fund shall be held sacredly in trust.
(Prior Code, § 30.091)
§ 30.092 CERTIFIED LIST OF PERSONS ENTITLED TO BENEFITS; RETIREMENT SYSTEM
BOOK.
   The Board of Trustees shall furnish the City Treasurer a written list,
certified to and signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of the Board and
attested under oath, of all persons entitled to payment out of the funds of the
system, showing the purpose for which such payment is to be made. Such list
shall be furnished the Treasurer at each monthly meeting. The Treasurer
thereupon shall enter a copy of the list upon a book to be kept for such
purpose, which book shall be known as “The Employee Retirement System Book.”
(Prior Code, § 30.092)
§ 30.093 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Secretary of the Board of Trustees shall report annually, at the time of
the election of officers of the Board, the condition of the retirement system,
the receipts and disbursements thereof, together with a full and complete list
of the beneficiaries of funds in the system and the amount paid to such
beneficiaries.
(Prior Code, § 30.093)
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
31.01   Created; composition; appointment; terms and removal of members
   
31.02   Election and terms of office
   
31.03   General powers and duties
   
31.04   Meetings; adoption of rules; records to be kept
   
31.05   Quorum
   
31.06   Employment and compensation of personnel; authority to incur expenses
Fire Department and Service
   
31.20   Fire Department; Chief of the Department
   
31.21   Duties of the Fire Chief
   
31.22   Duties of the Assistant Chief
   
31.23   Company officers
   
31.24   Secretary-Treasurer
   
31.25   New members
   
31.26   Bylaws
   
31.27   Rules and regulations
   
31.28   Use of fire equipment; inventory and repair
   
31.29   Contracts authorized outside city limits
   
31.30   Contract terms; fees for services
   
31.31   Firefighters serving in regular line of duty
   
31.32   Department considered agent of state
   
31.33   Rates for runs made outside the city limits
   
31.34   Subscription policy
Police Department
   
31.45   Chief of Police
   
31.46   Duties of Department
   
31.47   Assistant Chief of Police
   
31.48   Duties of Assistant Chief of Police
   
31.49   Fee established
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 31.01 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission of the city. The
Commission shall be composed of five members, who are residents of the city,
nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Mayor shall be an
ex officio member of the Commission. Each appointed member shall hold office
for such period as is prescribed by the Mayor. Members may be removed by the
Mayor or the City Council only for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malefaction in office. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of a term shall be filled only for the unexpired term by the Mayor,
with confirmation by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to appoint members of Planning Commission, see Charter
§
7(6)
Statutory reference:
   Planning Commissions may be established, duties, see 11 O.S. §§ 45-101 et
seq.
§ 31.02 ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice
Chairperson, and a Secretary, and may create and fill such other offices as it
may deem necessary. The term of the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and
Secretary shall be one year with eligibility for reelection.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
§ 31.03 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and the duty to
prepare and recommend to the City Council for adoption a comprehensive plan for
the physical development of the city. In conducting its work, the Commission
may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to the development and
betterment of the city and may make such recommendations as it may deem
advisable concerning the adoption thereof to the City Council. The Commission
may prepare and recommend to the City Council for adoption rules and
regulations governing the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of
the city. The Commission shall also act as the Zoning Commission and shall have
the power to prepare and to recommend to the City Council for adoption a zoning
plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the
size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population and the
location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry,
residences, and other purposes.
(Prior Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.04 MEETINGS; ADOPTION OF RULES; RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each quarter, at such times and dates as the Commission shall establish
from time to time.
   (B)   Special meetings shall be held at dates and times specifically set by
the Commission when necessary to respond to the requests and needs of the
citizens of the city and when convenient for any business of the Commission.
   (C)   All meetings shall be open to the public and notice of each meeting
shall be published in accordance with state law. The Commission shall adopt
rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
regulations, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be
a public record.
(Prior Code, § 31.04) (Ord. 94-434, passed 3-1-1994)
§ 31.05 QUORUM.
   (A)   (1)   At any meeting, a majority of the members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission present shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
      (2)   No action shall be taken which is binding upon the Commission
unless concurred by not less than a majority of members present at any meeting.
   (B)   If a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be absent from
more than one-half of all the meetings of the Commission held within any period
of four consecutive months, he or she shall thereupon cease to hold office as a
member of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 31.05) (Ord. 99-456, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.06 EMPLOYMENT AND COMPENSATION OF PERSONNEL; AUTHORITY TO INCUR EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and authority
to employ planners, engineers, attorneys, clerks, and other help deemed
necessary, within the limits of the appropriation fixed by the City Council.
   (B)   The salary and compensation for such services shall be fixed by the
Mayor and Council and shall be paid out of the City Treasury. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may incur necessary expenses within the limits of its
appropriation to carry out its purposes and responsibilities.
(Prior Code, § 31.06)
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND SERVICE
§ 31.20 FIRE DEPARTMENT; CHIEF OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which shall be the
Chief of the Fire Department appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite
term.
      (2)   It is the duty of the Fire Department, among others, to extinguish
fires; to rescue persons endangered by fire; to resuscitate, and to administer
first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in
case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and, unless otherwise
provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and
safety of person from fire and explosions in theaters, stores, and other public
buildings.
   (B)   The city’s Fire Department is a volunteer department, consisting of
not more than two full-time, salaried firefighters.
(Prior Code, § 31.20)
Statutory reference:
   Volunteer Fire Departments, see 11 O.S. §§ 29-201 to 29-205
§ 31.21 DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief shall be at the head of the Department, subject to the laws
of the state, ordinances of the city, and the rules and regulations adopted in
this subchapter.
   (B)   The Chief shall have the following powers and duties.
      (1)   The Chief shall be responsible for the general condition and
efficient operation of the Department, the training of members, and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him or her.
      (2)   The Chief may inspect, or cause to be inspected by members of the
Department, the fire hydrants, cisterns, and other sources of water supply at
least twice each year.
      (3)   The Chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire
prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best advantage
of all members.
      (4)   The Chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct
the officers and members in the performance of their duties.
      (5)   The Chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire
hazards in the community and on the activities of the Department.
      (6)   The Chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to
determine its cause, and, in the case of suspicion of incendiarism, shall
notify proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for
future use in the case.
      (7)   The Chief is authorized to enter any building or premise in the
city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making inspections and to serve
written notice that the owner or occupant must correct any violations that may
be found.
      (8)   The Chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires,
inspections, apparatus, and equipment, personnel, and other information of the
Department and shall make reports to the City Manager as he or she may require.
(Prior Code, § 31.21)
§ 31.22 DUTIES OF THE ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief on duty shall command the
Department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full
powers and responsibilities of the Chief. The Assistant Chief shall be elected
from among the members of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 31.22)
§ 31.23 COMPANY OFFICERS.
   Company officers shall be selected by the Chief based upon the following
criteria:
   (A)   Knowledge of firefighting;
   (B)   Leadership ability; and
   (C)   Knowledge of firefighting equipment.
(Prior Code, § 31.23)
§ 31.24 SECRETARY-TREASURER.
   (A)   One member elected by the members of the Fire Department shall be a
Secretary-Treasurer.
   (B)   His or her duties shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting;
      (2)   Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and
      (3)   Collecting any money due the Department by the members.
(Prior Code, § 31.24)
§ 31.25 NEW MEMBERS.
   New members of the Department shall be appointed by the Chief and shall be
on probation for one year after their appointment. Upon completion of their
probation period, new members must be approved by the majority of the other
members of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 31.25)
§ 31.26 BYLAWS.
   The bylaws of the Department shall include the following.
   (A)   All volunteer Fire Department members are required, when notified, to
respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies.
   (B)   A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called
meetings, and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters.
   (C)   At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held
each month.
   (D)   Any member having two unexcused absences in succession or three
unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from the Fire
Department rolls.
   (E)   Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is required
to notify the Chief.
   (F)   Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of
the Department will be dropped.
   (G)   Any member of the Fire Department may be dropped from the rolls for
the following offenses:
      (1)   Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
      (2)   Any act of insubordination;
      (3)   Neglect of duty;
      (4)   Any violation of rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department; or
      (5)   Conviction of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 31.26)
§ 31.27 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may adopt and change regulations
relating to the Fire Department, its organization, operation, and compensation.
(Prior Code, § 31.27)
§ 31.28 USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT; INVENTORY AND REPAIR.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any
private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority
take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department.
      (2)   No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless
accompanied by, or having the special permission of, an officer or authorized
member of the Department.
   (B)   The Chief shall prepare and keep a complete inventory of all property
belonging to the Fire Department, and shall, at the expiration of his or her
term, turn over such inventory and all such property to his or her successor,
together with all books, records, reports, and data of the Department.
   (C)   The Chief shall report to the City Manager any necessary repairs,
alterations, or improvements needed by the Fire Department with an estimate of
their probable cost, and shall superintend the making of the repairs,
alterations, or improvements, and if any apparatus shall become disabled for
immediate use, he or she shall repair the same and report his or her action to
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.28) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 31.29 CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   The city is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into contracts or
agreements with individuals, firms, private corporations or associations, or
political subdivisions of the state for fire protection outside the corporate
limits of the city, and to contract to provide fire protection jointly with
other organizations and municipal subdivisions of the state.
(Prior Code, § 31.29)
§ 31.30 CONTRACT TERMS; FEES FOR SERVICES.
   Any contract entered into by the city with an individual owner, firm,
private corporation, or association for outside aid or mutual aid for fire
protection shall provide for the payment by the owner, firm, private
corporation or association, or political subdivision to the city for such fire
apparatus and personnel at a rate as set by the City Council by motion or
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 31.30)
§ 31.31 FIREFIGHTERS SERVING IN REGULAR LINE OF DUTY.
   All firefighters of the Fire Department of the city attending and serving at
fires or doing fire prevention work outside the corporate limits of the city,
as herein provided, shall be considered as serving in their regular line of
duty as fully as if they were serving within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.31)
§ 31.32 DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED AGENT OF STATE.
   The Fire Department of the city answering any fire alarm, or call, or
performing any fire prevention services outside the corporate limits of the
city shall be considered as an agent of the state, and acting solely and alone
in a governmental capacity, and the municipality shall not be liable in damages
for any act of commission, omission, or negligence while answering or returning
from any fire, or reported fire, or doing any fire prevention work under and by
virtue of §§
31.29 through
31.31.
(Prior Code, § 31.32)
§ 31.33 RATES FOR RUNS MADE OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS.
   Charges for rural fires outside the city limits are as follows, subject to
change at discretion of the City Council from time to time:
 
$250          For the first two trucks for the first hour
$100 per hour For each additional hour
$75           For each additional truck after the first two
Fractional hours in excess of 30 minutes will be billed as a full hour
Charges for foam, when used, is that of the current purchase price of the foam
 
(Prior Code, § 31.33) (Ord. 2009-514, passed 11-17-2009)
§ 31.34 SUBSCRIPTION POLICY.
   (A)   A Fire Department subscription policy be and is hereby established
whereby rates for Fire Department Services rendered in relation to fires
occurring in rural areas outside of the city limits of the city be charged and
that the city hereby establishes said rates for said services as follows.
      (1)   Rural fire dues schedule for members. The following amounts are
subject to change at discretion of the City Council from time to time.
 
Acres Owned and/or Operated Annual Dues
Up to 160                   $50
161 to 320                  $100
321 to 640                  $150
641 to 1,280                $200
1,281 to 2,560              $300
2,561 and over              $400
 
      (2)   Fire Department charges per fire for non-members. The following
amounts are subject to change at discretion of the City Council from time to
time.
 
Rate for first and second truck       $250 for the first hour
Rate for first and second truck after $100 per hour for each additional hour*
first hour
Rate for each additional truck        $75 per hour
Foam (if needed)                      Current market price
*Note: Anything over 30 minutes is considered an additional hour
   
   (B)   The effective date of said rate changes shall be March 4, 2014.
(Prior Code, § 31.34) (Ord. 2014-539, passed 3-18-2014)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.45 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   There shall be a Police Department, the head of which is the Chief of
Police appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term, and removable by
the Manager.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is an officer of the city, and has supervision and
control of the Police Department.
   (C)   All police officers are officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.45)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal police departments, see 11 O.S. §§ 34-101 et seq.
§ 31.46 DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.
   It is the duty of the Police Department to apprehend and arrest on view or
on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to
suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies which may come to its
knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs,
executions, and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to
apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law,
and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all
duties pertaining to the office of police officers.
(Prior Code, § 31.46)
§ 31.47 ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   If desired by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police may select an
officer from the police officers of the city to serve as the Assistant Chief of
Police.
   (B)   An officer so selected as Assistant Police Chief must be an officer of
the city in good standing, must meet the qualifications as set forth in 11 O.S.
§ 34-102, and shall assist the Chief of Police in the supervision and control
of the Police Department in such manner and under such duties as directed by
the Chief of Police.
   (C)   In the absence of or under the direction of the Chief of Police, the
Assistant Chief shall command the Police Department and shall be held
responsible therefor in all respects with all the full powers and
responsibilities of the Chief of Police in his or her absence.
(Ord. 2023-579, passed 4-4-2023)
§ 31.48 DUTIES OF ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The Assistant Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Chief of
Police for an indefinite term and may be removed by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Assistant Chief of Police shall perform the administrative duties
as directed by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   The Assistant Chief of Police shall be responsible for normal patrol
duties as well as maintaining a shift schedule as set by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2023-579, passed 4-4-2023)
§ 31.49 FEE ESTABLISHED.
   All citations issued by the Walters Police Department shall henceforth
include a $20 fee, with such funds to be used for officer training,
communication enhancements, animal control needs, and technology improvements.
This fee shall be in addition to, equivalent to, and collectible in the same
manner as all other fines and costs included in citations issued by the Walters
Police Department.
(Ord. 591, passed 3-4-2025)
CHAPTER 32: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
32.01   Organization
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Jurisdiction of Court
   
32.04   Judge; qualifications
   
32.05   Term of Judge
   
32.06   Alternate Judge
   
32.07   Acting Judge
   
32.08   Appointment of Judge and Alternate Judge
   
32.09   Salary and payments to Judges
   
32.10   Removal of Judge
   
32.11   Vacancy in office of Judge
   
32.12   Disqualification of Judge
   
32.13   Chief of Police
   
32.14   Clerk of the Court; duties
   
32.15   Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest
   
32.16   Bond of Court Clerk
   
32.17   Rules of Court
   
32.18   Enforcement of rules
   
32.19   Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations
   
32.20   Traffic ordinance violations; procedures for issuing citation; custody;
arrest
   
32.21   Creation of Traffic Violations Bureau
   
32.22   Summons for appearance
   
32.23   Form of arrest warrant
   
32.24   Procedures for bail or bond
   
32.25   Traffic bail bonds
   
32.26   Trials and judgments
   
32.27   Suspension of sentence
   
32.28   Imprisonment; work by prisoners
   
32.29   Fines and costs
   
32.30   Witness fees
   
32.31   Extra fees for training period
   
32.32   Unpaid fines, costs, and assessments
§ 32.01 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the
Municipal Criminal Court of the city, as put into operation by resolution duly
passed on January 21, 1969, and filed in accordance with law as authorized by
11 O.S. §§ 27-101 and 27-102. To the extent of conflict between any provisions
of this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance of this city, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
   (B)   The Court shall be operative on and after February 4, 1969.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
Charter Reference:
   Municipal Court, see Charter §
31
Statutory reference:
   Municipal courts not of record, organization, rules and procedures,
    see 11 O.S. §§ 27-101 to 27-131
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
municipality.
   CLERK. The Clerk of this municipality, including any deputy or member of the
office staff of the Clerk while performing duties of the Clerk’s office.
   COURT. The Municipal Criminal Court of the City of Walters.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the city.
   JUDGE. The Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court, including any acting Judge
or alternate Judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and
this chapter.
   MUNICIPALITY or THIS MUNICIPALITY. The City of Walters, Cotton County,
Oklahoma.
   THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT. The District Court Judicial District of the state of
Oklahoma, wherein the government of this municipality is situated.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 JURISDICTION OF COURT.
   The Court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this municipality is
charged.
(Prior Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.04 JUDGE; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Judge shall be at least 30 years of age, a resident of the state, and of
good moral character. If the Judge is licensed to practice law in the state, he
or she may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he or she shall
not accept employment inconsistent with his or her duties as Judge, or arising
out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the
jurisdiction of the Court, pending therein or which might become the subject of
proceedings therein. The Judge may serve as Judge of other municipal criminal
courts, if such service may be accomplished consistently with his or her duties
as Judge of this Court, with the consent of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 32.04) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996; Ord. 2015-550, passed 12-
15-2015)
§ 32.05 TERM OF JUDGE.
   The official term of the Judge shall be two years expiring on February 4 in
each odd-numbered year. Each Judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause,
shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 32.05)
§ 32.06 ALTERNATE JUDGE.
   (A)   There shall be appointed for each Judge of the Court an alternate
Judge possessed of the same qualifications as the Judge.
   (B)   His or her appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same
manner as the Judge.
   (C)   He or she shall sit as acting Judge of the Court in any case if the
Judge is:
      (1)   Absent from the court;
      (2)   Unable to act as Judge; or
      (3)   Disqualified from acting as Judge in the case.
(Prior Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.07 ACTING JUDGE.
   If at any time there is no Judge or alternate Judge, duly appointed and
qualified, available to sit as Judge, the City Manager, with consent of the
governing body, shall appoint some person, possessing the qualifications
required by this chapter for the Judge, who shall preside as acting Judge over
the court in the disposition of pending matters until such time as a Judge or
alternate Judge shall be available.
(Prior Code, § 32.07) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 32.08 APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND ALTERNATE JUDGE.
   Judges and alternate Judges shall be appointed by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 32.08) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
Charter reference:
   Similar provisions, see Charter §
31
§ 32.09 SALARY AND PAYMENTS TO JUDGES.
   A Judge, other than an alternate Judge or an acting Judge, shall receive a
salary as set by the governing body, by motion or resolution, paid in the same
manner as the salaries of other officials of this municipality. An alternate
Judge or an acting Judge shall be paid an amount as set by the governing body
for each day devoted to the performance of his or her duties, except that the
total payments so calculated during any month shall not exceed the salary of
the Judge in whose stead he or she sits. An alternate or acting Judge who sits
for an entire month shall receive the amount specified in this chapter as the
salary of the Judge in whose stead he or she sits.
(Prior Code, § 32.09)
§ 32.10 REMOVAL OF JUDGE.
   (A)   Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the governing body
for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the
removal of public officers.
   (B)   Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a
verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or
more legal grounds for removal.
   (C)   Petitions may be signed and filed by:
      (1)   The Mayor; or
      (2)   Twenty-five or more qualified electors of this municipality.
Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by
one or more of the petitioners.
   (D)   The governing body shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall
cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served
personally upon the Judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing,
the Judge shall be entitled to:
      (1)   Representation by counsel;
      (2)   To present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him
or her; and
      (3)   Have all evidence against him or her presented in open hearing.
   (E)   So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the State
Administrative Procedures Act governing individual proceedings (75 O.S. §§ 309
to 317, as amended) shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of
removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all
members of the governing body, in favor of such removal.
(Prior Code, § 32.10)
§ 32.11 VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE.
   (A)   A vacancy in the office of Judge shall occur if the incumbent:
      (1)   Dies;
      (2)   Resigns;
      (3)   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
      (4)   Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in
judicial proceedings or is no longer subject to judicial review.
   (B)   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Judge, the City
Manager shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term, upon the same
procedure as an original appointment is made.
(Prior Code, § 32.11) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 32.12 DISQUALIFICATION OF JUDGE.
   In prosecutions before the Court, no change of venue shall be allowed; but
the Judge before whom the case is pending may certify his or her
disqualification or he or she may be disqualified from sitting under the terms,
conditions, and procedure provided by law for courts of record. If a Judge is
disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting Judge
appointed as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32.12)
§ 32.13 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   All writs or process of the Court shall be directed, in his or her official
title, to the Chief of Police of this municipality, who shall be the principal
officer of the Court.
(Prior Code, § 32.13)
§ 32.14 CLERK OF THE COURT; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk, or a deputy designated by him or her, shall be the
Clerk of the Municipal Court.
   (B)   The Clerk shall:
      (1)   Assist the Judge in recording the proceedings of the court,
preparation of writs, processes, or other papers;
      (2)   Administer oaths required in judicial or other proceedings before
the Court;
      (3)   Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes, and
proceedings in the dockets of the Court;
      (4)   Perform such other clerical duties in relation to the proceedings
of the Court as the Judge shall direct;
      (5)   Receive and give receipt for and disburse or deliver to the
Municipal Treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money
properly payable to the Municipal Court; and
      (6)   (a)   Pay to the Treasurer of this municipality immediately all
money so received by him or her, except such special deposits or fees as shall
be received to be disbursed by him or her for special purposes.
         (b)   All money paid to the Treasurer shall be placed in the General
Fund of the municipality, or in such fund as the governing body may direct, and
it shall be used in the operation of the municipal government in accordance
with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed.
(Prior Code, § 32.14)
§ 32.15 PROSECUTING ATTORNEY; DUTIES; CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   The Attorney for this municipality, or his or her duly designated assistant,
shall be the prosecuting officer of the Court. He or she shall also prosecute
all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He or she shall be
authorized, in his or her discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal,
proceedings in error, and review from this Court to any other court of the
state, and to represent this municipality in all proceedings arising out of
matters in this Court.
(Prior Code, § 32.15)
§ 32.16 BOND OF COURT CLERK.
   (A)   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall give bond in an amount to be
set by the City Council from time to time.
   (B)   The bond shall be submitted to the governing body for its approval,
and shall include either one licensed corporate surety or two individuals as
surety.
   (C)   The bond shall be in substantially the following form:
   I, __________ Clerk of the Municipal Court of Walters, State of Oklahoma,
and __________ and __________________, his or her sureties, do jointly and
severally agree to pay on demand each and every person who may be entitled
thereto, all such sums of money as the said Clerk may become liable to pay, on
account of any moneys which may come into his or her hands, by virtue of his or
her office.
   Dated at ____________, this ____ day of ____________, 20______.
   ______________________________________
   (Signed)
   (D)   When approved, it shall be filed with the Clerk of this municipality
and retained in the municipal archives.
(Prior Code, § 32.16) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 32.17 RULES OF COURT.
   The Judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and
with the ordinances of this municipality for the proper conduct of the business
of the Court.
(Prior Code, § 32.17)
§ 32.18 ENFORCEMENT OF RULES.
   Obedience to the orders, rules, and judgments made by the Judge or by the
Court may be enforced by the Judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt
committed as to him or her while holding court, or committed against process
issued by him or her, in the same manner and to the same extent as the District
Courts of this state.
(Prior Code, § 32.18)
§ 32.19 WRITTEN COMPLAINTS TO PROSECUTE ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided otherwise in this chapter or code, all prosecutions
commenced in the Municipal Court shall be initiated by filing of a written
complaint, which shall be subscribed and verified by the person making
complaint and setting forth concisely the offense charged.
   (B)   All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be
styled “The City of Walters vs. ______________ (naming the person or persons
charged).”
(Prior Code, § 32.19)
§ 32.20 TRAFFIC ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING CITATION; CUSTODY;
ARREST.
   (A)   (1)   If a police officer observes facts which he or she believes
constitute a violation of the traffic ordinances of this municipality,
committed by a resident thereof, in lieu of arresting such a person, he or she
may take his or her name, address, operator’s license number, and registered
license number of the motor vehicle involved and any other pertinent and
necessary information and may issue him or her in writing in form prescribed by
the Mayor or his or her duly designated delegate, a traffic citation embracing
the above information, and also stating the traffic violation alleged to have
occurred, and notifying him or her to answer to the charge against him or her
at a time, not later than 30 days thereafter, specified in the citation.
      (2)   The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged
violator, endorsed on the citation to answer as specified, may then release the
person from custody. If the person to whom a citation is issued fails to answer
as prescribed in the citation, a complaint shall be filed and the case shall be
prosecuted as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident or
resident of this municipality, the police officer may:
      (1)   Release the person after obtaining sufficient information as set
out in division (A) above pending his or her appearance on a day certain in
court, as specified in the citation after the person:
         (a)   Posts cash bail;
         (b)   Deposits with the arresting officer a guaranteed arrest bond
certificate; or
         (c)   Complies with the traffic bail bond as provided in §
32.25.
      (2)   Take the person in custody and demand that bond for the offense
charged be posted according to the provisions of this chapter; or
      (3)   Take the person into custody under arrest. The arrested person
either shall be taken immediately before the Judge for further proceedings
according to law or shall have bail fixed for his or her release in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Upon providing bail as fixed, and upon
giving his or her written promise to appear upon a day certain, as provided in
division (A) above, the person shall be released from custody.
   (C)   If the alleged offense is a violation of an ordinance restricting or
regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such
an ordinance, and the operator is not present, the police officer shall place
on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the
operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in divisions
(A) or (B) above, with such variation as the circumstances require. The
operator of this vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the
citation as if it had been issued to him or her personally under divisions (A)
or (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 32.20) (Ord. 393, passed 7-31-1978)
§ 32.21 CREATION OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   A Traffic Violations Bureau hereby is established as a division of the
office of the Clerk of the Court, to be administered by the Clerk, or by
subordinates designated by him or her for that purpose. Persons who are cited
for violation of one of the traffic regulatory ordinances of this municipality,
other than:
      (1)   A second traffic offense within a 12-month period;
      (2)   A driver’s license offense; or
      (3)   An offense punishable by a fine of an amount to be set by the City
Council from time to time or by imprisonment, may elect to pay a fine in the
Traffic Violations Bureau according to the schedule of fines as determined by
the governing body.
   (B)   (1)   The Court may adopt rules to carry into effect this section.
Payment of a fine under this section shall constitute a final determination of
cause against the defendant.
      (2)   If a defendant who has elected to pay a fine under this section
fails to do so, prosecution shall proceed under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32.21)
§ 32.22 SUMMONS FOR APPEARANCE.
   Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the
Judge or Court Clerk, unless the Judge determines to issue a warrant of arrest,
or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been
arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the
person charged, specifying his or her address or place of residence, if known,
stating the offense with which he or she is charged and giving him or her
notice to answer the charge in the court on a certain day, five days (Sundays
and holidays excepted) after the summons is served upon him or her, and
including such other pertinent information as may be necessary. The summons
shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he or she
fails to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a
warrant shall be issued for his or her arrest, as provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 32.22) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 32.23 FORM OF ARREST WARRANT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this municipality,
upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the Attorney of
this municipality or by the Judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest,
in substantially the following form:
   In the Municipal Court of the City of Walters, Oklahoma, Plaintiff, vs.
_____________, defendant.
   Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that
the offense of (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been
committed and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefor
forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring (insert him, her, them)
before me, at the (naming the place). Witness my hand this _______ day of
_______________, 20_____.
   ____________________________________________________
   Judge (or Clerk) of the Municipal Court of Walters, Oklahoma
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, personally, or through a
duly constituted member of the police force of this municipality, or through
any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as
promptly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 32.23)
§ 32.24 PROCEDURES FOR BAIL OR BOND.
   Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his or her
appearance in an amount and upon conditions fixed by this chapter or the Judge,
who shall prescribe appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case
of arrests made at night or under other conditions or emergency or when the
Judge is not available, the rules shall authorize the Chief of Police, or his
or her designated representative, to accept a temporary cash bond of an amount
to be set by the City Council from time to time, nor more than the maximum
monetary penalty provided by ordinance for the offense charged.
(Prior Code, § 32.24)
§ 32.25 TRAFFIC BAIL BONDS.
   (A)   In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person,
whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law
enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law
or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon
personal recognizance if:
      (1)   The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United
States which is a party to the Nonresident Violator Compact, or any party
jurisdiction of the Nonresident Violator Compact;
      (2)   The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the
arrested person;
      (3)   The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided
for on the citation; and
      (4)   The violation does not constitute:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   Negligent homicide;
         (c)   Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating
substances;
         (d)   Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer;
         (e)   Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid
driver’s license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial,
or cancellation;
         (f)   An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;
         (g)   A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in divisions
(A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(f) above;
         (h)   An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit
exceeding the authorized permit weight; or
         (i)   A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials.
   (B)   (1)   If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal
recognizance as provided for in division (A) above, then the arresting officer
shall:
         (a)   Designate the traffic charge;
         (b)   Record information from the arrested person’s driver’s license
on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal
description, type of driver’s license, driver’s license number, issuing state,
and expiration date;
         (c)   Record the motor vehicle make, model, and tag information;
         (d)   Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and
         (e)   Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear
as provided for in the citation.
      (2)   The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal
recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall
contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal
recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is
conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in
the suspension of the arrested person’s driver’s license in this state, or in
the nonresident’s home state pursuant to the Nonresident Violator Compact.
   (C)   Procedures for arraignment, continuances, and scheduling, timely
appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines
and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of driver’s
license, shall be as required in state law, 22 O.S. §§ 1115.1 through 1115.5.
   (D)   A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before
he or she is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the
copy of the citation furnished to him or her or on a legible copy thereof,
together with the date of the plea and his or her signature. The defendant
shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the
Court Clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the
defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in
this division (D), such plea shall be accepted by the Court, and the amount of
the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation
charged or as prescribed by the Court.
   (E)   (1)   If, pursuant to the provisions of division (D) above, the
defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the Court may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the defendant and the municipal or District Court Clerk, within
120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting
officer, shall notify the State Department of Public Safety that:
         (a)   The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon
personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment
as provided for in the citation;
         (b)   The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good
cause shown;
         (c)   The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any
other arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and
         (d)   The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law.
      (2)   The Court Clerk shall request the State Department of Public Safety
to either suspend the defendant’s driver’s license to operate a motor vehicle
in this state, or notify the defendant’s home state and request suspension of
the defendant’s driver’s license in accordance with the provisions of the
Nonresident Violator Compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form
approved or furnished by the State Department of Public Safety.
      (3)   The Court Clerk shall not process the notification and request
provided for in this division (E)(3) if, with respect to such charges:
         (a)   The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was
jailed, or otherwise settled the case;
         (b)    The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon
a signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if
released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for
arraignment;
         (c)   The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight
violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials;
or
         (d)   A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the date
the citation was issued by the arresting officer.
   (F)   The Court Clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver’s
license suspension submitted to the State Department of Public Safety pursuant
to the provisions of this section.
      (1)   When the Court or Court Clerk receives appropriate bail or payment
of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the
defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the Court Clerk shall furnish proof
thereof to such defendant, if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail
such proof by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the
address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the
defendant.
      (2)   Additionally, the Court or Court Clerk shall notify the home
jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction
is a member of the Nonresident Violator Compact, and shall, in all other cases,
notify the State Department of Public Safety of the resolution of the case.
      (3)   The form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be
approved by the State Department of Public Safety; provided, however, the Court
or Court Clerk’s failure to furnish such proof or notice in the manner provided
for in this division (F) shall in no event create any civil liability upon the
court, the Court Clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any
state department or agency or any employee thereof, but duplicate proof shall
be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request.
(Prior Code, § 32.25)
§ 32.26 TRIALS AND JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Before trial commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may
obtain a reasonable postponement thereof.
   (B)   The defendant must be present in person at the trial. If, without
sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or
conditions of his or her bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial, or
judgment, or upon any other occasion when his or her presence in court or
before the Magistrate may be lawfully required, the Judge may direct that fact
to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be
forfeited. If the defendant has not deposited a monetary bond, the Judge shall
then set the amount thereof in the maximum fine, costs, and fees, and cause the
forfeiture to be certified to the District Court of the county where the situs
of government is situated, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket
and shall have the full force and effect of a District Court judgment. At such
time as the forfeiture is entered upon the District Court judgment docket, the
District Court Clerk shall proceed in accordance with the applicable provisions
of state statutes.
   (C)   In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the
statutes relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by
the Supreme Court of the state, the procedure applicable in trials of
misdemeanors in the District Courts shall apply to the extent that they can be
made effective.
   (D)   If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after the trial, the
Court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits
prescribed by the applicable ordinance, and imposing sentence accordingly.
   (E)   At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered immediately by the
Judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his or her docket.
   (F)   If judgment is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained
for any other legal cause, he or she must be discharged at once.
   (G)   If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a
fine or costs or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same
shall be satisfied at a rate to be set by the City Council from time to time.
      (1)   If the defendant is without means to pay the fines or costs, the
Municipal Judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court
minutes and to be certified to the District Court in the county where the situs
of the municipal government is located where it shall be entered upon the
District Court judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a
District Court judgment.
      (2)   Thereupon, the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement
of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor.
(Prior Code, § 32.26) (Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-1996)
§ 32.27 SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE.
   The Judge may suspend or defer judgment and sentence in accordance with
state law.
(Prior Code, § 32.27) (Ord. 2004-484, passed 12-7-2004)
§ 32.28 IMPRISONMENT; WORK BY PRISONERS.
   (A)   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy
thereof, certified by the Clerk, shall be delivered to the Chief of Police, the
Sheriff of the county, or other appropriate police officer. Such copy shall be
sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence.
   (B)   (1)   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of
guilty may be compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public
streets, avenues, alleys, parks, buildings, or other public premises or
property.
      (2)   For each day of such work, the prisoner shall be credited for
serving two days of imprisonment under his or her sentence.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, subject to the direction of the City Manager,
shall direct where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in
charge of the place where the work is to be performed, himself or herself, or
by some person designated by him or her, shall oversee the work. If a guard is
necessary, the Chief of Police shall make provision therefor.
(Prior Code, § 32.28)
§ 32.29 FINES AND COSTS.
   (A)   If a judgment of conviction is entered, suspended, or deferred, the
Clerk of the Court shall assess such fines, deferral fees, warrant fees, and
costs of confinement as the Municipal Judge shall impose in accordance with
state law for all offenses, and shall tax the costs of the case unless waived
by the Judge, all of which the defendant shall pay.
      (1)   Court costs. Pursuant to 11 O.S. § 27-126, as amended, court costs
shall be in an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time plus
witness and mileage fees, per case and may be added to the fine. All funds
collected shall be deposited in the appropriate fund.
      (2)   Additional fees, costs, and assessments will be added to the court
costs an fines and may include:
         (a)   Twenty-five dollars administrative warrant fee;
         (b)   Fifty dollars deferral fee;
         (c)   One-hundred dollars failure to appear fee.
   (B)   For every fine, fee, or bond forfeiture collected by the Municipal
Court of the city, additional local and state-mandated fees, costs and penalty
assessments shall be collected as provided in 20 O.S. §§ 1313.2 through 1313.4,
as amended, and as provided in other applicable state law.
   (C)   Cost related to prisoner confinement.
      (1)   In addition to the other allowable costs, the Municipal Court, at
its discretion, may require that a person confined in the county jail, both
before or after conviction, upon conviction, or receiving a deferred sentence
in lieu of a fine, pay to the Court Clerk of the Municipal Court, the contract
account owed to the County Sheriff’s office for the cost of incarceration of
the individual as provided by 22 O.S. § 979a.
      (2)   At the discretion of the Municipal Court, in addition to
incarceration costs, any and all costs associated with medical care, dental
care, psychiatric services, and other costs expended for health services
provided to the municipal prisoner will be collected from the individual.
      (3)   The individual shall pay to the Clerk of the Municipal Court all
costs of incarceration. The Clerk shall then pay the monies to the City
Treasurer for any payments required by law.
(Prior Code, § 32.29) (Ord. 96-424, passed 1-19-1993; Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-
1996; Ord. 2000-459, passed 4-18-2000; Ord. 2003-476, passed 5-20-2003; Ord.
2004-484, passed 12-7-2004; Ord. 568, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 32.30 WITNESS FEES.
   (A)   Witnesses in any proceeding in the Court, other than police officers
or peace officers, shall be entitled to a sum for each day of attendance, plus
mileage for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to and
returning from the place of attendance, if their residences are more than one
mile outside the limits of the city.
   (B)   No witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the
same period of time or the same travel.
   (C)   A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit, with the Clerk
of the Court, a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of
attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be
required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out:
      (1)   The names of no more than three witnesses;
      (2)   The defendant, by reason of his or her poverty, is unable to
provide the fees and mileage allowed by law;
      (3)   The testimony of such witnesses is material; and
      (4)   Their attendance at the trial is necessary for his or her proper
defense. The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.30)
§ 32.31 EXTRA FEES FOR TRAINING PERIOD.
   (A)   Any person either:
      (1)   Convicted of an offense punishable by a fine in an amount to be set
by the City Council from time to time or more or by imprisonment, excluding
parking and standing violations; or
      (2)   Forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense under division
(A)(1) above, shall pay a sum as set by state law as a separate penalty
assessment for law enforcement training, and as a separate fingerprinting fee,
which shall be in addition to and not in substitution for any and all fines and
penalties and costs otherwise provided for such offense. The Court shall
provide for separate bail for the assessments; however, a defendant admitted to
bail on an undertaking by a surety may include the amount of the assessment in
the undertaking.
   (B)   Upon conviction or bond forfeiture, the Court shall collect the
assessment and deposit the moneys for payment as required by state law.
   (C)   At the end of every quarter, the city shall deposit with the State
Treasury the funds deposited in the law enforcement training funds and the
A.F.I.S. (Automated Fingerprint Identification) Fund as required by law. The
Court Clerk shall also furnish to the State Treasury reports required on the
funds collected and penalty assessments imposed each quarter.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, CONVICTION means any final
adjudication of guilt, whether pursuant to a plea of guilty or nolo contendere
or otherwise, and any deferred or suspended sentence or judgment.
(Prior Code, § 32.31) (Ord. 96-424, passed 1-19-1993; Ord. 96-444, passed 4-2-
1996)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 20 O.S. §§ 1313.2 through 1313.3.
§ 32.32 UNPAID FINES, COSTS AND ASSESSMENTS.
   The Clerk of the Municipal Court is authorized and empowered to instate,
charge, and collect, as an additional court cost assessment, an amount equal to
35% of the total of any court cost, fine, or court assessment not paid by any
offender that has been turned over for collection to a collection agency or
collection service company; and the Clerk of the Municipal Court is authorized
and empowered to instate, charge, and collect such court cost assessment in
such matters as are warranted by the provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 32.32) (Ord. 2009-511, passed 8-4-2009; Ord. 2024-583, passed 2-
6-2024)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Sales Tax
   
33.001   Citation and codification
   
33.002   Definitions
   
33.003   Classification of taxpayers
   
33.004   Subsisting state permits
   
33.005   Effective date
   
33.006   Purpose of revenues
   
33.007   Tax rate; sales subject to tax
   
33.008   Exemptions
   
33.009   Tax due when; returns; records
   
33.010   Payment of tax; brackets
   
33.011   Tax constitutes debt
   
33.012   Vendor’s duty to collect tax; penalties
   
33.013   Returns and remittances; discounts
   
33.014   Interest and penalties; delinquency
   
33.015   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
33.016   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
33.017   Fraudulent returns
   
33.018   Records confidential
   
33.019   Amendments
   
33.020   Provisions cumulative
Purchases and Sales
   
33.035   Sale of surplus or obsolete supplies, material, or equipment belonging
to city
   
33.036   Definition
   
33.037   When Council approval required
   
33.038   Competitive bidding, generally
   
33.039   When bidding not required
Telephone Exchange Tax
   
33.050   Fee levied on telephone exchanges
   
33.051   Fee to be in lieu of other fees; taxes
Utility Fee
   
33.065   Utility fee levied
   
33.066   Fee to be in lieu of franchise
   
33.067   Payable monthly
   
33.068   Tax constitutes lien
   
33.069   Ouster for failure to pay
   
33.070   Revocable permit
Use Tax
   
33.085   Excise tax on storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property levied
   
33.086   Exemptions
   
33.087   Time due; returns; payment
   
33.088   Tax constitutes debt
   
33.089   Collection of tax by retailer or vendor
   
33.090   Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of
business within state or both within and without state
   
33.091   Revoking permits
   
33.092   Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states
   
33.093   Interest and penalties; delinquency
   
33.094   Waiver of interest and penalties
   
33.095   Erroneous payments; claim for refund
   
33.096   Fraudulent returns
   
33.097   Records confidential
   
33.098   Provisions cumulative
   
33.099   Provisions severable
   
33.100   Definitions
   
33.101   Classification of taxpayers
   
33.102   Subsisting state permits
   
33.103   Purpose of revenues
   
33.104   Effective date
 
   
33.999   Penalty
SALES TAX
§ 33.001 CITATION AND CODIFICATION.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “City of Walters Sales
Tax Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 33.001) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 376 became effective 11-13-1973, levying a first $0.01 tax. Ord. 388,
effective 10-21-1976, levied the second $0.01 tax. Ord. 399, effective 8-1-
1980, levied the third $0.01 tax. These ordinances have been amended to reflect
1981 and 1984 legislative changes in sales tax law.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy (sales) taxes for municipal purposes, see 68 O.S. § 2701
   State Sales Tax Code, see 68 O.S. §§ 1350 et seq.
§ 33.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the State
Sales Tax Code (68 O.S. § 1352) are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.002)
   (B)   The term TAX COLLECTOR as used in this subchapter means the department
of the city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to
law or contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax
levied in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.003)
(Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.003 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the classification of taxpayers
hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Sales
Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 33.004) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.004 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Sales Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional city permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 33.005) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.005 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter became effective as to each cent tax at least 30 days after
approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the
ordinance in the manner prescribed by 11 O.S. § 16-112.
(Prior Code, § 33.006) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
Editor’s note:
   As to the first $0.01 tax, this subchapter became effective 11-13-1973. As
to the second cent tax, this subchapter became effective on 10-21-1976. The
third cent tax became effective 8-1-1980.
§ 33.006 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   (A)   It is the purpose of the first and second cent sales tax to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city.
   (B)   It is the purpose of the revenues provided by the third cent sales tax
levied by this subchapter to provide revenues for:
      (1)   The making of capital improvements to physical properties of the
city;
      (2)   Paying the costs and expenses of general and special purposes of
the municipal government of the city; and
      (3)   The payment of the principal of and interest on indebtedness
incurred by the city or any duly constituted authority thereof.
(Prior Code, § 33.007) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973; Ord. 388, passed 7-21-
1976; Ord. 399, passed 5-27-1980)
§ 33.007 TAX RATE; SALES SUBJECT TO TAX.
   There is hereby levied an excise tax of 3% upon the gross proceeds or gross
receipts derived from all sales taxable under the State Sales Tax Code
including, but not exclusive of, the following:
   (A)   Tangible personal property;
   (B)   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other
utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this
subchapter;
   (C)   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, Pullman car companies, airlines, and all other means of
transportation for hire;
   (D)   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall
include all services and rental charges having any connection with transmission
of any message;
   (E)   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and the
service of printing or over-printing, including the copying of information by
mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter
in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on
magnetic tapes furnished by customers;
   (F)   Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming
house, motel, public lodging house, or tourist camps;
   (G)   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots;
   (H)   Selling, renting, or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or
software or coding sheets, cards, or magnetic tapes on which pre-written
programs have been coded, punched, or otherwise recorded;
   (I)   Food, confections, and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
   (J)   Advertising of all kinds, types, and character, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except those specifically exempt by this subchapter;
   (K)   Dues or fees to clubs, including free or complimentary dues or fees
which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise
been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services
rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business;
   (L)   Sales of tickets, fees, or other charges made for admission to or
voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports entertainment,
exhibition, display, or other recreational events or activities, including free
or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge
that would have otherwise been made;
   (M)   Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of
activity, when no admission is charged spectators, such as tennis, racket ball,
or hand ball courts;
   (N)   Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports,
entertainment, or recreational activity such as trampolines or golf carts;
   (O)   The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment, or other
recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or other
sports and athletic equipment;
   (P)   The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without any
deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person
who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom;
   (Q)   Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible
personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when the
rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair, or
otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any
deduction for the cost of the service rendered; provided, if the rental or
lease charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making
the rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the
rental or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the
statement, bill, or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services
rendered shall be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds;
   (R)   Any licensing agreement, rental, lease, or other device or instrument
whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances or
rights to receive images, pictures, or performances for telecast by any method
are transferred; provided, persons regularly engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed
under this subchapter shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in respect
to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts,
cartoons, and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or licensing of
such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this
subchapter;
   (S)   Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees, and other floral items, whether or not
same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or nursery
business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma business for
delivery in another state; provided, all orders taken outside this state for
delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by this
subchapter;
   (T)   Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors, or
other sales persons, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will
lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this subchapter because of:
      (1)   The operation of the business;
      (2)   The nature of the business;
      (3)   The turnover of independent contractors;
      (4)   The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep
records;
      (5)   Lack of adequate records;
      (6)   The persons are minors or transients;
      (7)   The persons are engaged in service businesses; or
      (8)   Any other reasonable reason.
   (U)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property including
materials, supplies, and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of
developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended
for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or
users and taxable; and
   (V)   Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons
who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repair people, are
hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable.
(Prior Code, § 33.008) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973; Ord. 388, passed 7-21-
1976; Ord. 399, passed 5-27-1980)
§ 33.008 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions; sales subject to other tax. There is hereby specifically
exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter the gross receipts or gross
proceeds exempted from the State Sales Tax Code inclusive, but not exclusive
of, and derived from the:
      (1)   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax,
gasoline excise tax, or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid;
      (2)   Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories
attached to motor vehicles on which the State Motor Vehicle Excise Tax levied
by state law has been paid;
      (3)   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall
not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or
use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting
or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This division (A)(3) shall not
operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of
this state; and
      (4)   Sale of aircraft on which the tax levied pursuant to 68 O.S. §§
6001 through 6004 has been paid. The provisions of this division (A)(4) shall
not become operative until July 1, 1984.
   (B)   Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities. There are hereby
specifically exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States
government or to the state, any political subdivision of this state, or any
agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to
contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United
States government, the state, or any of its political subdivisions shall not be
exempted from the tax levied by this subchapter, except as hereinafter
provided;
      (2)   Sales made directly by county, district, or state fair authorities
of this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of
the fair authority;
      (3)   Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools,
high schools, colleges, or universities which are operated primarily for
teachers and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for
profit;
      (4)   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable, or
educational societies or organizations by regular members thereof; provided,
such societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge
plan or system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for
a profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members
thereof to the exclusion of other members;
      (5)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing
with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
      (6)   The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets
which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of
money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the
purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of
an athletic event, a theatrical production or any other form of entertainment,
edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid
admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic
fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters, and theaters. To be
eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the
admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected, and used for
the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by
the college or university to effect the capital improvements hereinbefore
described;
      (7)   Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council
organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A., and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt from
sales tax; or
      (8)   (a)   Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county,
municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state system of
higher education, and the Grand River Dam Authority, or to any person with whom
any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly entered
into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such public
contract.
         (b)   Any person making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or
agency of this state shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or
sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the purchases are made for and
on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state and set out the name of
such public subdivision or agency.
   (C)   Exemptions; general. There are hereby specifically exempted from the
tax levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or
high schools in motor or other vehicles;
      (2)   Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time, or local
transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a municipality except
by taxicab;
      (3)   Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to
consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual
transaction does not exceed another amount to be set by the City Council from
time to time. A CARRIER is a person who regularly delivers newspapers or
periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route;
      (4)   Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling
the articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such
sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits
have been issued as provided in this subchapter. This exemption shall not apply
to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons
purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the
business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible
personal property to peddlers, solicitors, and other salespersons who do not
have an established place of business and a sales tax permit;
      (5)   Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and
billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic
media, including radio, television, and cable television;
      (6)   (a)   Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery, and equipment purchased by
persons regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect,
or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the
purpose of raising same for marketing.
         (b)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the raising of
animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the
invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he or she is regularly
engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the items
purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to the
State Tax Commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the
full benefit of the exemption;
      (7)   Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human
beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs; and
      (8)   Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the
city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas
and electricity, whether sold for residential or any other use after December
31, 1980. The sales tax levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and
electricity shall be in effect regardless of any ordinance or contractual
provisions referring to previously imposed state sales tax on such items.
   (D)   Exemptions; agriculture. There are hereby specifically exempted from
the tax levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the
producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold
at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows:
         (a)   Farm, orchard, or garden products;
         (b)   Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the
cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced;
         (c)   Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; and
         (d)   The provisions of this division (D)(1) shall not be construed as
exempting sales by florists, nurserymen, or chicken hatcheries, or sales of
dairy products by any other business, except as set out herein.
      (2)   Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults, and starter pullets used in the
commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the
purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to
be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg
production;
      (3)   Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements,
limestone, and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following
purposes, and subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding
stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk,
or meat for human consumption;
         (b)   Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to and
which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules, or other domestic or draft
animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products;
         (c)   Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays,
disinfectants, or other such agricultural supplies;
         (d)   Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than
domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs;
         (e)   Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such
as dogs, cats, birds or such other fur-bearing animals; and
         (f)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the
purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that
would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in
duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the Tax Commission. The purchaser may
demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall
retain a copy.
      (4)   Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of
agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. Each such
purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket
to be retained by the vendor, that he or she is so engaged in farming and/or
ranching and that the material purchased will be used only in such business;
         (b)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned
or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the
business of farming and/or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in
writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the
vendor that he or she is engaged in the business of applying such materials to
lands owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in
the business of farming and/or ranching, and shall show in said certificate the
name or names of such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands
on which said materials are to be applied to each such land, and he or she
shall further certify that his or her contract price has been reduced so as to
give the farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption;
         (c)   Sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons engaged in the
business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis shall not be
considered to be sales to contractors under this subchapter, and said sales
shall not be considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the State
Sales Tax Code. As used in this section, AGRICULTURAL FERTILIZER means any
substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for
promoting the growth and productivity of plants;
         (d)   Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly
engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. This section
shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and
sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens;
         (e)   Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person
regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching. For
the purposes of this act, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any
substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying,
repelling, or mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode,
fungus, weed, or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life
or virus, bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial, or other
microorganisms on or in living humans, or any substance or mixture of
substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant; and
         (f)   This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the
purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production
of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy
of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the material
purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The vendor shall
certify to the State Tax Commission that the contract price of the items has
been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by
the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon violation and
conviction for a second offense the State Tax Commission shall revoke the
vendor’s sales tax permit.
      (5)   Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto, or fuel, oil,
lubricants, and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm
machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production,
cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation,
or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural, or dairy products
produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts
thereto, or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales
ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he or she is engaged in farming or
ranching and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto, or fuel will be
used only in farming, and/or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall
not apply to motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the
copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that the
material purchased will only be used in his or her farming occupation. The
vendor shall certify to the State Tax Commission that the price of the items
has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption.
   (E)   Exemptions; manufacturers. There are hereby specifically exempted from
the tax levied by this subchapter:
      (1)   Goods, wares, merchandise, and property purchased for the purpose
of being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling, or preparing for sale a finished article and such
goods, wares, merchandise, or property become integral parts of the
manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled, or prepared products or are
consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
or preparing products for resale. The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean
those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations and generally recognized as such;
      (2)   Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same
with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law;
      (3)   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing plants in the state, and machinery and equipment
purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already
established in the state. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery
and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under this subchapter. The term
MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
      (4)   Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the
business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the
purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden, or orchard for resale to the
consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any
containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable
containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of
title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person
who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling, or
otherwise transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this
code. And, this exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other
materials delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or
absolutely essential to the sale of the sold merchandise; or
      (5)   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in the state when
sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state.
   (F)   Exemptions; corporations and partnerships. There are hereby
specifically exempted from the tax levied in this subchapter:
      (1)   The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows:
         (a)   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a
reorganization. As used in this division (F), the term REORGANIZATION means a
statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of
substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the
consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring
corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation;
         (b)   In connection with the winding up, dissolution, or liquidation
of a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders
of the property of such corporation;
         (c)   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such
corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately
after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities
received by each is substantially in proportion to his or her interest in the
property prior to the transfer;
         (d)   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the
former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer,
members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by
each, is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to
the transfer; or
         (e)   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in
the dissolution of such partnership.
      (2)   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on
such tangible personal property.
(Prior Code, § 33.009) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.009 TAX DUE WHEN; RETURNS; RECORDS.
   The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the State
Sales Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 33.010) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.010 PAYMENT OF TAX; BRACKETS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time
and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax.
   (B)   The bracket system for the collection of the city sales tax by the Tax
Collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the
city and the Tax Collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and
the 2% state sales tax.
(Prior Code, § 33.011) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.011 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   The taxes, penalty, and interest due under this subchapter shall at all
times constitute a prior, superior, and paramount claim as against the claims
of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 33.012) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.012 VENDOR’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX; PENALTIES.
   (A)   The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the
vendor. It shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this subchapter,
or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average
equivalent thereof.
   (B)   Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent
thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute
a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to
vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other
debts.
   (C)   A vendor, as defined hereunder, who willfully or intentionally fails,
neglects, or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this
subchapter, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to comply
with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly
or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein
levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any
statement which infers that he or she is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax
for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the
tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in accordance
with this subchapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any
person, firm, corporation, joint venture, or association that willfully or
intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the sums required to be
collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 33.013) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.013 RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; DISCOUNTS.
   Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made
to the Tax Collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be
subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the State Sales Tax Code for
collection of state sales taxes.
(Prior Code, § 33.014) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.014 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Sixty-eight O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this
subchapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein
specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in
reporting and paying the tax levied by this subchapter.
   (B)   The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the
reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this
subchapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent.
   (C)   In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five days,
the taxpayer shall forfeit his or her claim to any discount allowed under this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.015) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.015 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer’s failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted
in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration
of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220. To accomplish the purposes of
this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.016) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.016 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made
to any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure,
and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the
state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purpose of
this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.017) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.017 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this subchapter shall be an offense.
(Prior Code, § 33.018) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.018 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of the State Sales Tax Code,
68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as
if here set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 33.019) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.019 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance,
hereby authorize the City Council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of
administering and enforcing this subchapter as may be necessary or proper for
efficiency and fairness.
   (B)   Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the use to which the
revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the qualified electors of
the city as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 33.020) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
§ 33.020 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any
or all other taxing provisions of city ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 33.021) (Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973)
PURCHASES AND SALES
§ 33.035 SALE OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE SUPPLIES, MATERIAL, OR EQUIPMENT BELONGING
TO CITY.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, the City Manager may sell
surplus or obsolete supplies, material, or equipment belonging to the city. No
sale shall be made under this section until the City Council has declared the
supplies, material, or equipment involved to be surplus or obsolete.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) below, the City Manager
shall advertise any sale under this section in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city or in such other manner as he or she deems necessary
adequately to reach prospective buyers to give them an opportunity to make
bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated
time and place, except when the sale is by auction. The City Manager may
repeatedly reject all bids and advertise again. He or she shall sell such
supplies, materials, or equipment to the highest responsible bidder, and if
necessary, shall cast lots in case of a tie to determine to whom to sell. The
City Manager may sell the following without giving an opportunity for
competitive bidding: surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment the
total value of which does not exceed an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time in a single transaction.
(Prior Code, § 33.035)
Charter reference:
   City Manager authorized to sell surplus or obsolete supplies, material or
equipment subject to regulations prescribed by Council, see Charter §
26
   Procedure for sale of property valued at more than $10,000, see Charter §
27
§ 33.036 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES. Service performed for the city by persons not in the
employment of the city, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing
of commodities in connection with such services under express or implied
contract. CONTRACTUAL SERVICES shall include travel; freight; express; parcel
post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rents; printing and binding;
and repairs, alterations and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets,
bridges, and other physical facilities of the city by persons not in the
employment of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.036)
§ 33.037 WHEN COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Every contract for, or purchase of, supplies, materials, equipment, or
contractual services involving the expenditure of more than an amount to be set
by the City Council from time to time by the City Manager shall require the
prior approval of the city Council, and under no circumstances may the Manager
make such contract or purchase without first obtaining the prior approval of
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 33.037)
Charter reference:
   Council approval required for purchase exceeding an amount prescribed by
ordinance, see Charter §
26
§ 33.038 COMPETITIVE BIDDING, GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in §
33.039, before the City Manager makes any purchase of, or contract for,
supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, he or she shall submit
to at least three persons, firms, or corporations dealing in and able to supply
the same, or to a smaller number if there are not three dealing in and able to
supply the same, a request for quotation or invitation to bid and
specifications, to give them opportunity to bid. As an alternative, the City
Manager may publish notice of the proposed purchase in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city.
   (B)   He or she shall favor a person, firm, or corporation in the city, when
this can be done without additional cost to the city, but he or she shall
submit requests for quotation to those outside the city, when necessary to
secure bids or to create competitive conditions, or when he or she thinks that,
by so doing, he or she can make a saving for the city, and shall purchase from
them when he or she can make a saving for the city.
   (C)   (1)   All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a
designated time and place.
      (2)   The Manager may repeatedly reject all bids and may again submit to
the same or other persons, firms, or corporations, the request for quotations
or invitation to bid, or again publish notice of the proposed purchase.
   (D)   He or she shall purchase from the bidder whose bid is most
advantageous to the city, considering price, quality, date of delivery, and the
like, and, in case of a tie, may cast lots to determine from whom to make a
purchase, or may divide the purchase among those tying, always accepting the
bid or bids most advantageous to the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.038)
Statutory reference:
   Competitive bidding on public construction projects, see 61 O.S. §§ 101 et
seq.
§ 33.039 WHEN BIDDING NOT REQUIRED.
   The City Manager, after the approval of the City Council, may purchase the
following without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding:
   (A)   Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services the cost of
which does not exceed an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time
in a single transaction;
   (B)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services which can be
furnished only by a single dealer, or which has a uniform price wherever
bought;
   (C)   Supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services purchased from
another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from private
dealers, including war surplus;
   (D)   Contractual services (gas, electricity, telephone service, and the
like) purchased from a public utility corporation at a price or rate determined
by the State Corporation Commission or other government authority; or
   (E)   Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering,
architectural, and medical services.
(Prior Code, § 33.039)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to prescribe exceptions to requirement for competitive
bidding, see Charter §
26
TELEPHONE EXCHANGE TAX
§ 33.050 FEE LEVIED ON TELEPHONE EXCHANGES.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge
upon each and every person, firm or corporation operating a telephone exchange
in the city in an amount equal to 2% of the gross revenues for each current
year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the
limits of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and
services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision,
police regulations, and police control of the construction of lines and
equipment of the telephone company in the city.
   (B)   The inspection fee and charge shall be on a calendar year basis and
shall be due and payable to the city on or before March 1 in each year for the
whole of the calendar year next preceding the date and shall be paid into and
appropriated and expended from the General Revenue Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.050)
§ 33.051 FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF OTHER FEES, TAXES.
   During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this subchapter by
the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and
continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege, and permit fees or taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes;
however, it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing
arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct
space, or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police calls
systems of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.051)
UTILITY FEE
§ 33.065 UTILITY FEE LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of 2% upon the gross
receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas,
electricity, or water in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other
franchise, license, occupation, or excise tax levied by the city, all as
provided by 68 O.S. §§ 2601 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 33.065) (Ord. 93-426, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 33.066 FEE TO BE IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall, when levied, apply to all
persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water within the corporate
limits of the city, except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association,
or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city, nor to the city
or the City Public Works Authority when providing any such services.
(Prior Code, § 33.066) (Ord. 93-426, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 33.067 PAYABLE MONTHLY.
   The tax levied under this subchapter shall be levied for a term of not less
than one year and shall be payable monthly and placed in the General Revenue
Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.067) (Ord. 93-426, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 33.068 TAX CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   The tax so imposed in this subchapter shall constitute a first a prior lien
on all the assets located within the city of any person, firm, or corporation
engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or
water within the city limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.068) (Ord. 93-426, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 33.069 OUSTER FOR FAILURE TO PAY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when
levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city. In
addition, thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm, or
corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 33.069) (Ord. 93-426, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 33.070 REVOCABLE PERMIT.
   Any persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing gas within the city limits of the city, not operating under a valid
franchise from the city, and upon whom the tax provided under this subchapter
is imposed, is hereby granted a revocable permit by the city for so long as
this subchapter remains in effect and the taxes are paid in accordance with the
terms of this subchapter to acquire, construct, erect, install, extend, repair,
remove, relocate, replace, operate, and maintain a system of works, pipes,
pipelines, apparatus, structures, and appurtenances in, across, upon, and under
the streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, parks, parkways, sidewalks,
parkings, driveways, rights-of-way, utility easements, and other public ways,
places, areas, and grounds, all being sometimes referred to herein as “streets,
alleys, avenues, and other public ways, places, and grounds” in the city, as
now constituted, and as may be added to hereafter, for the purpose of
transporting, distributing, and selling gas to the city, its inhabitants, and
the public generally for domestic, commercial, and industrial uses, and for any
and all other purposes for which gas, during the period of this revocable
permit may be used, together with the right to enter upon the streets, alleys,
avenues, and other public ways, places, and grounds of the city for the purpose
of constructing, erecting, installing, extending, relocating, operating,
maintaining, removing, and repairing the works, pipes, pipelines, and all
necessary apparatus, machinery, structures, and appurtenances.
(Prior Code, § 33.070) (Ord. 93-426, passed 5-18-1993)
USE TAX
§ 33.085 EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE, OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL
PROPERTY LEVIED.
   There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing,
using or otherwise consuming within the city, tangible, personal property
purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the storage, use,
or otherwise consuming within the municipality of such property at the rate of
3% of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every
person storing, using, or otherwise consuming, within the municipality,
tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the municipality. The
additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or
storage of the property within the municipality and shall be assessed to only
property purchased outside the state; provided, that, the tax levied herein
shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use
outside the municipality, but which is stored in the municipality pending
shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily retained in the
municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration,
maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the use tax
authorized herein, may deduct from such use tax any local or municipal sales
tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that, the amount
deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes
imposed by the municipality had been levied on the sale of such goods or
services.
(Prior Code, § 33.085) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.086 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply:
   (A)   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual visiting in this
municipality for his or her personal use or enjoyment while within the
municipality;
   (B)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for re-
sale before being used;
   (C)   (1)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal
property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the State
Use Tax Code and this subchapter, has been paid by the person using such
tangible, personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was levied
under the laws of the state or some other state or municipality of the United
States.
      (2)   If any article of tangible, personal property has already been
subjected to a tax by the state or any other state or municipality in respect
to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the State
Use Tax Code and this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall also
apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided
by both the State Use Tax Code and this subchapter, and the rate by which the
previous tax upon the sale or use was computed; provided, that, no credit shall
be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or
municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in the state and the
municipality;
   (D)   (1)   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and
used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the
operation of manufacturing plants already established in the machinery and
equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to the taxation under §§
33.001 through
33.020.
      (2)   The term MANUFACTURING PLANTS shall mean those establishments
primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally
recognized as such;
   (E)   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under §§
33.001 through
33.020;
   (F)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident
of this municipality where such personal property is for such individual’s
personal use or enjoyment;
   (G)   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property
used, or to be used, by commercial airlines or railroads; or
   (H)   In respect to livestock purchased outside the state and brought into
this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later re-sold.
(Prior Code, § 33.086) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.087 TIME DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENT.
   The tax levied by this subchapter is due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the Use Tax
Code of the state.
(Prior Code, § 33.087) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.088 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.
   Such taxes, penalty, or interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute
a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as with any other debt.
(Prior Code, § 33.088) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.089 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR.
   Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and
without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place
of business outside this state for use in the city, shall, at the time of
making such sales, collect the use tax levied by this subchapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form
prescribed by the State Tax Commission, if said Tax Commission shall, by
regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with said
Tax Commission the name and address of all his or her agents operating in this
municipality and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or
offices or other places of business in this municipality.
(Prior Code, § 33.089) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.090 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING A PLACE OF
BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE; PERMITS.
   The State Tax Commission may, at its discretion, upon application, authorize
the collection of the use tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in this municipality, and by the out-of-
state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of
business both within and without the state and making sales of tangible,
personal property at such out-of-state place of business for use in this
municipality. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit
to collect such taxes, by said Tax Commission in such manner and subject to
such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it
shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the use tax upon all
tangible, personal property sold to his or her knowledge for use within this
municipality. Such authority and permit may be canceled when, at any time, said
Tax Commission considers that such use tax can more effectively be collected
from the person using such property in this municipality; provided, however,
that, in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to
the purchaser within this municipality by the retailer or vendor in such
retailer’s or vendor’s vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common
carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
municipal sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and
reported under the taxpayer’s sales tax permit number accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 33.090) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.091 REVOKING PERMITS.
   Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, authorized to collect the use tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter or
the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules, or regulations of the State Tax
Commission, said Tax Commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in
68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such
retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation
authorized to do business in this state may, after the notice and hearing above
provided, cancel said corporation’s license to do business in this state and
shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the
obligations under this subchapter, the State Use Tax Code or any order, rules,
or regulations of the State Tax Commission.
(Prior Code, § 33.091) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.092 REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES.
   Returns and remittances of the use tax herein levied and collected shall be
made to the State Tax Commission at the time and in the manner, form, and
amount prescribed for returns and remittances required by the State Use Tax
Code; remittances of use taxes collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Prior Code, § 33.092) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.093 INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY.
   Sixty-eight O.S. 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter,
and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified
are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting
and paying the use tax levied by this subchapter; provided, that, the failure
or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of use tax in the time and manner required by this subchapter shall
cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for
a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his or her claim to
any discount allowed under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.093) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.094 WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The interest or penalty, or any portion thereof, accruing by reason of a
retailer’s or vendor’s failure to pay the use tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as
applied in administration of the state use tax. provided in 68 O.S. § 220.
To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68
O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.094) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.095 ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND.
   Refund of erroneous payment of the municipal use tax herein levied may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same mariner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time provided for administration
of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purpose
of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.095) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.096 FRAUDULENT RETURNS.
   In addition to all civil penalties provided by this subchapter, the willful
failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein
required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any use tax, or portion thereof, rightfully due
under this subchapter, shall be an offense.
(Prior Code, § 33.096) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.097 RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL.
   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning
the administration of the municipal use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the State
Use Tax Code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and
made fully effective and applicable to administration of the municipal use tax
as if herein set forth in full.
(Prior Code, § 33.097) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.098 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all
other taxing provisions of municipal ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 33.098) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.099 PROVISIONS SEVERABLE.
   The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any
section, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this subchapter, is for any reason
held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence, or clause
hereof.
(Prior Code, § 33.099) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.100 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the State Use
Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1401, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this subchapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall be
defined as follows
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Walters, Oklahoma.
      TAX COLLECTOR. The department of the municipality or the official agency
of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law,
to administer the collection of the use tax herein levied.
      TRANSACTION. Sale.
(Prior Code, § 33.100) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.101 CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the State Use Tax Code.
(Prior Code, § 33.101) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.102 SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS.
   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to the State Use Tax Code are, for the purpose of this
subchapter, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional municipal permit for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 33.102) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.103 PURPOSE OF REVENUES.
   It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this subchapter to provide
revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the
city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the City
Council for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended and
authorized.
(Prior Code, § 33.103) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.104 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The collection of this use tax shall begin on July 1, 2001.
(Prior Code, § 33.104) (Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)    (1)   Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that
purchases are for any of the subdivision or agencies of this state named in §
33.008(B) or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount equal to
double the amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerated for not more than
60 days, or both.
      (2)   Violation of §
33.008(C)(6) by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor.
      (3)   Violation of §
33.008(D)(5) by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor, and, upon
violation and conviction for a second offense the State Tax Commission shall
revoke the vendor’s sales tax permit.
(Prior Code, § 33.009)
   (C)   (1)   Violation of §
33.012(C) shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
as provided in §
10.99.
      (2)   Violation of §
33.012(D) shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
as provided in §
10.99
(Prior Code, § 33.013)
   (D)   Violation of §
33.017 shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer
shall be subject to a fine and imprisonment as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 33.018)
   (E)   Any violation of §§
33.085 through
33.104 shall be liable for a fine not to exceed an amount to be set by the City
Council from time to time per day, or the maximum legal limit.
(Prior Code, § 33.999)
   (F)   Violation of §
33.096 shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer
shall be punished by a fine in an amount to be set by the City Council from
time to time. Each day of noncompliance with §§
33.085 through
33.104 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 33.096)
(Ord. 376, passed 10-23-1973; Ord. 2001-463, passed 6-5-2001)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER
      
53.   ELECTRIC
      
54.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Application for utility service
   
50.02   Service pipes and lines; how installed
   
50.03   Separate service
   
50.04   Bills; when payable; delinquency
   
50.05   Rights reserved to interrupt service
   
50.06   City not liable
   
50.07   Damaging equipment
   
50.08   To be used only on premises
   
50.09   Interference with mains, fire hydrants
   
50.10   Tampering with meters unlawful
   
50.11   Procedure for governing board to fix future utility rates
   
50.12   Right of access to utility meters
   
50.13   Lease of municipal utility systems
Public Works Authority
   
50.25   Procedures established
   
50.26   New services
   
50.27   Deposits
   
50.28   Disconnection for nonpayment
   
50.29   Fees
   
50.30   Disconnection other than nonpayment
   
50.31   Transfer of account
   
50.32   Collection of unpaid balances
   
50.33   Subterfuge
   
50.34   Terms of service
Deposits Charged
   
50.45   Fees established
   
50.46   Deposits required for utility service
   
50.47   Billing fee schedule for utility services
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 APPLICATION FOR UTILITY SERVICE.
   (A)   Every person, firm, or corporation desiring to have his or her
premises connected with any of the city’s utilities, water, electric, sewer, or
trash collection shall make application to the City Clerk, shall sign a
contract therefor upon a printed form to be furnished for that purpose, and
shall pay to the Clerk the regular fees and deposits for installation of the
service.
   (B)   The Clerk shall issue a permit authorizing any regular plumber or
electrician to make the proper connections for water, sewer, or electric
service.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 SERVICE PIPES AND LINES; HOW INSTALLED.
   All service pipes or lines shall be located in such manner that the supply
for each separate house or premises shall be controlled by a separate stopcock
or switch so placed as to be readily accessible from the outside of the house.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 SEPARATE SERVICE.
   Every separate premises supplied must have its own separate service
connection with the mains or lines, and the premises so supplied shall not be
allowed to supply water, sewer, or electricity to any other premises.
(Prior Code, § 50.04) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 BILLS; WHEN PAYABLE; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   (1)   All bills for water, electricity, sewer, garbage, and all other
monthly charges made by the city shall be payable to the City Clerk or such
other person as is designated by the City Manager at the office of the City
Clerk on the first day of each month.
      (2)   If a bill is not paid on or by the due date on the bill, the bill
will be declared to be delinquent. A penalty of 5% of the amount due on any
delinquent bill may be charged, and the City Clerk or other designated person
is hereby directed to collect such penalty at the time the bill is paid. The
utility bill shall not be considered paid in full until any penalties are also
paid.
   (B)   If any bill is not paid by the date specified on the bill, a fee will
be added to the bill and service may be discontinued beginning on the next day.
The Superintendent of the Department or such other person as the City Manager
may designate shall discontinue the city’s service to the premises after
written notice. The utility service shall not be turned on again until all
arrearages are paid in full together with the penalty as above specified and a
fee as set by the Council for shutting off and turning on the city’s service.
   (C)   (1)   If the Superintendent of the Department or other designated
person goes to the premises to shut off the service and the occupant pays the
Superintendent or person prior to his or her shutting off the service, there
shall be added to the bill the sum as set by the Council for the trip made by
the Superintendent or other person to shut off such services.
      (2)   All bills, penalties, and fees collected as herein above specified
shall be paid over to the City Clerk. Nothing herein shall be construed as
preventing the city from instituting suit for the recovery of any delinquent
accounts.
   (D)   The City Clerk may not accept payment of a water bill without payment
of the sewer service charge, nor shall the Clerk accept payment of a sewer bill
without payment of the water bill. The failure to pay any utility bill in
accordance with divisions (A) and (B) above shall be grounds for discontinuing
any or all of the utility services furnished to the customer whose bill is
delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 50.05) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 RIGHTS RESERVED TO INTERRUPT SERVICE.
   The city reserves the right to shut off the supply of water or electricity
without notice, for repairs, extensions, nonpayment of rates, or for any other
reason, and no liability shall attach therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 50.06)
§ 50.06 CITY NOT LIABLE.
   The city shall not be liable for any damage caused by the breaking of any
pipes or fixtures, stoppage or interruption of water or electricity, or for any
defect in the system.
(Prior Code, § 50.07)
§ 50.07 DAMAGING EQUIPMENT.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to destroy or injure any water
pipe, hydrant, faucet, electric light wire, pole, transformer, or other
electrical, sewer, or water equipment erected or placed by or belonging to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 50.08) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 TO BE USED ONLY ON PREMISES.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to take any water or
electricity from any main, pipe, or wire, except for use on the premises where
the same is located.
(Prior Code, § 50.09) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 INTERFERENCE WITH MAINS, FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to disturb, interfere with,
open, operate, close, turn on, turn off, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect
anything with any fire hydrant, or stop any valve or stopcock belonging to the
city; however, this section shall not apply to any member of the Fire
Department when in the lawful discharge of his or her duties as such or to any
person endeavoring to prevent or put out any fire in any lawful manner.
(Prior Code, § 50.10) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 TAMPERING WITH METERS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   The tampering with water or electrical meters or meter boxes of the
city, or the placing of any bypass connection on or around the meters, or the
use of any other device tending to interfere with the proper registration of
same is unlawful.
   (B)   Evidence of the violation of this section from information by a meter
reader or other qualified employees of the city, duly supported by affidavit,
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the intent on the part of the person or
persons using the equipment, to violate the provisions of the section.
   (C)   The Superintendent of the Department in charge or his or her
authorized representative is hereby directed to discontinue service to any
person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violation of this section. Service
shall not be resumed until the estimated cost of the service that was used and
diverted shall have been paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 50.11) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.11 PROCEDURE FOR GOVERNING BOARD TO FIX FUTURE UTILITY RATES.
   The Mayor and City Council, acting either as the governing board of the city
or as trustees of the City Public Works Authority, may establish future rates
for utility services by ordinance, motion, or resolution, as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 50.12) (Ord. 2014-541, passed 8-19-2014)
§ 50.12 RIGHT OF ACCESS TO UTILITY METERS.
   The city and the Public Works Authority and any of its employees or
representatives shall have the right to enter on any premises and grounds in
order to access any utility meters or equipment. Any person who willfully
obstructs such access to meters or equipment shall be guilty of an offense. A
copy of all applicable utility rates, deposits, and charges, as set by
ordinance, motion, or resolution, shall be kept in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 50.13) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.13 LEASE OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The city hereby consents and agrees to the leasing of the city’s
municipal utility properties and facilities described as follows:
      (1)   All of the water production, storage, transportation, and
distribution system and facilities;
      (2)   Sanitary sewage collection, transportation, proceeding, and
disposal system and facilities;
      (3)   Garbage and trash collection, transportation, proceeding, and
disposal facilities; and
      (4)   All of the electric production, transmission, and distribution
system and facilities, including all tangible property, real and personal, and
all interests therein appertaining or related thereto or used in connection
therewith, and all rights-of-way, easements, licenses, and other rights and
privileges appertaining or related to such system and facilities, or the use
thereof, together with all and singular appurtenances and hereditaments thereto
appertaining and belonging, including (without limitation by reason of express
mention) all buildings and improvements now or hereafter located thereon and
all fixtures now or thereafter existing thereto, together with any and all
additions, enlargements, extensions, and improvements thereto acquired by the
city during the life of the lease for a primary term of 50 years, renewable for
successive like terms, to the trustees of the City Public Works Authority (a
public trust of which the city is the beneficiary), with such lease to become
effective as of 12:01 a.m., on the day following June 26, 1980, the effective
date of the ordinance, and the Mayor of the city hereby is authorized and
directed to execute the aforesaid lease upon behalf of the city as lessor, in
several multiple originals, and after the same shall have been attested by the
City Clerk, to deliver such lease to the trustees of the City Public Works
Authority.
   (B)   This provision shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city
if a proper referendum petition is properly filed within 30 days after its
passage; otherwise, it shall go into effect 30 days after its passage.
(Prior Code, § 50.14) (Ord. 400, passed 5-27-1980)
PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY
§ 50.25 PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED.
   The following rules and regulations shall constitute the procedures that
will be followed by city personnel to facilitate the provision of municipal
utility services on a fair and consistent basis to all citizens of the city and
assure that appropriate measures have been taken to assure payment of amounts
owed to the City Public Works Authority.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.26 NEW SERVICES.
   It shall be the practice of the Walters Public Works Authority (WPWA) to
provide municipal utility services, consisting of water, sewer, sanitation, and
electricity on a fair and non-discriminatory basis provided all the conditions
of service are met and maintained by the end user, citizen, consumer, city
resident, or commercial entity.
   (A)   Application must be made. New service connections shall be provided to
everyone who moves into town or the outskirts of town where WPWA provides
services provided that the consumer makes appropriate application for service
(s), provides all required information and documents, posts the required
deposits, and assumes responsibility for payment of the services provided.
      (1)   WPWA does not provide all municipal services in all areas of the
city. Some services in specific areas are available through other utility
providers. During the application process the employee taking the application
will check service area maps and inform the individual who the other providers
are, and provide contact information for those other providers.
      (2)   The individual shall completely fill out an application for service
as approved and amended by the City Council or WPWA Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The individual shall post the appropriate deposit(s) to secure
payment for the service(s) requested. Deposits shall be posted to the
appropriate account of the city or WPWA and retained for the period of time
prescribed by the Council/Board of Trustees.
      (4)   The employee shall prepare the appropriate work order for a meter
set (installation of electric or water meter) or service transfer to the
requesting individual.
   (B)   New service where no facilities currently exist.
      (1)   Individuals constructing new homes or business will complete the
same application as above. The employees will take their contact information
and complete the appropriate work order to notify the department supervisors
that construction of new facilities will be required. The department
supervisors will develop a timeline and estimate of construction costs. The
estimate will include the cost of labor, materials, overheads, and easements.
Where multiple services are required, multiple estimates will be made by each
affected department (water, sewer, electric).
      (2)   Construction estimate costs may exceed the free limit set by the
Council/Board of Trustees. In this event, the requesting individual or
developer shall be required to make a construction contribution to the city/
WPWA for the service extension before any construction begins. Such
contributions shall be recorded on the fixed asset accounting system as
contributed plant.
      (3)   When a contribution is required, individuals, businesses, or
developers may find those costs unreasonable. Department supervisors or the
City Manager shall work with the requesting entity to find less expensive
routing alternatives to make services available. This may include relocating
the home/business, rerouting utility services, or releasing the entity to
another service provider that may be closer or less costly.
   (C)   New service at an existing location.
      (1)   When an individual requests service(s) at an existing location or
address, the employee shall check the billing records to determine that the
service(s) has been disconnected or that the present customer has completed a
service disconnect form and that the form has been signed by the current
resident/owner. An application for service where a disconnect has not been
requested by the current resident/owner shall constitute a red flag event and
shall be documented in the red flag register. If and when this occurs, the
employee shall contact the current resident/owner and assure that they do in
fact desire to terminate services and that they intend to complete a service
disconnect form and sign it, or that they have vacated the premises.
      (2)   If the above conditions have been met, the employee will complete a
work order to set new meters or to have the existing meters read “in and out.”
      (3)   The in and out reading shall consist of one meter reading for the
metered services. The reading shall be the final reading for billing purposes
for the current resident/owner and the beginning reading for the new customer
moving into the location who assumes responsibility for the bill.
   (D)   Discontinuance of service.
      (1)   Service disconnect forms signed by the customer/owner will be
required to assure that service charges cease for the customer/owner leaving
the premises.
      (2)   Past experience has shown that customer/owner(s) often leave with
no notice, forwarding address, and owing a big bill, especially from rental
property. When it is determined that the current responsible customer has
vacated the premises, the billing clerk will make every effort to obtain a
forwarding address for the departing customers.
      (3)   Connection of a new customer will be in accordance with above rules
and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.27 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Deposits.
      (1) Deposits will be required of all new customers, for each city service
requested or provided to the location where their home or business is located.
The total deposit required will consist of the numeric sum of the individual
deposits.
      (2)   The deposit for each service shall be consistent with the service
deposits established by the City Council and approved in open public meeting
under state law.
      (3)   All service deposits shall be shown on a tariff sheet identified as
the schedule of deposits. A schedule so identified will be reviewed and amended
by the City Council periodically as they and city management deem necessary to
limit the city/WPWA exposure to unpaid balances.
      (4)   In addition to the initial deposit(s) to establish service, any
customer who pays late twice in any six consecutive-month period, or is on the
disconnect list, but not disconnected, shall have their deposit balance
reviewed. If their initial deposit is less than two times the average billing
for the most recent consecutive six months, the customers will be required to
post additional deposits equal to the two-months’ average billing.
         (a)   Customers who are required to pay additional deposits under the
above provisions, may elect to either pay the balance of the additional deposit
in one payment or spread it over three equal payments over the following three
months.
         (b)   Customers required to post additional deposits shall also pay
all current bills when due. Customers who fail to pay current shall be required
to pay all amounts, bills, and deposits immediately.
         (c)   Customers who default on making the additional deposits shall be
given ten days’ notice that service will be terminated if the default is not
cured.
         (d)   Customers who are still in default after ten days’ notice shall
have all services terminated.
      (5)   Customers in bankruptcy, other than liquidation, shall be required
to post a new deposit equal to two times the average monthly billing to secure
post petition consumption. The customer will be provided ten days’ notice of
the deposit requirement. If the new deposit is not paid within the ten-day
period, service shall be terminated until security deposits are paid in full.
   (B)   Refund of deposits. In the normal course of business, deposits will
not be refunded until the customer discontinues receiving service(s) from WPWA.
Upon service termination, deposits will be applied to any and all final
billings for the services rendered by WPWA. If deposits are insufficient to
cover final billings, the customers will be mailed a final billing at their new
address. Any deposit funds remaining after the final bill has been applied will
be returned to the customers as soon as possible by mailing it to their new
address.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.28 DISCONNECTION FOR NONPAYMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the WPWA/city that services be terminated for
nonpayment in accordance with this approved disconnection procedure. Employees
shall assure that customers have been given the required notices, the number of
days, and provided with a list of other agencies, organization, or groups that
may be able to help them pay their bills.
   (A)   Utility bills shall be mailed to the customer at their service address
or business address. Bills will indicate the due date and the late payment due
if not paid on or before the due date.
   (B)   Customers who do not make payment seven days after the due date will
receive a disconnect notice, hand delivered to their door. The notice will
indicate that if payment has not been received within seven days of the notice
(that’s 14 days total), service will be discontinued/terminated.
   (C)   Individuals may contact the billing clerk and make other payment
arrangements. Persons who request additional time or payment arrangements will
be subject to deposit review and may be required to post additional deposits.
   (D)   Customers who have exhausted time limits and/or payment arrangements
will be disconnected for nonpayment without additional notice.
   (E)   Customers disconnected for nonpayment shall pay all amounts owed, past
due and current, disconnect fees, trip charges, and all other applicable fees
before service(s) are restored.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.29 FEES.
   (A)   The following fees will be applied to utility bills paid late, or
requiring additional collection procedures.
      (1)   Bills not paid by the due date shown on the bill shall be charged
an additional 5% as shown on the bill as the “amount due if not paid by the due
date.”
      (2)   If the WPWA/city is required to hand deliver a disconnect notice,
an additional fee will be added to the bill.
      (3)   If the customer is physically disconnected, an additional fee will
be added to the bill (trip charge).
      (4)   If the customer then pays his or her bill and related charges, an
additional reconnect fee will be charged to the bill to cover the reconnect
trip costs.
      (5)   All fees and additional deposits must be paid before service(s) are
restored.
      (6)   The fee for connecting, activating, and inspecting utilities to
properties served by the City of Walters, Oklahoma, shall be $25 per meter, per
occurrence. Said fee shall appear on the customer's utility bill and shall be
due and payable along with the usual charges.
   (B)   A returned check fee will be assessed on all checks returned to the
WPWA regardless of the reason returned.
   (C)   These fees will be shown on a tariff sheet titled billing fee schedule
and will be subject to revision as the City Council/Board of trustees deem
necessary. All changes in the fees shall be done in open public meeting per
state law.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012; Ord. 593, passed 7-1-2025)
§ 50.30 DISCONNECTION OTHER THAN NONPAYMENT.
   The WPWA/city may disconnect or discontinue service(s) to customer for
reasons other than nonpayment to preserve the safety and welfare of city
residents, employees, or the general public.
   (A)   A service may be disconnected or discontinued without terminating all
utility services provided by WPWA/city.
   (B)   Water service will be discontinued to preserve health or due to
excessive leak. This can occur when a resident has a sewer leak or rupture, or
employees notice a significant water leak, and the resident does not correct
the problem, after being notified.
   (C)   All involved services will be terminated when theft of service is
discovered. Customers who have been disconnected and have not made arrangements
to have service restored will be monitored daily or weekly to assure that
service is not being stolen. When theft is discovered, employees will
immediately contact the police officer on duty for investigation and
prosecution.
      (1)   Normal disconnection practices will consist of removing electric
meters and turning off water main valves. When theft is discovered, electric
service will be terminated at the transformer or secondary voltage supply and
the water meter will be removed.
      (2)   Persons receiving the benefit of stolen services shall be
considered the offending party and shall be arrested, fined, or otherwise
prosecuted for the offense.
      (3)   Poly carts will be removed from the premises.
   (D)   All services will be terminated when an unsafe condition exists on the
premises that could cause fire, injury, or death due to the continuation of
such service.
   (E)   Customers who seasonally leave the city may request a suspension of
utility services. Customers may request that all utility services be suspended
or only specific services be suspended. Services will not be suspended for more
than six consecutive months.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.31 TRANSFER OF ACCOUNT.
   Since The WPWA/city now falls under the federal red flag rules, it becomes
necessary that the WPWA exercise higher security when transferring utility
services between individuals and businesses. It is not uncommon for utility
service to be transferred from one customer to another customer or from one
business entity to another. In the past this has been done informally over the
phone, since most people and business owners are known personally by WPWA
employees. To properly follow the new federal rules and guidelines, it is
necessary that this process be more formal and in writing. This will basically
require that people transferring services appear in person at City Hall and
complete the required paper work.
   (A)   Customers desiring to discontinue utility services should appear in
person at City Hall and complete a service disconnect form and sign it. This
form must indicate the final date that the customer wants to receive service.
      (1)   WPWA employees will assure that the work order to discontinue
service is executed on the day indicated on the service disconnect form.
      (2)   Before a physical service disconnect is made, the employee shall
review work orders to assure that a connect work order for a new customer is
not pending at the same physical address.
      (3)   If a connect order exists, the employee will convert the work order
to a “read in read out” order and not physically disconnect the services.
   (B)   When the customer desiring to discontinue service is a tenant, the
employee will make a physical disconnect unless the landlord, known to the
WPWA, has completed a service transfer form, properly signed it, and maintains
it on file with the WPWA. Service transfer forms shall be maintained in a file
established for that purpose.
   (C)   Landlords who have the proper documents completed will be responsible
for all the service costs from the “read in read out” readings forward, until
another tenant becomes responsible for that service billing.
   (D)   Landlords shall be responsible for the same services as the tenant,
and partial services shall not be allowed on a limited or partial basis.
   (E)   Transfer of accounts from one person or business, to another person or
business, will be allowed via telephone, mail, or email only when the person
(customer) has moved from town and is no longer in the area.
   (F)   Automatic transfer from a tenant to a landlord will be allowed,
provided the landlord has completed the necessary documentation and signed an
authorization with the WPWA.
   (G)   Employees will assure that all information is completed in full on the
service disconnect form, service transfer form, and the application for service
form to assure that WPWA has the proper address for billing, mailing of the
final billing, or the refund of unused deposits.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.32 COLLECTION OF UNPAID BALANCES.
   (A)   The city/WPWA will mail final unpaid bills for three consecutive
months. If the customer has not paid at the end of 90 days (three months), the
account will be turned over to the collection professionals under contract with
the city/WPWA as approved, or as may be approved, by the City Council/Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   Customers who still refuse to pay amounts due will be referred to the
City Attorney for further legal action, in an effort to collect the bill. The
city/WPWA may file a law suit and seek court judgments in efforts to collect
the bill as advised by the City Attorney.
   (C)   Uncollectible accounts may be placed on a statewide list of non-paying
customers or other list(s) maintained by the State Tax Commission or other
state agency.
   (D)   The city/WPWA will maintain a list of old unpaid accounts, forever,
and should a customer ever move back to town and request services, they will be
required to pay all old bills and collection costs, court costs, and legal fees
before service will be rendered.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.33 SUBTERFUGE.
   There will be occasions where a customer has been disconnected for
nonpayment and another person(s) is living in the household, either related or
unrelated, the other cohabitant will come to City Hall and request services be
established in their name, or the co-habitant who did not have the service in
his or her name will then move to another location (address) and attempt to
establish service, or they will establish service, in their name and then
allowed the other disconnected cohabitant to move in at the new location.
Anytime this occurs and the disconnected person with an outstanding bill
remains or becomes an occupant in the house, this act shall be considered
subterfuge, and service(s) will either be denied or disconnected. These acts
will be treated as an act of theft and referred to the Police Department for
prosecution or the City Attorney for recovery of amounts due.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.34 TERMS OF SERVICE.
   All new customers will be provided these rules and regulations in writing
when they apply for initial service. They will be explained to the customer
verbally, and he or she will be asked to sign a statement that the rules and
regulations were explained to them and that they understood the requirements
for service. These signed forms shall be filed with the customers other
information and maintained by the city/WPWA.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Res. 785, passed 11-6-2012)
DEPOSITS CHARGED
§ 50.45 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   Deposits for electric, water, sewer, trash, and sanitation fees for services
rendered to residential and commercial customers and consumers, charged by the
city for said services be and the same are hereby set as follows.
(Prior Code, Ch. 50, Appendix A) (Ord. 2020-565, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 50.46 DEPOSITS REQUIRED FOR UTILITY SERVICE.
   (A)   Applicability. Applicable to all existing and new customers of the
City Public Works Authority for any monthly services provided by the authority.
   (B)   Deposits. Deposits shall be required for all utility services provided
by the WPWA.
      (1)   Electric. Deposits to secure payment of electric services shall be
$250, and commercial customers shall be two times the average bill from the
most recent 12 months.
      (2)   Water. Deposits to secure payment of water services shall be $50,
and commercial customers shall be two times the average bill from the most
recent 12 months.
      (3)   Sewer. Deposits for sewer and waste water are included in the water
deposit, and additional deposits are not required for this service.
      (4)   Sanitation. Deposits to secure payment of sanitation services shall
be $25, and commercial customers shall be two times the average bill from the
most recent 12 months.
      (5)   Higher deposit amount. Existing customer deposits will be
reevaluated if services are disconnected for nonpayment. The Authority may
require a minimum of two times the amount of the most recent 12-month average
monthly utility bill for any and all services.
(Prior Code, Ch. 50, Appendix A) (Ord. 2020-565, passed 2-4-2020)
§ 50.47 BILLING FEE SCHEDULE FOR UTILITY SERVICES.
   (A)   Applicable to all existing and new customers of the Walters Public
Works Authority for all monthly services provided by the authority. The
following amounts are subject to change at the discretion of the City Council
from time to time.
      (1)   Past due fee: 5% of the bill;
      (2)   Disconnect notice: $10;
      (3)   Trip charge: $5;
      (4)   Reconnect fee:
         (a)   Twenty dollars; and
         (b)   After hours, $15 additional ($35).
      (5)   Returned check fee: $25.
   (B)   The effective date of said rate changes shall be November 1, 2012.
(Prior Code, Ch. 50, Appendix A) (Ord. 2012-533, passed 11-6-2012)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, whether as owner, plumber, electrician, servant, agent, or
employee, who shall make any connection to the water, sewer, or electric system
without first having secured a permit as provided herein, shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 50.02)
   (C)   Any person who in any manner directly or indirectly violates or
permits others under his or her supervision, custody or control to violate any
provision of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to any
of the chapters in this part, shall be guilty of an offense. Such violation
shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 50.99)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Municipal Water System
   
51.01   Definition
   
51.02   Meters
   
51.03   Responsibility of customer to install and maintain service line
   
51.04   Right of entry to premises served by system
   
51.05   Right to turn off water in mains; city not liable for damages from
pressure
   
51.06   Tampering with, injuring water system property
   
51.07   Water shortages; declaration of emergency
   
51.08   Restriction on water use in emergency
   
51.09   Proclamation and notice of emergency
   
51.10   Grievances with water restrictions
   
51.11   Watering restrictions; quadrants
Municipal Water District
   
51.25   Definitions
   
51.26   Established and described
   
51.27   Authority to enlarge
   
51.28   Police power and jurisdiction of city extended to district
   
51.29   Applicability of rules and regulations of state, county, and city
health authorities
   
51.30   Burials permitted
   
51.31   Permitting waste matter, saltwater, to flow access, over, or under land
within district
 
   
51.99   Penalty
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
§ 51.01 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, the terms WATER SERVICE or WATER SYSTEM mean the
water service and system of this city.
(Prior Code, § 51.01)
§ 51.02 METERS.
   (A)   Water from the city’s water system shall be furnished to customers
only through meters, except with permission from the City Council.
   (B)   All meters shall be set under the directions of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 51.02)
§ 51.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF CUSTOMER TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN SERVICE LINE.
   Each consumer of water furnished by the city shall lay his or her own
pipeline from the premises to the curb for the purpose of conveying water to
such point on his or her premises as he or she may desire and shall thereafter
be required to keep the same in good repair and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 51.03) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 RIGHT OF ENTRY TO PREMISES SERVED BY SYSTEM.
   Consumers taking water from the city shall, at all reasonable hours, grant
any person authorized by the City Manager free access to all parts of the
premises to which water is delivered, for the purpose of inspection and
examination of fixtures, or to read the meters.
(Prior Code, § 51.04)
§ 51.05 RIGHT TO TURN OFF WATER IN MAINS; CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES FROM
PRESSURE.
   The city reserves the right to turn off the water in its mains at any time
for the purpose of making repairs or in the event of a breakdown in equipment
or machinery. All persons taking water from the mains shall do so at their own
risk, and the city shall not be held responsible for any accident or damage of
any kind or character occasioned by pressure in the water mains or by the
shutting off of the water or for failure to keep water under pressure in the
mains for any reason.
(Prior Code, § 51.05)
§ 51.06 TAMPERING WITH, INJURING WATER SYSTEM PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure or deface, or in any way tamper with
any hydrant, stopcock, corporation cock, meter, valve, pipeline, or any part of
the water system, or to turn the water off or on from any main at any time or
place, unless he or she is duly authorized so to do by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 51.06) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 WATER SHORTAGES; DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to
inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of
equipment or material, the Mayor is hereby authorized to restrict or prohibit
the use of water from the city’s water system.
   (B)   An emergency exists whenever the City Manager reasonably determines
that the city’s water system is unable or will within 60 days become unable to
supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the users thereof, including
adequate fire protection.
(Prior Code, § 51.07)
§ 51.08 RESTRICTION ON WATER USE IN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Upon the determination that such an emergency exists, the City Manager
shall issue a proclamation declaring the emergency and setting out with
particularity an order restricting use of water from the city system.
      (1)   The order may:
         (a)   Restrict water usage during certain periods of the day or week
or according to any orderly and nondiscriminatory scheme; and
         (b)   Prohibit usages not essential to public health and safety.
      (2)   The order may be revised from time to time as the City Manager
deems necessary.
   (B)   A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the
proclamation shall be in force for 30 days or until such time as the City
Manager cause to be published a proclamation that the emergency has ended,
whichever is shorter, unless the Council, by resolution, approved by a majority
of all its members votes to terminate the emergency and proclamation upon a
different date.
(Prior Code, § 51.08)
§ 51.09 PROCLAMATION AND NOTICE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   The proclamation required by §
51.08 shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or,
if there is no such newspaper in which the proclamation may be published within
24 hours after the emergency arises, publication shall be by posting a copy of
the proclamation in ten prominent places in the city. The emergency shall be in
full force and effect upon publication. Substantial compliance with this
section is sufficient to effect the emergency.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the
availability of water or water pressure as to create an immediate threat to
public health or safety, the notice of the proclamation may be given by any
reasonable means, including electronic means.
      (2)   The emergency shall be in full force and effect upon such notice;
however, if any means other than that required in division (A) above is used,
the proclamation shall be republished in accordance with division (A) above
within 24 hours of the first notice.
(Prior Code, § 51.09) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 GRIEVANCES WITH WATER RESTRICTIONS.
   Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the City Manager shall
have the right to present the matter to the next regular or special meeting of
the City Council or to any emergency session called to discuss the water
emergency. The Council may exempt such aggrieved person, wholly or in part,
from compliance with the proclamation order upon a showing that compliance
creates an immediate threat to the person’s health or safety. The ruling of the
Council by a majority vote of all its members shall be final and binding as to
the continuance of any terms of the proclamation. Until and unless the action
of the Mayor is modified or revoked by action of the Council, all water users
shall be bound by the proclamation.
(Prior Code, § 51.10) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 WATERING RESTRICTIONS; QUADRANTS.
   The city be divided into quadrants for the establishment and regulation of
watering in the city limits and for the establishment of schedules therefor and
providing that violations shall be subject to fines, fees, and assessments for
convictions related to citations issued by officers and other regulatory
officials of the city for violation of this section. Said division and
regulations shall be in the schedule. See the schedule attached to the
ordinance codified herein of quadrants and regulation of times for the allowed
watering.
(Prior Code, § 51.11) (Ord. 2013-534, passed 4-16-2013)
MUNICIPAL WATER DISTRICT
§ 51.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESERVOIR. Refers to Lake Boyer or to any tributary which serves as a source
of water supply therefor.
   WATER DISTRICT. The municipal water district established by this chapter.
   WATERCOURSE. Includes every spring, pond, stream, ditch, gutter, or other
channel of every kind, the water of which, when running, whether continuously
or occasionally, eventually flows or may flow into the reservoir.
(Prior Code, § 94.075)
§ 51.26 ESTABLISHED AND DESCRIBED.
   Pursuant to state statutes, there is hereby established, and designated by
metes and bounds, a water district for the sanitary protection of the water
supply of the city, which district shall be known as the municipal water
district, and shall embrace all the lands in the county, within the following
metes and bounds:
   (A)   Commencing at northwest corner of northwest quarter, Section 22,
Township 2 South, Range 11 West, thence running east on section line to
northeast corner of the quarter section; thence running south along the east
line of the quarter a distance of 1,980 feet to a point; thence running west
parallel to the north line of the quarter a distance of 1,320 feet to a point;
thence running north parallel with the west line of the northwest quarter a
distance of 660 feet to a point; thence running northwest on an angle of 45
degrees to a point 660 feet south and 660 feet east of the northwest corner of
the quarter; thence west 660 feet to the west line of the quarter and thence
running 660 feet north on the west line of the northwest quarter to place of
beginning, containing 85 acres;
   (B)   Beginning at the southwest corner of the southwest quarter of Section
15, Township 2 South, Range 11 West T.M., thence north along the west line of
the quarter 561.4 feet; thence due east 1,071.6 feet; thence in a southeasterly
direction 1,068.2 feet to a point on the south line of the southwest quarter
1,983.3 feet east of the southwest corner of the quarter and thence west to
place of beginning, containing 19.68 acres, more or less;
   (C)   Beginning at the southeast corner of the southeast quarter of Section
15, Township 2 South, Range II West T.M., thence west along the south line of
the quarter a distance of 2,640 feet to the southwest corner of the southeast
quarter; thence north on the west line of the quarter a distance of 1,000 feet
to a point; thence due east 720 feet to a point; thence due south, 280 feet to
a point; thence due east 1,000 feet to a point; thence southeasterly on an
angle to a point 100 feet north of the southeast corner of the southeast
quarter and thence due south 100 feet to place of beginning and containing
41.72 acres, more or less, which includes two acres of the south section line;
and
   (D)   Beginning at a point 720 feet north and 920 feet west of the southeast
corner of the southeast quarter of Section 15 in Township 2 South, Range 11
West T.M., thence due south 150 feet; thence south 45 degrees and 40 minutes
east a distance of 350 feet and thence northwest in a straight line to point of
beginning, containing one-half acre.
(Prior Code, § 94.076)
§ 51.27 AUTHORITY TO ENLARGE.
   The City Council may, by ordinance, extend, modify, or change the metes and
bounds of the water district, so as to embrace any additional lands directly or
indirectly flowing or shedding into the reservoir basin.
(Prior Code, § 94.077)
§ 51.28 POLICE POWER AND JURISDICTION OF CITY EXTENDED TO DISTRICT.
   By virtue of laws of the state, the police power of the city is hereby
extended over all lands embraced within the water district established by this
subchapter, and it is hereby declared that the jurisdiction of the city, the
City Council, the courts, and all proper officers of the city, in fullest
degree conformable to law, extends over and applies to the entire water
district for the protection of the health of the inhabitants and purity of the
water supply of the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.078)
§ 51.29 APPLICABILITY OF RULES AND REGULATIONS OF STATE, COUNTY, AND CITY
HEALTH AUTHORITIES.
   All rules and regulations of the State, County, and City Boards of Health,
the State Commissioner of Health, and the county and City Health Officer are
hereby extended over and shall apply and have full force and effect within the
water district.
(Prior Code, § 94.079) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.30 BURIALS PROHIBITED.
   From and after September 5, 1944, no burials or interments shall be made in
the water district, in any cemetery that may be within such district, or at any
other place within such district.
(Prior Code, § 94.080) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.31 PERMITTING WASTE MATTER, SALTWATER, TO FLOW ACROSS, OVER, OR UNDER LAND
WITHIN DISTRICT.
   No person shall permit or cause any waste matter from oil or gas wells, or
any saltwater or other substance of any nature whatsoever that would pollute
the water of the reservoir to flow across, over or under any land within the
water district, in such manner that it will flow directly or ultimately into
the reservoir, or into any reservoir, lake, pond, stream, ditch, watercourse,
or other body of water, the water of which flows or may flow directly or
ultimately into the reservoir.
(Prior Code, § 94.081) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who in any manner directly or indirectly violates or
permits others under his or her supervision, custody, or control to violate any
term of a duly published proclamation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
violation of the provisions of the City Manager’s proclamation or action of the
Council shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as provided in §
10.99.
      (2)   Violation of the established regulations for watering at times not
allowed and conviction for said violation shall be subject to a fine in an
amount to be set by the City Council from time to time for the first violation
and a fine in another amount to be set by the City Council from time to time
for all such subsequent violations.
(Prior Code, § 51.99) (Ord. 2013-534, passed 4-16-2013)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
   
52.01   City to make and maintain sewer connection
   
52.02   Mandatory sewer connection
   
52.03   Prohibited sewer deposits
   
52.04   Private sewage disposal facilities
§ 52.01 CITY TO MAKE AND MAINTAIN SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   The city shall make, inspect, and maintain all connections to its
sewer lines upon the payment to the city by the user or beneficiary thereof of
the charge prescribed by this code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized agent or
employee of the city, to make a connection to any sewer line belonging to or
controlled by the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.02 MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   The owners of all houses, buildings, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located a
public sanitary sewer of the city, are hereby required, at their expense, to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to have such facilities
connected directly with the proper public sewer, within 60 days after the date
of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 300 feet
of the property line.
   (B)   The notice provided for in division (A) above shall be served by any
member of the Police Department by delivering a true and correct copy to the
property owner, or leaving the same at his or her usual place of residence with
a member of his or her family over the age of 15 years, or if such owner cannot
be found, by posting a copy of such notice at the front entrance of the
building involved.
   (C)   Any person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the terms
of this section after having been notified so to do as provided herein shall be
guilty of an offense, and each 24-hour period thereafter shall constitute a
separate offense. In the event of a continuous violation of this section by any
property owner, the city shall discontinue the furnishing of water to such
property owner, until such time as a proper sewer connection has been made.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.03 PROHIBITED SEWER DEPOSITS.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
public sewer any mud, silt, rags, refuse, or other matter which is likely to
cause a congestion preventing proper drainage of the sewer.
(Prior Code, § 52.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.04 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided in this section, it is unlawful for any
person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended to be used for the disposal of sewage within the
city.
   (B)   Where a connection to a public sanitary sewer line is not required
under the provisions of §
52.02, a private septic tank or cesspool facility for sewage disposal may be
constructed and maintained, provided it is constructed and maintained under the
rules and regulations of the City Health Officer and in compliance with the
recommendations and requirements of the State Health Department. No septic tank
or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural
outlet.
   (C)   The owner of private septic tanks or cesspools shall operate and
maintain the same in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer of the city,
county, or state.
   (D)   At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a septic tank or cesspool, a direct connection shall be made to such public
sewer in compliance with §
52.02, and the septic tank or cesspool shall immediately be abandoned and
filled with suitable material.
(Prior Code, § 52.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 53: ELECTRIC
Section
   
53.01   Superintendent of city’s electrical distribution system
   
53.02   Separate electric meter for each unit in multiple dwellings
   
53.03   Rates
§ 53.01 SUPERINTENDENT OF CITY’S ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   The city’s electrical distribution system shall be under the supervision of
the Superintendent of such system, who shall be appointed by and serve under
the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 53.01)
§ 53.02 SEPARATE ELECTRIC METER FOR EACH UNIT IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS.
   Each family unit in residential dwellings comprising multiple-family units
shall be metered separately for electricity in the name of the individual
occupant, except hotels or motels.
(Prior Code, § 53.02)
§ 53.03 RATES.
   (A)   All rates for electrical services for both residential and commercial,
charged by the city for said services be, and the same are hereby increased as
follows. The following amounts are subject to change at the discretion of the
City Council from time to time.
      (1)   Commercial total electric.
         (a)   Single phase:
            1.   Monthly service charge: $35;
            2.   First 1,700 kWh: $0.113 per kWh;
            3.   Excess kWh (over 1,700): $0.097 per kWh; and
            4.   Heat allowance (October to March): all energy over 7,000 kWh:
$0.082 per kWh.
         (b)   Three phase:
            1.   Monthly service charge: $60;
            2.   First 1,700 kWh: $0.113 per kWh;
            3.   Excess kWh (over 1,700): $0.097 per kWh; and
            4.   Heat allowance (October to March): all energy over 7,000 kWh:
$0.082 per kWh.
      (2)   Commercial electric.
         (a)   Single phase:
            1.   Monthly service charge: $25;
            2.   First 1,700 kWh: $0.113; and
            3.   Excess kWh (over 1,700): $0.087.
         (b)   Three phase:
            1.   Monthly service charge: $50;
            2.   First 1,700 kWh: $0.113; and
            3.   Excess kWh (over 1,700): $0.087.
      (3)   Residential total electric.
         (a)   Monthly service charge: $15;
         (b)   First 700 kWh: $0.095; and
         (c)   Excess kWh (over 700):
            1.   Summer (April to September): $0.087; and
            2.   Winter (October to March): $0.082.
      (4)   Residential electric.
         (a)   Monthly service charge: $23;
         (b)   First 700 kWh: $0.095; and
         (c)   Excess kWh (over 700): $0.087.
      (5)   Security lights. Monthly service charge: $10.
      (6)   Power cost adjustment base. Power cost adjustment base is $0.055,
which reduces the adjustment.
   (B)   The effective date of said rate changes shall be February 15, 2014,
billing.
(Prior Code, § 53.03) (Ord. 2013-537, passed 10-15-2013; Ord. 2013-538, passed
12-17-2013; Ord. 2014-543, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 586, passed 8-6-2024)
CHAPTER 54: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Containers
   
54.03   Proper disposal of waste; responsibility
   
54.04   Council authority required for private collection and disposal
   
54.05   Frequency of collection
   
54.06   Charges for collecting and disposing of nonhazardous waste
   
54.07   Charges for collecting and disposing of hazardous waste
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any and all dangerous, toxic, or hazardous materials,
including, without limitation, chemotherapeutic, radioactive, volatile, highly
flammable, explosive, infectious, biological, hospital or other hazardous
materials, including, without limitation, waste listed or characterized as
hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the USDH.
   NONHAZARDOUS WASTE. Only such waste and materials as are not dangerous,
toxic, or hazardous and which are not hazardous waste as hereinabove defined.
NONHAZARDOUS WASTE includes the following categories.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL WASTE. Waste that is typically generated by a commercial
establishment, government office and facilities, and institutions.
      (2)   CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE. Waste resulting from construction or
demolition activities.
      (3)   HOUSEHOLD BULKY WASTE. Waste materials generated by residents that
are large, cumbersome, or heavy items that are normally not deposited into bags
or boxes for disposal, including, without limitation, furniture, appliances,
carpeting, mattresses, box springs, bicycles, and wood, metal, or yard waste.
      (4)   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste that is typically generated by industrial,
manufacturing, assembly and fabrication businesses, and the like.
      (5)   OTHER NONHAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste not falling within one of the
foregoing categories of nonhazardous waste.
      (6)   RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Waste material that is typically generated by a
residence.
   WASTE. All garbage, refuse, and trash found within the city, including,
without limitation, kitchen and table scraps, offal, and every accumulation of
animal and vegetable matter which attends the preparation, decay of, dealing
in, or storage of meats, fruits, vegetables, and other provisions for
subsistence, tree trimmings, junked building materials and roofing materials,
manufacturing waste, rocks, dirt, paper, rags, containers of paper, tin cans,
yard and house sweepings, and all other household waste, rubbish, ashes, and
all discarded materials of any kind or nature, but does not include sewage,
rain water, or other liquid refuse normally disposable safely through the
sanitary sewers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 54.01) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993)
§ 54.02 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Every person using or occupying any building, house, or structure
within the city shall maintain or cause to be maintained for his, her, or its
behalf by an authorized sanitation service company garbage can or container, of
some suitable and substantial material, of sufficient size and in such
condition as to permit the same to contain garbage and trash and to be lifted
up and emptied into the collection vehicles.
   (B)   All non-hazardous waste shall be placed in such garbage cans or, when
such cans have reached their capacity, non-hazardous waste may be piled in
close proximity thereto, in a sufficient container within 24 hours prior to
regularly schedule days for collecting bulky waste materials. All such garbage
and trash containers shall be placed and maintained at the location designated
by city officials from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 54.02) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.03 PROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE; RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The disposal of waste is hereby declared to be the responsibility of
the generator thereof.
   (B)   As a protection of the public health, the police powers of the city
shall be invoked when necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 54.03) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.04 COUNCIL AUTHORITY REQUIRED FOR PRIVATE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The collection and disposal of waste by any private person, firm, or
corporation is unlawful, unless duly authorized by the City Council.
   (B)   To assist the generators of non-hazardous waste within the city, the
City Council shall from time to time authorize one or more sanitation service
companies to provide for the collection and disposal of non-hazardous waste on
a regular, continuous basis.
   (C)   Generators of hazardous waste are required to make adequate
arrangements for the disposal of their hazardous waste at sites approved for
the particular hazardous waste involved, and to submit such contracts to the
City Manager or his or her designee for his or her approval of the disposal
company. To protect the public, the Council directs and authorizes the Chief of
Police, the City Manager and any city officials appointed by the City Manager
to require the generator of any hazardous waste immediately to cause the proper
collection and disposal of the hazardous waste in accordance with all state and
federal laws relating to the particular hazardous waste involved.
(Prior Code, § 54.04) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.05 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   Collection of non-hazardous waste and the removal thereof to some suitable
place outside the city limits, shall be made upon collection schedules set by
the City Council by motion or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 54.05) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.06 CHARGES FOR COLLECTING AND DISPOSING OF NONHAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   Fees shall be charged and collected for the collection and disposal of
nonhazardous waste generated in the city in accordance with schedules adopted
by ordinance, motion, or resolution of the Council.
   (B)   The fees shall be charged against the person in whose name the water
meter is registered, and such person shall pay the fees monthly along with the
regular utility bill. Failure to pay such fees shall be penalized by the
discontinuance of water or electrical service in the same manner and by the
same means as discontinuance of such service for failure to pay the utility
bill.
(Prior Code, § 54.06) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.07 CHARGES FOR COLLECTING AND DISPOSING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   Because hazardous waste creates unusual problems, difficulties, and dangers
to the city, state, and nation and their respective citizens, public, and
residents, and because it is not feasible to determine a rate which should be
charged for the collection and disposal of hazardous waste, in lieu of setting
a schedule of rates, the rate shall be a matter of negotiation between the
parties involved. In those situations where the city, in order to protect the
public generally, is compelled to act to require the collection, removal, and
disposal of hazardous waste, the City Council may determine in each instance
the appropriate rate which may be charged to the generator of waste by the
sanitation service company removing and disposing of the hazardous waste.
(Prior Code, § 54.07) (Ord. 93-427, passed 6-4-1993)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The following fines and punishments shall be instituted for violations
of the policy rules, regulation, and fines for the sanitation services for the
city.
      (1)   Residents who do not remove poly-carts from the street within the
time allowed will be fined in increasing amounts, to be set by the City Council
from time to time, for the first, second , and each successive occurrence in
any six-month period, together with fees, costs, and assessments of a CLEET
(Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training) fee and a court cost, both
also in amounts to be set by the City Council from time to time.
      (2)   Commercial service entities and individuals for hire that place
debris, grass clippings, tree limbs, and other refuse on the curb as if they
were left by the resident shall be fined in an amount to be set by the City
Council from time to time, together with fees, cost, and assessments of a CLEET
(Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training) fee and a court cost, both
also in amounts to be set by the City Council from time to time.
      (3)   Other violations of the policy as adopted will result in fines of
$125 for littering, together with fees, cost, and assessments of a CLEET
(Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training) fee and a court cost, both
also in amounts to be set by the City Council from time to time.
      (4)   Additionally, illegal dumping, including placing solid waste in
someone else’s poly-cart or dumpster shall be punishable by a littering fine
per §
93.033.
(Prior Code, § 54.99) (Ord. 2008-507, passed 12-16-2008)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
72.   VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
      
73.   PEDESTRIANS
      
74.   VEHICLE OPERATION
      
75.   DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
      
76.   PARKING AND LOADING
      
77.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Citation of title
   
70.02   Traffic Code controlling
   
70.03   Definitions
   
70.04   Adoption of State Traffic Code
Enforcement
   
70.15   Duty to enforce
   
70.16   Direction of traffic by hand or voice
   
70.17   Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons
   
70.18   Obedience to police and fire officials
   
70.19   Emergency and experimental regulations
   
70.20   Push carts, riding animals, or driving animal-drawn vehicles to comply
with code
   
70.21   Use of coasters, rollerskates, and similar devices restricted
   
70.22   Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.23   Persons working on streets, exceptions
   
70.24   Maintenance and construction zones
   
70.25   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.26   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.27   Accident, duty to stop
   
70.28   Issuance of citation tags
   
70.29   Failure to obey citations
   
70.30   Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle
   
70.31   Presumption in reference to illegal parking
   
70.32   Illegal cancellation of traffic citations
   
70.33   Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants, and complaints
   
70.34   Court records; abstract to be sent to State Department of Public Safety
   
70.35   Insurance or certificate required
Impoundment of Vehicles
   
70.50   Purpose and effect of impoundment provisions
   
70.51   Place of impoundment
   
70.52   Duration of impoundment
   
70.53   Police granted authority to impound vehicles
   
70.54   Disabled vehicles
   
70.55   Vehicles on bridge
   
70.56   Arrest and detention of driver of vehicle
   
70.57   Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard
   
70.58   Illegal trespass by vehicle
   
70.59   Vehicles parked overtime
   
70.60   Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants
   
70.61   Vehicles parked in intersection
   
70.62   Stolen vehicles; recovery by police
   
70.63   Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 CITATION OF TITLE.
   This title and all amendments hereto may be cited or referred to as the
“Traffic Code, City of Walters,” and may so appear upon all official documents,
records, or instruments.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 TRAFFIC CODE CONTROLLING.
   Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this title, the
Traffic Code shall be controlling in the use of city streets, alleys,
thoroughfares, parks, parkways, or any other public right-of-way or municipally
owned land, by pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled
or otherwise and whether moving or at rest.
(Prior Code, § 70.02)
§ 70.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any narrow highway ordinarily located in the interior portion of
platted blocks and ordinarily used for service or delivery purposes at the rear
of stores, dwellings, or buildings.
   AMBULANCE. A motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed, or arranged for the
purpose of transporting ill, sick, or injured persons.
   BICYCLE. A device upon which any person or persons may ride, propelled
solely by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having two or more
wheels, excluding mopeds.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and
used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to, and including a highway if
there are buildings within 600 feet of the highway in use for business or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   CENTER LANE. Any clearly marked center lane. If the CENTER LANE is not
marked and no cars are parked on the roadway, then the CENTER LANE is equally
distanced between the curbs or traveled portion of the roadway. In the event a
vehicle or vehicles are parked on one side of the roadway only, then the CENTER
LANE is equally distanced from the side of the parked vehicle or vehicles
toward the street and curb on the opposite roadway. If vehicles be parked on
each side of the roadway, then the CENTER LANE is equally distanced from the
edges of the parked vehicles.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily
for the transportation of property.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, street, or roadway.
   CROSSWALK. The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street measured from the curbs; or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway. CROSSWALK also means any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   DOUBLE PARK. Parking or stopping a vehicle on the roadway side of another
vehicle already parked adjacent to the edge or curbing of the roadway.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. A person who drives or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseeable occurrence of temporary duration causing or
resulting in an abnormal increase in traffic volume, cessation, or stoppage of
traffic movement, or creation of conditions hazardous to normal traffic
movement, including fire, storm, accident, riot, or spontaneous assembly of
large numbers of pedestrians in such a manner as to impede the flow of traffic.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, and
ambulances.
   HIGHWAY. See STREET.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway
of two streets, which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets join at any
other angle may come in conflict; or
      (2)   Where a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street
shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event such intersecting
street also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of
two roadways of such streets shall be regarded as separate INTERSECTIONS.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMIT LINES. Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones, and non-traffic
areas and lines indicating the proper place for stopping where stops are
required.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY. See CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. A FREIGHT
CURB LOADING ZONE is a loading zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of freight; a passenger curb loading zone is a loading
zone for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
   MOTORCYCLE, MOTORSCOOTER, and MOTOR BICYCLE. Any motor vehicle having:
      (1)   A seat or saddle for the use of each rider;
      (2)   Not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but
excluding a tractor; and
      (3)   A combustion engine with a piston or rotor displacement of 150
cubic centimeters (150 cc) or greater.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. 
      (1)   (a)   Any vehicle which is self-propelled; or
         (b)   Any vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
      (2)   As used in this title, the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include:
         (a)   Implements of husbandry, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125;
         (b)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices as defined in 47
O.S. § 1-114A;
         (c)   Motorized wheelchairs, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-136.3; or
         (d)   Vehicles moved solely by human or animal power.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean
Central Standard Time, or Daylight Savings Time, as may be in current use in
the city.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning,
or guiding traffic.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in,
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, providing such loading and
unloading is in an authorized place.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Municipal Police Department, or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or to make arrests for
violation of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY. A way or place in private ownership or leading to
property in private ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and
those having express or implied permission from the owner.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars other than streetcars
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, diesel, electric, or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed, ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulders. In the event a street includes
two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to
any such roadway, separately, but not to all such roadways, collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SCHOOL ZONE. All streets or portions of streets immediately adjacent to a
school, or school ground, where same is adjacent and for a distance of 300 feet
in each direction.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or at lateral lines
of the roadway and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   STOP or STOPPING.
      (1)   When required, the complete cessation from movement.
      (2)   When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic
signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY. A street, or boulevard or highway, or portion
thereof at the entrances to which:
      (1)   Vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required
by law to come to a full stop before entering or crossing; and
      (2)   Stop signs are erected as provided in this title.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR SIGNALS. Any device legally authorized and used
for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter mile or
more.
   U-TURN. A turn by which a vehicle reverses its course of travel on the same
street.
   VEHICLE. 
      (1)   A vehicle is any device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      (2)   As used in this chapter, the term VEHICLE shall not include:
         (a)   Implements of husbandry, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125;
         (b)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in 47
O.S. § 1-114A; or
         (c)   Motorized wheelchairs, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-136.3.
(Prior Code, § 70.03)
Statutory reference:
    Definitions for state motor vehicle code, see 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 to 1-186
§ 70.04 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC CODE.
   The provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code, 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.,
and the Rules of the Road, 47 O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq., are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the
city limits as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Prior Code, § 70.04)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.15 DUTY TO ENFORCE.
   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or any
officers that are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws of this city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic
in this city. Officers of the Department shall make arrests for traffic
violations, investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the
Department by this title and any other traffic ordinances of this city.
(Prior Code, § 71.01)
Statutory reference:
   Police officers’ authority to regulate traffic, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 70.16 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY HAND OR VOICE.
   Officers of the Police Department or any officers designated by the Chief of
Police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in
conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances. Officers of the Fire
Department, when at the scene of a fire, or other emergency, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 71.02)
§ 70.17 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in
case of emergency where no officer is present.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
(Prior Code, § 71.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give by
motion or resolution, is empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than 90 days. The City Manager may have traffic-control devices tested
under actual conditions of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 71.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.20 PUSH CARTS, RIDING ANIMALS, OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES TO COMPLY
WITH CODE.
   Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this title which, by their very nature, can have no application.
(Prior Code, § 71.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-104
§ 70.21 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLERSKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon rollerskates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be subject to
all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon
any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of this
city.
(Prior Code, § 71.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, any state,
county, city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of
this title.
   (C)   This title shall not apply to the military forces of the United States
and organizations of the National Guard when performing any military duty.
(Prior Code, § 71.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal drivers to obey state rules of road, see 47 O.S. § 16-103
§ 70.23 PERSONS WORKING ON STREETS, EXCEPTIONS.B
   (A)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this title,
except those relating to reckless driving and driving while intoxicated, shall
not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles,
and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance, or
repair of public utilities.
   (B)   All street or highway and public utility operations shall be protected
by adequate warning signs, signals, devices, or flagpersons.
   (C)   The provisions of this title shall apply to any of the persons and
vehicles exempted by this section when traveling to and from such work.
(Prior Code, § 71.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION ZONES.
   (A)   City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the
streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing,
improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are
hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the City Clerk, to close
any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance, or
construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel,
contractor, or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper
control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street
has been closed to traffic.
   (B)   (1)   When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions
of division (A) above and traffic-control devices or barricades have been
erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under,
over, or around such traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to
enter the closed area.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to persons
entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or property.
Persons having their places of residence or places of business within the
closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own
risk.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or
utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel,
contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected,
traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public.
      (2)   Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals,
markings, flagpersons, or other traffic-control devices which are placed to
regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance
area.
(Prior Code, § 71.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from afire alarm,
may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions stated in this section.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may do any of the
following when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or
ordinance or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as life or property is not
endangered; or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions.
   (C)   The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making use of
audible and visual signals as required by law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 71.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Emergency vehicle driving rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-106
§ 70.26 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this
state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has
passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(Prior Code, § 71.12)
Statutory reference:
   Authorized emergency vehicles and their equipment, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-106,
11-405, and 12-218
§ 70.27 ACCIDENT, DUTY TO STOP.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or property shall
immediately stop his or her vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close
thereto as possible, return to and remain at the scene of the accident until he
or she has given his or her name, address, and the registration of his or her
vehicle and shall, upon request, exhibit his or her driver’s license to the
person injured or the driver or occupant of, or person attending any vehicle
collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident
reasonable assistance, including the carrying or making arrangement for the
carrying of such persons to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical and
surgical treatment if it is apparent that this treatment is necessary, or if
such is requested by the injured person. Each such stop shall be made without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent
that damage to one vehicle or to the property is in excess of an amount to be
set by the City Council from time to time shall, as soon as practicable, report
such accident to a police officer or to the Police Department. If a driver
makes out a written report of the accident in the office of the Police
Department as soon as practicable after the accident, which report is to be
forwarded to the State Department of Public Safety in accordance with state
law, the driver shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 71.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Accident reports, see 47 O.S. §§ 10-101 et seq.
§ 70.28 ISSUANCE OF CITATION TAGS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to supply police
officers with citation tags in sets, each set consisting of an original and at
least two duplicate copies, for the purpose of giving notice to persons
violating any provision of this title.
   (B)   Notice may be given by delivering the tags to the violator or by
affixing it to the vehicle involved in the violation.
   (C)   Each citation tag shall direct the violator to appear and to present
such tag at a designated place on or before a date and hour specified thereon.
Each tag shall bear the registration number of the vehicle.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a
police officer to arrest any violator and take him or her into custody.
   (E)   The City Manager may require that the police officers use citation
tags furnished by the Finance Department and that such tags be serially
numbered, and may regulate the use and handling of the citation tags.
(Prior Code, § 71.14)
§ 70.29 FAILURE TO OBEY CITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his or her
written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic
citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which citation was
originally issued.
(Prior Code, § 71.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.30 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS ATTACHED TO PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking
under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic
citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the Clerk
of the Municipal Court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed a letter, informing him or her of the violation
and warning him or her that, in the event such letter is disregarded for a
period of five days, a warrant of arrest may be issued.
   (B)   On any occasion where two or more such traffic citations have been
affixed on the same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been
disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued without sending the letter
provided in this section.
(Prior Code, § 71.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (A)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was,
at the time of the parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
   (B)   The presumption in division (A) above shall apply only when the
procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed.
(Prior Code, § 71.17)
§ 70.32 ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 71.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS, WARRANTS, AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or any
traffic law of this city shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the
citation with his or her immediate superior office, who shall cause the
original to be delivered to the Municipal Court.
   (B)   Upon the filing of the original citation in the Municipal Court, the
citation may be disposed of only by trial in the Court or by other official
action by a Judge of the Court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a
fine.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued by
the Municipal Court which are delivered to the Police Department for service,
and of the final disposition of the warrants.
   (D)   No member of the Police Department or other officer or public employee
shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or
the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint,
or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 71.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.34 COURT RECORDS; ABSTRACT TO BE SENT TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY.
   (A)   The Municipal Judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation
deposited with or presented to the court, and shall keep a record of every
official action by the court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in reference
thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction,
forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or
forfeiture.
   (B)   Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person
upon a charge of violating any provision of this title or other law regulating
the operation of vehicles on highways the Municipal Judge or Clerk of the Court
in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall prepare and
immediately forward to the State Department of Public Safety a certified
abstract of the court’s record of the case. An abstract need not be made of any
conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   (C)   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State
Department of Public Safety and shall include the name and address of the party
charged, the number of his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license, the
registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the
date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the
amount of the fine or forfeiture.
(Prior Code, § 71.20)
Statutory reference:
   Record of traffic convictions sent to state, see 47 O.S. §§ 6-204, 6-206
§ 70.35 INSURANCE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state and operating
the vehicle within the city’s boundaries shall carry in such vehicle at all
times a current owner’s security verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been used by the State Department of Public Safety
which shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by
any law enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form shall be
shown upon request to any person affected by the collision.
   (B)   The following shall not be required to carry an owner’s or operator’s
security verification form or an equivalent form from the Department during
operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for
vehicle registration purposes:
      (1)   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or
any agency or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol, or logo of the business,
corporation, or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
Compulsory Insurance Law according to records of the Department of Public
Safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy;
      (3)   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued
by the Interstate Commerce Commission, or the State Corporation Commission;
      (4)   Any licensed taxicab; and
      (5)   Any vehicle owned by a licensed motor vehicle dealer.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW. The law requiring liability insurance in
conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in 47
O.S. Article VI, Chapter 7, and 47 O.S. § 7-606.
      OPERATOR’S POLICY. An operator’s policy of liability insurance, which
shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him
or her by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by him or her of
any motor vehicle not owned by him or her, subject to the same limits of
liability required in an owner’s policy.
      OWNER’S POLICY. An owner’s policy of liability insurance which:
         (a)   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate
reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted;
         (b)   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other
person, except as provided in division (c) below, using an insured vehicle with
the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the
liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation, or use of such vehicle;
         (c)   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with
existing laws; and
         (d)   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in
accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204.
      SECURITY.
         (a)   A policy or bond meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-204;
         (b)   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits
required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable limits for a policy or bond; or
         (c)   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503,
having the equivalency of limits required under 47 O.S. § 7-204 as acceptable
limits for a policy or bond.
      SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM. A form, approved by the State Board for
property and casualty rates, verifying the existence of security required by
the Compulsory Insurance Law of the state.
   (D)   Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall,
while operating or using such vehicle within the city’s boundaries, carry
either an operator’s or an owner’s security verification form issued by a
carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon, or an
equivalent form issued by the Department of Public Safety, reflecting liability
coverage.
   (E)   (1)   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be
suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the Court. Any person producing
proof in court that a current security verification form or equivalent form
which has been issued by the Department reflecting this liability coverage for
such person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitle to
dismissal of such charge.
      (2)   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture, or deferral of sentence, the
Court Clerk shall forward an abstract to the State Department of Public Safety
within ten days reflecting the action taken by the Court.
(Prior Code, § 71.21) (Ord. 410, passed 1-3-1983) Penalty, see §
70.99
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 70.50 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF IMPOUNDMENT PROVISIONS.
   The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the
public peace, safety, and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall
be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention
and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations,
protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from
obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for
safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 78.01)
§ 70.51 PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by
the City Council, and to no other place.
(Prior Code, § 78.02)
§ 70.52 DURATION OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the
authority of this subchapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for
its release is received from an officer of the Traffic Violations Bureau or
other proper police officer.
   (B)   The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon
the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment
costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle.
   (C)   No order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be issued until all
fines and costs due the city because of traffic law or other law violations
involving the vehicle have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 78.03)
§ 70.53 POLICE GRANTED AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized within the limits set
forth in this subchapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order
of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures
required in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 78.04)
§ 70.54 DISABLED VEHICLES.
   A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and
constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
or
   (B)   If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to
such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the
vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard.
(Prior Code, § 78.05)
§ 70.55 VEHICLES ON BRIDGE.
   An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway or in any
tube or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or
hazard, may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 78.06)
§ 70.56 ARREST AND DETENTION OF DRIVER OF VEHICLE.
   Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under
arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which
leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle
may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 78.07)
§ 70.57 VEHICLE CONSTITUTES TRAFFIC HAZARD.
   A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley, or thoroughfare and so
parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 78.08)
§ 70.58 ILLEGAL TRESPASS BY VEHICLE.
   (A)   An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this code may be
impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as
provided in this section.
   (B)   (1)   If a violation of the provisions of this code occurs, the owner
or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person
parking the vehicle on the owner’s or legal occupant’s property, or if the
identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may
be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle.
      (2)   The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the
complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the
vehicle is parked or standing.
   (C)   Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant,
and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of this code
have been violated, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle to be
impounded from the property and placed in storage.
(Prior Code, § 78.09)
§ 70.59 VEHICLES PARKED OVERTIME.
   Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in
excess of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any
vehicle parked in violation of §
76.04, regarding more than 24 hours, shall be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 78.10)
§ 70.60 VEHICLES BLOCKING FIRE EXITS OR HYDRANTS.
   Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape
ladder, device, or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be
impounded.
(Prior Code, § 78.11)
§ 70.61 VEHICLES PARKED IN INTERSECTION.
   Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be
impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection, with the person in charge of
the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the
nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing.
(Prior Code, § 78.12)
§ 70.62 STOLEN VEHICLES; RECOVERY BY POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered
owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or
cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in
the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen
cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place to impoundment
and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of
the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the Police Department.
   (B)   If the registered owner is identified, located, and notified of the
recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his
or her own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one
hour from the time he or she is actually notified of its recovery, and if the
owner is unable or unwilling to effect the removal within the time specified,
the vehicle may be impounded.
(Prior Code, § 78.13)
§ 70.63 VEHICLES WITH OUTSTANDING TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   Any vehicle for which two or more citations have been issued, pursuant to
this code for violation of an ordinance, and have not been presented as
required, may be impounded if parked in violation of any provision of this
title.
(Prior Code, § 78.14)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Obedience to Traffic Code.
         (a)   It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act
forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this chapter.
         (b)   It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or
for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this title.
         (c)   It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to
permit any vehicle registered in his or her name to be driven or to stand or to
be parked in violation of any of the provisions of this title.
      (2)   Penalties. Every person violating any of the provisions of this
title containing the traffic laws of the city shall be guilty of an offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined or punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 70.99)
   (B)   Any person failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements
of §
70.27 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 71.13)
   (C)   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the Department upon request of any peace officer of the Department shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as
provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 71.21)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
71.01   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
71.02   Traffic-control devices; uniform requirements
   
71.03   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
71.04   When official traffic-control devices required for enforcement purposes
   
71.05   Traffic-control signal legend
   
71.06   Pedestrians; signal indicators; regulations
   
71.07   Flashing signals
   
71.08   Pedestrian-activated school crossing signals
   
71.09   Unauthorized traffic-control devices prohibited
   
71.10   Defacement of traffic-control devices
   
71.11   Play streets
   
71.12   Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
   
71.13   Traffic lanes
§ 71.01 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The City Council, by motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained
traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the
traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such
ordinances, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic-control
signs, signals, and devices as it may deem necessary to regulate traffic under
the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law or to guide or warn
traffic.
(Prior Code, § 75.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Local power to erect traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. §§ 15-102, 15-105,
15-106
   Traffic-control devices, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-201 et seq.
§ 71.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; UNIFORM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, approved by the State Department of
Public Safety.
   (B)   All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and relative
location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official
traffic-control devices.
(Prior Code, § 75.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Uniform sign manual, see 47 O.S. § 15-104
§ 71.03 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police
officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this title.
(Prior Code, § 75.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT
PURPOSES.
   (A)   No provision of this chapter for which official traffic-control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
   (B)   If a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices
are erected or in place.
(Prior Code, § 75.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   The display of signal lights, arrows, and words shall be deemed to have the
following meanings and requires the appropriate response on the part of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
   (A)   Green alone, “Go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through or turn right or left unless an official sign at such
place prohibits such turn, but any vehicle and any pedestrian lawfully within
the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal displays green
shall have the right-of-way over such vehicular traffic.
      (2)   Pedestrian traffic, facing a green signal, may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless a “Walk” signal
indicator is operating.
   (B)   Steady yellow or amber alone, “Caution.”
      (1)   The showing of such signal color following green shall constitute a
warning that the “Red” or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately
thereafter.
      (2)   Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the near side
crosswalk or at the limit line, if it is marked, unless the vehicle is so near
the limit line when the “caution” signal first flashes that a stop cannot be
made in safety, in which event vehicles may proceed cautiously through the
intersection and clear the same before the “red” signal flashes.
   (C)   Red alone, “Stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
crosswalk and shall remain standing until green or “go” is shown alone.
      (2)   Except where official signs are erected prohibiting such turns,
vehicles in the right traffic lane, after making a full stop as required, may
enter the intersection cautiously and make a right turn, but such vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians or other traffic in the
intersection and the turn shall be made so as not to interfere in any way with
traffic proceeding on a green signal indication on the cross street.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter or cross the roadway
when such movement interferes with traffic proceeding on a green signal
indication on the cross street, or when the movement cannot be made in safety.
No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or
“go” is shown alone unless authorized to do so, by a pedestrian “walk” signal.
   (D)   Steady red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal when in the proper traffic
lane may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated
by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (2)   If the movement indicated by the green arrow is a left turn, the
left turn shall be made only on the red with green arrow signal.
      (3)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the
green or “go” is shown alone unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian “walk”
signal.
   (E)   Green arrows alone. Whenever vehicular traffic movements are
controlled by green arrows alone and not displayed with any other signal
indication, vehicles facing such signals may make the movements indicated by
the green arrows and the movements shall be made only when the green arrows are
displayed.
(Prior Code, § 75.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-202
§ 71.06 PEDESTRIANS; SIGNAL INDICATORS; REGULATIONS.
   Special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “Walk,” “Wait,” or
“Don’t Walk” shall regulate pedestrian movement as follows.
   (A)   “Walk.” Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Wait” or “Don’t Walk.” No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the “Walk” signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone
while the “Wait” signal is showing.
(Prior Code, § 75.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrian control signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-203
§ 71.07 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in
traffic signs or signals, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows.
      (1)   Flashing red. When a red light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow. When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection,
or pass such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(Prior Code, § 75.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-204
§ 71.08 PEDESTRIAN-ACTIVATED SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS.
   Whenever a pedestrian-activated school crossing signal is provided, it
requires obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows.
   (A)   Flashing yellow. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or pass such signal only with caution. Pedestrians shall not
proceed in conflict with traffic, but may activate the signal control switch,
and shall wait until steady red alone is shown before entering the roadway or
intersection controlled by the signal.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby
warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter,
and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or
pass the signal when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited. No pedestrian shall
enter the roadway or intersection on which the signal controls vehicular
traffic until steady red alone is shown.
   (C)   Steady red. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and shall remain
standing until flashing yellow is shown alone. Pedestrians may proceed across
the road controlled by the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
   (D)   Steady red and steady yellow combined.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and that such
vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow is shown
alone.
      (2)   Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is
about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or
intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular
traffic; but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or her crossing
shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 75.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrian control signals, see 47 O.S. § 11-205
§ 71.09 UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal, or device bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information which are
of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (D)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device may be removed
without notice.
(Prior Code, § 75.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-206
§ 71.10 DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, destroy, deface, molest, interfere, tamper, injure, knock down, remove,
or have in his or her possession any traffic-control device or any railroad
sign or signal or an inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part
thereof.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons when
acting within the scope and duty of their employment:
      (1)   Any officer, agent, independent contractor, employee, servant, or
trustee of any governmental agency; or
      (2)   Any officer, agent independent contractor, employee, servant or
trustee of any contractor, public utility, or railroad company.
(Prior Code, § 75.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-207
§ 71.11 PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   Authority to establish. The City Manager, subject to any directions
which the Council may give, shall have authority to declare any street or part
thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
(Prior Code, § 75.11)
   (B)   Restriction on use. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating
any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle
upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having
business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such
driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or
portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 75.12)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.12 DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
   The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give, may:
   (A)   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in its opinion,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as it may deem necessary; and
   (B)   Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at
such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 75.13)
§ 71.13 TRAFFIC LANES.
   (A)   The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may
give, may be authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any
street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
   (B)   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 75.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Designation of traffic lanes, see 47 O.S. § 11-309
CHAPTER 72: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Section
   
72.01   Certain vehicles prohibited; vehicles injurious to streets
   
72.02   Obstructive and dangerous vehicles
   
72.03   Equipment
   
72.04   Mufflers, cut-outs
   
72.05   Width, height, length, and load
   
72.06   Inspection of vehicles
§ 72.01 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; VEHICLES INJURIOUS TO STREETS.
   No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a
street shall be driven or moved on any street.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 OBSTRUCTIVE AND DANGEROUS VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so
loaded, as to cause delay or be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
Chief of Police and in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every vehicle operated upon the streets of the city shall be equipped
as required by law.
   (B)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon a street of the city which is
not equipped as required by law.
   (C)   It is unlawful to fail to use such equipment in the manner required by
law, or to use it in a manner prohibited by law.
   (D)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle which has equipment prohibited by
law upon a street of the city.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   For state law relating to equipment, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-201 et seq.
§ 72.04 MUFFLERS, CUT-OUTS.
   (A)   No motor vehicles with an internal combustion engine shall be operated
within the city unless the exhaust from such engine is muffled by a suitable
and sufficient muffler in good working order.
   (B)   No muffler cut-out, by-pass, exhaust, or vacuum whistle shall be used
on any motor vehicle while operating within the city.
   (C)   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in any
manner which will amplify or increase the noise or sound emitted louder than
that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 WIDTH, HEIGHT, LENGTH, AND LOAD.
   No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width,
length, height, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law,
except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   For state law relating to size, weight and load, see 47 O.S. §§ 14-101 et
seq.
§ 72.06 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive or move on any road, street, or highway of this city
any motor vehicle, including motorcycles, trailers, semi-trailers, or pole
trailers, or any combination thereof, which are licensed by the State Tax
Commission and operated on the streets or highways, of this city, unless the
vehicle is bearing a valid official inspection sticker issued by an official
inspection station licensed by the Department of Public Safety. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to any house trailer, which requires a permit
to be moved upon the highways of this state.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle inspections, see 47 O.S. §§ 13-102, 13-103
CHAPTER 73: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
73.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals
   
73.02   Pedestrians’ right-of-way at crosswalks
   
73.03   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
   
73.04   Crossing at right angles
   
73.05   When pedestrians shall yield
   
73.06   Pedestrians walking along roadways
   
73.07   Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business, or donations
from vehicle occupants
   
73.08   Drivers to exercise due care
   
73.09   Crossing prohibited
   
73.10   Obedience of pedestrians to railroad signals
§ 73.01 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided for in
this code of ordinances, but at all other places, pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 70.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Pedestrian rights and duties, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-501 to 11-507
§ 73.02 PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping, if need be, to so yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk when:
         (a)   The pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling; or
         (b)   The pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite edge
of the roadway as to be in danger.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (A) are not applicable under
conditions where pedestrians are required to yield pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety or
walk or run into the path of the vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
   (C)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or any unmarked
crosswalk, or at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake to
pass such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians, when crossing the street at a crosswalk, shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 70.37) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 70.38) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 WHEN PEDESTRIANS SHALL YIELD.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked or unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   The provisions of this section are not applicable where pedestrian
crossings are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 70.39) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the
roadway, or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 70.40) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 PEDESTRIANS PROHIBITED FROM SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS, OR DONATIONS
FROM VEHICLE OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for purpose of soliciting a ride,
donations, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Stand in any street, roadway, or park and stop or attempt to stop
and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
contributions or the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about
to be parked on a street;
      (2)   Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle;
      (3)   Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular,
advertisement, handbill, or any political campaign literature, or any sample,
souvenir, or gift; or
      (4)   In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway,
attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar
purpose.
(Prior Code, § 70.41) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 70.42) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.09 CROSSING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections, at which traffic-control signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall not cross any divided highway having a median in the
center thereof, except in a crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 70.43) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.10 OBEDIENCE OF PEDESTRIANS TO RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 70.44) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: VEHICLE OPERATION
Section
Speed Regulations
   
74.01   Speed limits generally; exceptions
   
74.02   School zones
   
74.03   Reasonable speed in existing conditions
   
74.04   Minimum speed requirements; exception
   
74.05   Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits
Turning Movements
   
74.20   Turning markers or indicators
   
74.21   Designation of restricted turns
   
74.22   Obedience to no-turn signs
   
74.23   U-turns
   
74.24   Position and method of turning
   
74.25   Turning movements and required signals
   
74.26   Means of giving turn signals
   
74.27   Method of giving hand and arm signals
   
74.28   Turns into or from alleys
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 74.01 SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 25 mph upon any
street or highway within the city, except:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this code;
      (2)   When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or
      (3)   When a different speed limit is established in this code.
   (B)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase the
speed limits provided in this code, and when it does so, appropriate signs
shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or
higher speed limit.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority to set speed limits, see 47 O.S. §§ 15-102, 11-803
§ 74.02 SCHOOL ZONES.
   No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted between the
hours posted on any street adjacent to any school in a designated school zone
on days when school is in session, unless a different speed limit or time is
otherwise designated and posted.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 REASONABLE SPEED IN EXISTING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is
reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into
consideration among other things, the conditions of the vehicle, the traffic,
roadway surface or width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of
pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of views.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than will permit
him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Basic speed rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-801
§ 74.04 MINIMUM SPEED REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION.
   No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to
the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere
with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is
unavoidable.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.05 OBEDIENCE TO MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum
speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in
excess of the maximum, nor slower than the minimum, except as required by an
authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs.
(Prior Code, § 73.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 74.20 TURNING MARKERS OR INDICATORS.
   (A)   The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give
by motion or resolution, is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so
indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(Prior Code, § 70.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
    Authority to place markers or indicators, see 47 O.S. § 11-601
§ 74.21 DESIGNATION OF RESTRICTED TURNS.
   The City Council is hereby authorized to determine those street
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or U-
turns, and shall have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of
the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours. Where turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this
section, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be
removed when turns are permitted.
(Prior Code, § 70.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.22 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U-
turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of
any such sign.
(Prior Code, § 70.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.23 U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon any street in the city at the following locations:
      (1)   At intersections controlled by traffic-control devices or signals,
unless such turns are specifically authorized;
      (2)   Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the latter’s
direction; or
      (3)   At any other location where an official “no U-turn” has been placed
and is maintained.
   (B)   A U-turn may be made only when it can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic. No person shall make a U-turn except in the
following manner:
      (1)   By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the
right curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a
signal for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn
across the intersection;
      (2)   In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle;
      (3)   By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until
such turn is completed; and
      (4)   Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.24 POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows.
   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the execution of a
right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
the approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the street nearest the center thereof by passing to the right of the centerline
where it enters the intersection. After entering the intersection, the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
   (C)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle. After entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in such direction upon roadway being entered.
(Prior Code, § 70.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
    Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-601
§ 74.25 TURNING MOVEMENTS AND REQUIRED SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required in §
74.24, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn
a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn
any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter
provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, slow, or stop when
required, shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning or stopping.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
the signal.
(Prior Code, § 70.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
    Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-604
§ 74.26 MEANS OF GIVING TURN SIGNALS.
   (A)   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by
means of hand or arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps, or mechanical device of a
type approved by the State Department of Public Safety, except as provided in
division (B) below.
   (B)   A vehicle shall be equipped with, and the required signal given by,
signal lamps or devices when:
      (1)   The body or cab of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle projects 24
inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel;
      (2)   Under any condition where a hand and arm signal would not be
visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The rear limit of the body of a vehicle or the load of any vehicle
projects 14 feet or more beyond the center top of the steering post.
(Prior Code, § 70.21) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
    Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-605
§ 74.27 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward with palm to
the rear.
(Prior Code, § 70.22) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
    Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-606
§ 74.28 TURNS INTO OR FROM ALLEYS.
   (A)   No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of
an alley, except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall
cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any alley
except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic
survey conducted by the Traffic Engineer shows that such turn may be made
safely and official signs are erected authorizing such turns.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) above shall not apply to bus terminals used by
licensed and authorized bus lines.
(Prior Code, § 70.23) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
Section
   
75.01   Changing lanes
   
75.02   Driving on right side of roadway required; exceptions
   
75.03   When overtaking on the right is permitted
   
75.04   Overtaking a vehicle on the left
   
75.05   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
75.06   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
75.07   Following too closely
   
75.08   No passing zones
   
75.09   Following fire apparatus prohibited
   
75.10   Crossing fire hose
   
75.11   Funeral processions
   
75.12   Overtaking and passing in school zones
   
75.13   Overtaking and passing school bus
   
75.14   School bus requirements; lights; signs; painting
   
75.15   Driving of vehicles on sidewalk prohibited; exception
   
75.16   Limitations on backing vehicle
   
75.17   Clinging to vehicles prohibited
   
75.18   Entering and leaving controlled access highway
   
75.19   Valid driver’s license required
   
75.20   Unlawful to operate vehicle without state vehicle license
   
75.21   Permitting unauthorized person to drive prohibited
   
75.22   Reckless driving
   
75.23   Careless or negligent driving, stopping, or parking
   
75.24   Careful and prudent driving on public ways
   
75.25   Transporting alcohol
   
75.26   Attention to driving required
   
75.27   Speed contest prohibited
   
75.28   Permits required for parades and processions
   
75.29   Driving through safety zones
   
75.30   Starting parked vehicle
   
75.31   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
75.32   Obstructions to driver’s view or driving mechanism
   
75.33   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
75.34   Unlawful riding
   
75.35   Private service drives
   
75.36   Eluding police officer prohibited
   
75.37   Truck weight; driving and route restrictions
   
75.38   Loads on vehicles
   
75.39   Vehicle approaching or entering intersection
   
75.40   Vehicle turning left at intersection
   
75.41   Vehicle approaching a “yield right-of-way” sign
   
75.42   Vehicle entering through highway
   
75.43   Vehicles facing stop, slow, warning, or caution signal
   
75.44   Through streets
   
75.45   Intersections where stop or yield required
   
75.46   Stop or yield sign construction and placement
   
75.47   Vehicle entering stop intersection
   
75.48   Vehicle entering yield intersection
   
75.49   Vehicle entering highway from private road or roadway
   
75.50   Operation of vehicle on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
75.51   Vehicles entering traffic from parking
   
75.52   Emerging rom the alley, driveway, or building
   
75.53   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
75.54   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train
   
75.55   Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad grade crossings
   
75.56   Prohibiting the use of engine compression brakes in residential areas
   
75.57   Texting while driving
   
75.58   Texting while driving a commercial motor vehicle
 
   
75.99   Penalty
§ 75.01 CHANGING LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, in addition to all other rules consistent with this section,
a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane
and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained
that the movement can be made with safety and has signaled for a change of
course.
   (B)   Where streets or roadways do not have marked traffic lanes, vehicles
shall nevertheless keep in line or follow a straight course as nearly as
practical and shall not weave in and out or turn from side to side
unnecessarily. Vehicles shall move to the right or left only as necessary in
slowing or stopping adjacent to the curb, in passing slow moving vehicles or
making a proper approach for a turn, and this only after the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made safely and has signaled for a change
of course.
   (C)   Upon a roadway which has been divided into three lanes, a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving
in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
   (D)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway. Drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Prior Code, § 74.01) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.02 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven to
the right of the center of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; and
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (B)   All vehicles shall keep to the right roadway on all streets or
highways which are divided into two roadways.
   (C)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
(Prior Code, § 74.02) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-301
§ 75.03 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in
each direction; or
      (3)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 74.03) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-304
§ 75.04 OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the street or roadway until safely clear
of the overtaken vehicle.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 74.04)
   (B)   (1)   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center
of the street or roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit the completion of
the overtaking and passing without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
         (b)   In every instance, the overtaking vehicle must return to the
right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
      (2)   No vehicle, at any time, shall be driven to the left side of the
roadway under the following conditions:
         (a)   When approaching the crest of a grade, or upon a curve in the
street or highway where the driver’s view along the street or highway is
obstructed; or
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or
tunnel or when approaching within 50 feet of or traversing any intersection or
railroad grade crossing.
(Prior Code, § 74.05)
Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-303
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-305
§ 75.05 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right. Upon roadways having a width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Prior Code, § 74.06) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.06 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   The City Manager, subject to such directions as the Council may give
by ordinance or resolution, may designate any road, street, alley, or highway,
or any separate roadway under his or her jurisdiction for one-way traffic and
shall cause appropriate signs giving notice thereof to be erected.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever the City Manager designates any street or alley or part
thereof as a one-way street or alley, the City Manager shall have placed and
maintained signs giving notice thereof; and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place.
      (2)   Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
   (C)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts
of alleys so designated as one-way streets and alleys, vehicular traffic shall
move only in the direction indicated when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
   (D)   Upon roadways designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (E)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(Prior Code, § 74.07) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.07 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(Prior Code, § 74.08) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-310
§ 75.08 NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The State Department of Transportation, as regards state and federal
highways, and the City Manager as regards all other streets, are hereby
authorized to determine those portions of any highway where overtaking and
passing to the left would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate
signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones.
When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person, every driver shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone as
set forth in division (A) above, no driver shall at any time drive to the left
side of the roadway within the no passing zone or on the left side of any
pavement striping designed to mark the no passing zone throughout its length.
(Prior Code, § 74.09) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-307
§ 75.09 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 74.10) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1108
§ 75.10 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(Prior Code, § 74.11) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.11 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this
chapter.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
(Prior Code, § 74.12)
   (B)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(Prior Code, § 74.13)
   (C)   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of such identifying
insignia as may be determined and designated by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 74.14)
Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Local powers to regulate processions, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 75.12 OVERTAKING AND PASSING IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion
and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours
posted on all days when schools are in session.
   (B)   Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is
divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the right
half of the roadway has been divided into two or more lanes, or on one-way
streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being driven
in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane movement.
(Prior Code, § 74.15) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.13 OVERTAKING AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that
is stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red
loading signals are in operation, is to stop his or her vehicle before it
reaches the school bus, and not proceed until the loading signals are
deactivated and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is
reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such school children and
other occupants.
      (2)   The red loading visual signals shall be activated by the driver of
the school bus whenever, and only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the
street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with separate
roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a
different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus
is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and
where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
   (C)   Occupants of the school bus shall have the right-of-way when crossing
the roadway immediately upon leaving the school bus.
(Prior Code, § 74.16) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-705
§ 75.14 SCHOOL BUS REQUIREMENTS; LIGHTS; SIGNS; PAINTING.
   (A)   The provisions of this code shall be applicable only if the school bus
is painted yellow and bears upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible
sign containing the words “SCHOOL BUS” in letters not less than eight inches in
height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a
school bus.
   (B)   The school bus shall be equipped with four red alternately flashing
warning signal lights, two of which shall be located high on the front and two
high on the rear of the vehicle. The lights shall be a minimum of four inches
in diameter and shall be widely separated.
(Prior Code, § 74.17) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.15 DRIVING OF VEHICLES ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway.
(Prior Code, § 74.18) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.16 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such
movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with any
other traffic.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection.
(Prior Code, § 74.19) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1102
§ 75.17 CLINGING TO VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon
a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 74.20) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.18 ENTERING AND LEAVING CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(Prior Code, § 74.21) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.19 VALID DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the highways
without having in his or her possession at all times, when operating such motor
vehicle, an unrevoked or unsuspended operator’s or chauffeur’s license as
required by the laws of the state, unless such person is specifically exempted
from such laws by the provisions thereof.
      (2)   No person charged with violating this section shall be convicted if
he or she produces in court an operator’s or chauffeur’s license issued to him
or her and valid at the time of his or her arrest.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation
of any restriction that may be imposed in a restricted license issued to him or
her with respect to the type of, or special mechanical control devices required
on a motor vehicle or any other restriction applicable to the licensee as the
state may determine.
(Prior Code, § 74.22)
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle when his or her privilege to
do so is cancelled, suspended, revoked, or denied.
(Prior Code, § 74.23)
Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Drivers’ license, see 47 O.S. §§ 6-101 to 6-117
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 6-303
§ 75.20 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE VEHICLE WITHOUT STATE VEHICLE LICENSE.
   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city
without a state vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display
the state vehicle license as may be required by law.
(Prior Code, § 74.24) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle tags, see 47 O.S. §§ 1112 et seq.
§ 75.21 PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit any vehicle owned by him or
her or under his or her control to be driven upon any highway by any person who
is not authorized under the provisions of the laws of the state to operate such
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 74.25) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 6-305
§ 75.22 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any vehicle in a wanton manner without regard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
(Prior Code, § 74.26) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.23 CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING, STOPPING, OR PARKING.
   It is unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be
parked, or stop any vehicle in a careless or negligent manner, or in such a
manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property, or as to interfere with
the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 74.27) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.24 CAREFUL AND PRUDENT DRIVING ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in
a careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater
than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic,
surface and width of the public way, and any other conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 74.28) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.25 TRANSPORTING ALCOHOL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving
vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any nonintoxicating beverage
containing more than 0.05% alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2% alcohol by
weight except in the original container, which shall not have been opened and
from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed unless the
opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include
the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside
compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the
vehicle while it is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 74.29)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any vehicle
upon a public highway, street or alley within the city any alcoholic beverage
except in the original container, which shall not have been opened and the seal
upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork
shall not have been removed, unless the opened container be in the rear trunk
or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a
vehicle commonly known as a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside
compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any person in the vehicle
while it is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 74.30)
Penalty, see §
75.99
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see
Chapter 110
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-101
§ 75.26 ATTENTION TO DRIVING REQUIRED.
   The operator of every vehicle, while driving, shall devote his or her full
time and attention to such driving.
(Prior Code, § 74.31) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.27 SPEED CONTEST PROHIBITED.
   No person shall engage in, aid, or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or
exhibition of speed on any street or highway. No person shall, for the purpose
of facilitating or aiding or as an incident to any motor vehicle speed contest
upon any street or highway, in any manner obstruct or place any barricade or
obstruction upon any street or highway. When three or more persons assemble to
witness or participate in an unlawful speed contest, such assembly is unlawful
assembly, and any person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty
of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 74.32) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.28 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
   No funeral, procession, or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or
more vehicles except the military forces of the United States and the military
forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except
in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
(Prior Code, § 74.33) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Local powers to regulate processions, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 75.29 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONES.
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or
island.
(Prior Code, § 74.34) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.30 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Prior Code, § 74.35) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.31 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 74.36) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1105
§ 75.32 OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRIVER’S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 74.37) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.33 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 74.38) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.34 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   (A)   No person shall ride on any such vehicle upon any portion thereof not
designed or intended for the use of passengers.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended
for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 74.39) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.35 PRIVATE SERVICE DRIVES.
   No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or
private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or
merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 74.40) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.36 ELUDING POLICE OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   No person operating a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible
signal directing the operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop shall
willfully increase his or her speed or extinguish his or her lights or in any
other manner attempt to or actually elude such law enforcement officer. A
VISUAL OR AUDIBLE SIGNAL, for the purpose of this section, means a red light
and a siren from a law enforcement officer driving a motor vehicle with
insignia showing the same to be an official police, sheriff, or highway patrol
car.
(Prior Code, § 74.41) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.37 TRUCK WEIGHT; DRIVING AND ROUTE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager, subject to any direction which the Council may give
by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes through the city for the use of
trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds, and/or other vehicles which are
not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city.
      (1)   Appropriate and adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so
that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes.
      (2)   When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck
or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed, as provided above,
while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate
therefrom except in case of emergency.
      (3)   Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as
practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city.
   (B)   No loaded or partially loaded motor vehicle of one ton or more, and no
loaded or partially loaded truck tractor, and no loaded or partially loaded
semi-trailer, or combination of such vehicles, shall be driven upon any of the
streets or roads in the city limits of the city unless for the purpose of
making a specific pickup or delivery at a specific point in the city limits
which requires travel on streets, except as may be permitted by the City
Manager. The state laws on limitation of weights shall be applicable to the
streets, roads, and highways within the city limits.
   (C)   No truck of one ton or more, no truck tractor, or semi-trailer shall
be driven along any streets, roads or highways in the city except those set
forth specifically in division (A) above, except for the further purpose of
traveling to the residence of the driver or owner.
(Prior Code, § 74.42) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.38 LOADS ON VEHICLES.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, blowing, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other
substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the
roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other
loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have
the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the
load from the vehicle.
   (C)   This section shall apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry, or
agricultural products only except baled agricultural products, provided that
any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock
or poultry from escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 74.43) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle load limits, see 47 O.S. §§ 14-107, and 14-118
§ 75.39 VEHICLE APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   When two vehicles enter or approach an uncontrolled intersection from
different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on
the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right as otherwise
stated in this chapter; however, the driver of vehicle on a street which is not
a state or federal highway approaching an intersection with a state or federal
highway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered
the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard. The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) above is modified at
through highways as otherwise stated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 74.44) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Right-of-way at intersections, see 47 O.S. § 11-401
§ 75.40 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard. After so yielding and having given signal when and as
required by this code, the driver may make the left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 74.45) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-402
§ 75.41 VEHICLE APPROACHING A “YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY” SIGN.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a “yield right-of-way” sign shall slow
to a reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic and visibility,
yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles on the intersecting street or highway
which have entered the intersection or which are so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
(Prior Code, § 74.46) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.42 VEHICLE ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY.
   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this code at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway, or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
(Prior Code, § 74.47) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.43 VEHICLES FACING STOP, SLOW, WARNING, OR CAUTION SIGNAL.
   (A)   If two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning, or caution signs or
signals at an intersection and are approaching as to enter the intersection at
the same time, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   If each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right-of-way.
      (2)   If each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the
right shall have the right-of-way.
      (3)   If each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming
from the right shall have the right-of-way.
      (4)   If one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution,
the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way.
   (B)   In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection
shall have the right-of-way over one which has not entered the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 74.48) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Flashing signal rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-204
§ 75.44 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   The City Council may designate any street or part of a street a
through street.
   (B)   Whenever the City Council designates and describes a through street,
the City Manager shall have placed and maintained a stop sign, or yield sign if
deemed more appropriate, on every street intersecting a through street, or
intersecting that portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic-control signals.
   (C)   At the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection
of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs
shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be
determined by the City Manager, if deemed desirable.
(Prior Code, § 74.49) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Powers to designate through streets, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 75.45 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED.
   The City Council is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections upon other than through streets where particular hazards exist
and to determine whether:
   (A)   Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop
intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every
such place a stop is required; or
   (B)   Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different
street as provided in this code, in which event it shall cause to be erected a
yield sign at every place where yield is required.
(Prior Code, § 74.50) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.46 STOP OR YIELD SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND PLACEMENT.
   Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the
word “Stop” or “Yield” in letters not less than eight inches in height for a
stop sign and not less than seven inches in height for a yield sign. Every stop
or yield sign shall, at night, be rendered luminous by steady or flashing
internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign,
or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or
yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk,
then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 74.51) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of municipalities to install stop, yield signs, see 47 O.S. §§ 15-102
and 15-108
§ 75.47 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Except when directed by a police officer or traffic-control signal,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection, indicated by a stop
sign, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection.
   (B)   In the event there is no crosswalk, the driver shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line before entering the intersection.
   (C)   If there is no marked stop line, then the driver shall stop at the
point nearest the intersecting road where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on an intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
   (D)   A driver, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or road, or
which is approaching so close as to constitute immediate hazard; but the driver
having so yielded may then proceed, and the driver of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so
proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 74.52) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
    Local power to require stop at intersections, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 75.48 VEHICLE ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in observance
to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing condition or
shall stop if necessary and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
legally crossing the roadway on which he or she is driving and to any vehicle
in the intersection or approaching on another road so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard.
   (B)   The driver having so yielded may then proceed, and drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so
proceeding.
   (C)   A driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has or
causes a collision with a pedestrian at a crosswalk or a vehicle in the
intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required
herein.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not release the drivers of other
vehicles approaching the intersection at such a distance as not to constitute
immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for
safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection before entering the intersection; if there is no crosswalk,
the driver shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or if there is no stop
line, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(Prior Code, § 74.53) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-403
§ 75.49 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR ROADWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter, leave, or cross a highway from or
into a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway.
(Prior Code, § 74.54) Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Rules on entering highway, see 47 O.S. § 11-404
§ 75.50 OPERATION OF VEHICLE ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
responding to emergency calls, the driver of every vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in the position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   (B)   The authorized emergency vehicle while responding to emergency calls
shall be equipped with and have in operation at least one lighted lamp
exhibiting a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the driver shall give an
audible signal by siren or bell.
   (C)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons using the highway.
(Prior Code, § 74.55) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.51 VEHICLES ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM PARKING.
   Any vehicle attempting to re-enter traffic while parked at the curb shall
yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching from the
rear. The parked vehicle shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the
driver has given the appropriate signal which indicates his or her intention of
turning from the curb and into the line of traffic. The vehicle shall in no
event enter the line of traffic until the driver has ascertained that no hazard
exists.
(Prior Code, § 74.56) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.52 EMERGING FROM THE ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and,
upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 74.57) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.53 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked cross walk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or cross walk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 74.58) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.54 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from
the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he or she can do
so safely.
      (2)   The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagperson gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
         (c)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
         (d)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 74.59) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.55 CERTAIN VEHICLES TO STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of
any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying explosive
substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing
at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50
feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and
while so stopped, shall listen and look in both directions along such track for
any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he or she can do so
safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe
to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the
vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing
such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or
tracks.
   (B)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 74.60) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.56 PROHIBITING THE USE OF ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   The operator of any motor vehicle equipped with an engine compression
brake (Jake brake), which produces any noise in addition to the normal
operating engine noise is prohibited from using the compression brake within
the residential areas of the city as delineated with posted signs. This
provision is not intended to prohibit the operation or movement of vehicles
equipped with engine brakes or “Jake brakes” in posted areas, but rather
prohibit the use of such equipment in posted areas.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a truck or truck-tractor to
activate or use the unit’s engine brake within the posted areas inside the city
limits except in an emergency situation.
   (C)   The term EMERGENCY SITUATION, for the purposes of this section, shall
mean one in which there is imminent danger of collision with property, persons,
or animals.
   (D)   Emergency vehicles will be exempt from this section.
(Prior Code, § 74.61) (Ord. 2013-536, passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.57 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any
street or highway within the city while using a handheld electronic
communication device to manually compose, send, or read an electronic text
message while the motor vehicle is in motion.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply if the person is
using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent
emergency situation:
      (1)   An emergency response operator;
      (2)   A hospital, physician’s office, or health clinic;
      (3)   A provider of ambulance services;
      (4)   A provider of firefighting services; or
      (5)   A law enforcement agency.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CELLULAR TELEPHONE. An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth
reserved for cellular telephones.
      COMPOSE, SEND, or READ. The manual entry, sending, or retrieval of a text
message to communicate with any person or device.
      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. An electronic device that permits the
user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than
through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a
device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or
a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a
motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send, or
read a text message without the use of either hand, except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate a feature or function.
      TEXT MESSAGE. A text-based message, instant message, electronic message,
photo, video, or electronic mail.
(Prior Code, § 74.62) (Ord. 2015-549, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.58 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING A COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial motor
vehicle or for a public transit driver to operate a motor vehicle on any street
or highway within the city while:
      (1)   Using a cellular telephone or electronic communication device to
write, send, or read a text- based communication; or
      (2)   Using a handheld mobile telephone while operating a commercial
motor vehicle.
   (B)   For the purposes of division (A), using a handheld mobile telephone is
permissible by drivers of a commercial motor vehicle when necessary to
communicate with law enforcement officials or other emergency services.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CELLULAR TELEPHONE. An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth
reserved for cellular telephones.
      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE. An electronic device that permits the
user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than
through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a
voice-activated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a
motor vehicle.
      OPERATE. Operating on a street or highway, including while temporarily
stationary because of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary
delays. OPERATING does not include when the driver of a commercial motor
vehicle has moved the vehicle to the side of or off a street or highway and has
halted in a location where the vehicle can safely remain stationary.
      PUBLIC TRANSIT DRIVER.
         (a)   Any operator of a public transit vehicle owned and operated by
the state, any public trust authority, county, municipality, town, or city
within this state;
         (b)   Any operator of a school bus or multi-passenger motor vehicle
owned and approved to operate by the State Department of Education or any
school district within this state; or
         (c)   Any operator, conductor, or driver of a locomotive engine,
railway car, or train of cars.
      WRITE, SEND, or READ A TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION. Manually entering
alphanumeric text into, sending text, or reading text from an electronic
device, including, but not limited to, short message service (SMS), e-mailing,
instant messaging (IM), a command or request to access a world wide web page,
or engaging in any other form of electronic text retrieval or entry, for
present or future communication; also known as TEXTING. As used in this
section, TEXTING does not include:
         (a)   Using voice commands to select or enter a telephone number, an
extension number, or voicemail retrieval codes and commands into an electronic
device for the purpose of initiating or receiving a phone call;
         (b)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system; or
         (c)   Using a device capable of performing multiple functions for a
purpose that is not otherwise prohibited in this section, including, but not
limited to, fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smart phones,
citizens band radios, and music players.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to railroads and railroad operating
employees regulated by the Federal Railroad Administration.
(Prior Code, § 74.63) (Ord. 2015-548, passed 12-1-2015) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating §
75.19 shall be punished by a fine as provided in §
10.99. Each act of driving on the streets or highways as prohibited by §
75.19 shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 74.23)
   (C)   Any person guilty of reckless driving as per §
75.22, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount to be set by the
City Council from time to time, including costs.
(Prior Code, § 74.26)
   (D)   Any person, or persons, violating or failing to comply with any
provision of § 74.56 shall be fined in an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time, upon conviction, plus court costs and fees. Persons who
violate § 74.56 subsequent to a first conviction shall be fined, upon
conviction, $175, plus court costs and fees.
(Prior Code, § 74.99)
   (E)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
75.57(A) shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in an amount to be set
by the City Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 74.62)
   (F)   Any person who violates §
75.58(A) shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of $200.
(Prior Code, § 74.63)
(Ord. 2013-536, passed 9-3-2013; Ord. 2015-548, passed 12-1-2015; Ord. 2015-
549, passed 12-1-2015)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING AND LOADING
Section
Stopping, Standing, and Parking Generally
   
76.01   Illegal parking declared public nuisance
   
76.02   Application of standing or parking regulations
   
76.03   Parking time limits may be established; signs
   
76.04   Parking more than 24 hours
   
76.05   Brakes; motor not to be left running
   
76.06   Angle-parking
   
76.07   Parking in spaces marked off
   
76.08   Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
   
76.09   Hazardous or congested places; stopping, standing, parking
   
76.10   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
   
76.11   Blocking of intersection or crosswalk prohibited
   
76.12   Standing or parking on one-way roadway
   
76.13   Standing or parking on left side of one-way streets
   
76.14   Parking adjacent to schools
   
76.15   Parking prohibited at intersections
   
76.16   Parking in alleys, blocking driveways
   
76.17   Entry on private property
   
76.18   Parking on streets, alleys, and rights-of-way
   
76.19   Double parking
   
76.20   Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials
   
76.21   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
76.22   Method of parking or standing close to curb
   
76.23   Negligent parking
   
76.24   Right-of-way to parallel parking space
   
76.25   Physically disabled parking regulations
Loading Provisions
   
76.40   Definitions
   
76.41   Curb loading zones, designation
   
76.42   Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose
   
76.43   Stopping, standing, or parking in passenger curb loading zone
   
76.44   Stopping, standing, or parking in commercial curb loading zone
   
76.45   Designation of public carrier stops and stands
   
76.46   Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted
   
76.47   Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxis
 
   
76.99   Penalty
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING GENERALLY
§ 76.01 ILLEGAL PARKING DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter
governing, limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any
street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for
such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or
operator of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 76.01) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.02 APPLICATION OF STANDING OR PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable when it is necessary
for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.
(Prior Code, § 76.02)
§ 76.03 PARKING TIME LIMITS MAY BE ESTABLISHED; SIGNS.
   The City Manager, subject to such direction as the Council may give by
motion or resolution, may establish parking time limits or prohibit parking on
designated streets or parts of streets and have appropriate signs placed on the
streets. When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle in violation of the sign. No such time limits shall be effective unless
a sign is erected and in place at the time of the alleged violation.
(Prior Code, § 76.03) Penalty, see §
76.99
Statutory reference:
   Local powers to regulate parking, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 76.04 PARKING MORE THAN 24 HOURS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time
longer than 24 hours.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall park a vehicle on any public parking lot owned
or controlled by the city for a period of time longer than 72 hours; however,
the City Manager may under such rules, regulations, or directions as the City
Council may establish, grant special permission for a person to park a vehicle
on a public parking lot owned or controlled by the city for a period of time in
excess of 72 hours.
      (2)   This section shall not affect parking limits established for
shorter periods.
(Prior Code, § 76.04) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.05 BRAKES; MOTOR NOT TO BE LEFT RUNNING.
   Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor
vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked.
(Prior Code, § 76.05) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.06 ANGLE-PARKING.
   (A)   The City Manager, subject to such direction as the City Council may
give by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of
streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have such streets marked or
signed.
(Prior Code, § 76.06)
   (B)   On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(Prior Code, § 76.07)
Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.07 PARKING IN SPACES MARKED OFF.
   In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus
marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space.
(Prior Code, § 76.08) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.08 PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the
backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit.
Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein. The City Manager may revoke such permits
at any time.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the
special terms or conditions of any such permit.
(Prior Code, § 76.09) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.09 HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES; STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and regulate by
proper signs the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping,
standing, or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic.
   (B)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as
authorized in division (A) above, no person shall violate such signs.
(Prior Code, § 76.10) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.10 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except in emergencies
or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of
the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, sidewalk area, or between the sidewalk and the
street;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except in a parking space
officially marked;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length has been indicated by signs or markings;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and
on the side of street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance when properly signposted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; or
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance away from a curb.
(Prior Code, § 76.11) Penalty, see §
76.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1003
§ 76.11 BLOCKING OF INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK PROHIBITED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 76.12) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.12 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAY.
   (A)   If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking.
   (B)   The City Council may determine when standing or parking may be
permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect
signs giving notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 76.13) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.13 STANDING OR PARKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The City Manager may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any
one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles.
   (B)   When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle
in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, § 76.14) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.14 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   (A)   The City Manager may have signs erected indicating no parking upon
either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs.
(Prior Code, § 76.15) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.15 PARKING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be
prohibited 15 feet in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 76.16) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.16 PARKING IN ALLEYS, BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within a street or
alley in such position as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting
property.
(Prior Code, § 76.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.17 ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property
owned or legally occupied by another without the owner’s or occupant’s consent
except where such private property is provided as public parking and the
general use of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings.
   (B)   Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by
another without the owner’s or occupant’ s consent, except on unrestricted
public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the
premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to show that
permission for such entry was given.
(Prior Code, § 76.18) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.18 PARKING ON STREETS, ALLEYS, AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any of the
following on any street, alley, or right-of-way in the city, except as provided
in division (B) below:
      (1)   Truck;
      (2)   Bus;
      (3)   Tractor;
      (4)   Trailer;
      (5)   Truck-trailer, semi-trailer, or combination of any of the above;
      (6)   Boat;
      (7)   Equipment of any nature (recreational or work-related); or
      (8)   Any other motor vehicle.
   (B)   The items listed in division (A) above may be parked entirely on
private property so long as they do not obstruct the usage of the streets by
other vehicles and pedestrians.
   (C)   It shall be permissible for automobiles, pick-ups, and other motor
vehicles which do not exceed a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of one ton, to park
on any street in the city for a continuous period of not longer than 72 hours
so long as they do not obstruct the usage of the streets by other vehicles and
pedestrians.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle which is not in running
condition on any street, alley, or right-of-way in the city.
      (2)   Such vehicles may be parked entirely on private property, provided
that they are properly secured and are hidden from public view.
(Prior Code, § 76.19) (Ord. 99-455, passed 9-21-1999) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.19 DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle under the
following conditions:
      (1)   Within 50 feet of an intersection except alley intersections, or
within ten feet of an alley intersection;
      (2)   Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the
street;
      (3)   When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or
interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic;
      (4)   When parking space adjacent to the curb is available;
      (5)   When directed by a police officer to move on; or
      (6)   In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two feet
of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb.
   (B)   (1)   A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as
authorized in this section.
      (2)   There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is double
parked or double stopped.
   (C)   A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually
engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject,
however, to all the general conditions herein above set out.
   (D)   (1)   A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while
actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise,
subject, however, to all the general conditions herein above set out.
      (2)   No such vehicle shall be double parked longer than ten minutes.
(Prior Code, § 76.20) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.20 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR TRUCKS TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   It is unlawful to park, store, or otherwise let stand a truck or other
vehicle which is used for the purpose of transporting or delivering flammable
and combustible liquids as defined by the fire prevention code of the American
Insurance Association and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the
transportation and delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the
city, except as may be permitted in applicable regulations of the city and
state; however, the trucks and vehicles restricted in this section may be
temporarily parked at locations otherwise zoned for the purpose of loading and
unloading flammable and combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gases for a
period not to exceed one and one-half hours during any 24-hour period.
(Prior Code, § 76.21) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.21 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for
sale or selling merchandise or other things; or
   (C)   Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 76.22) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.22 METHOD OF PARKING OR STANDING CLOSE TO CURB.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs, shall be so stopped or
parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18
inches of the right-hand curb.
   (B)   Any vehicle stopped or parked upon the left-hand side of a one-way
street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or stopped with the left-
hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the left-hand curb.
(Prior Code, § 76.23) Penalty, see §
76.99
Statutory reference:
   Parking rules, see 47 O.S. § 11-1004
§ 76.23 NEGLIGENT PARKING.
   No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop, or leave unattended any
vehicle as follows:
   (A)   In a careless or negligent manner;
   (B)   In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or
   (C)   In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or
use of the streets.
(Prior Code, § 76.24) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PARALLEL PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space
where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another
vehicle shall stop his or her vehicle to the rear of the parking space until
the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He or she then
shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other
vehicle attempting to park therein.
   (B)   The first of two or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an
unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to
occupy shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space.
(Prior Code, § 76.25) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.25 PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle
in any parking space, van-accessible parking space, wheelchair ramp area,
wheelchair unloading area, or any portion thereof that is designated and posted
as a reserved area for the parking of a motor vehicle operated by or
transporting a physically disabled person unless such person has applied for
and been issued a detachable insignia indicating physical disability under the
provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112, and such insignia is displayed as provided in
47 O.S. § 15-112 or rules adopted pursuant thereto, or has applied for and been
issued a physically disabled special license plate pursuant to the provisions
of 47 O.S. §§ 1135.1 et seq., and such license plate is displayed pursuant to
the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 1101 et seq., the State Vehicle License and
Registration Act.
      (1)   It shall also be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor
vehicle in any side-striped area adjacent to a van-accessible physically
disabled parking space, physically disabled parking space, wheelchair ramp
area, or wheelchair unloading area.
      (2)   Vehicles unlawfully parked in side-striped areas adjacent to a van-
accessible physically disabled parking space, physically disabled parking area,
wheelchair ramp area, or wheelchair unloading area, whether with or without a
physically disabled placard or plate, shall be subject to citation being issued
for violation of this section and/or immediate tow and storage at the expense
of the vehicle owner.
   (B)   In the case of unattended vehicles, notice of violations of this
section shall be sent by first class mail to each person alleged to be liable
as an owner for a violation.
      (1)   The notice shall reference the law which was allegedly violated,
and shall contain the name and address of the person alleged to be liable as an
owner for violation of a physically disabled parking law or ordinance, the
license tag number of the vehicle involved in such violation, the location
where such violation took place, the date and time of such violation, and the
identification number of the officer who recorded the violation.
      (2)   It shall also contain information advising the person charged of
the manner and time in which he or she may contest the violation alleged in the
notice and shall contain a warning to advise the persons charged that failure
to contest in the manner and time provided shall be deemed an admission of
liability and that a default judgment may be entered thereon. A manual or
automatic record of mailing prepared in the ordinary course of business shall
be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.
(Prior Code, § 76.26) (Ord. 2005-489, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
76.99
LOADING PROVISIONS
§ 76.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner
or his or her business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used
during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or
freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag; and
      (2)   A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during
normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight,
and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear
of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically
numbered decal, issued vehicle.
   FREIGHT LOADING ZONES. All curb loading zones authorized and regularly used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade,
shipment, or re-sale.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONES. All loading zones authorized and used regularly and
exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops,
taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 76.40)
§ 76.41 CURB LOADING ZONES, DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The City Manager, subject to any directions which the Council may give
by ordinance or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and freight
curb loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs
indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this
section are applicable.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected
in accordance with this section.
   (C)   If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs
shall not be placed until the applicant pays to the city an amount of money
estimated by the City Council to be adequate to reimburse the city for all
costs of establishing and signing the same.
(Prior Code, § 76.41) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.42 LOADING ZONES TO BE USED ONLY FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSE.
   No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone
shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be
used as a passenger loading zone except as may be specifically provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 76.42) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.43 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING IN PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading
zone for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
three minutes.
(Prior Code, § 76.43) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.44 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING IN COMMERCIAL CURB LOADING ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb
loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop
for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. Vehicles using any
commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing requirements and
regulations provided by this subchapter.
   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 76.44) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.45 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.
   The City Manager may establish loading zones for common carriers, including,
but not limited to, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other
passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places
and in such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by
appropriate signs.
(Prior Code, § 76.45)
§ 76.46 USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter the zone.
(Prior Code, § 76.46) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.47 STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXIS.
   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone designated as
provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to
load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the
bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement
of other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided
herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers.
(Prior Code, § 76.47) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
76.25 shall be fined not less than $100, and not more than $200, and shall pay
all court costs; provided, however, any person cited for a first offense of a
violation of this section who has displayed a placard which has expired
pursuant to 47 O.S. § 15-112(D)(4) or (D)(5) shall be entitled to dismissal of
such charge and shall not be required to pay the fine or court costs if the
person presents to the Court within 30 days of the issuance of the citation a
notice from the State Department of Public Safety that the person has obtained
a valid placard pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112(D).
      (1)   In addition thereto, any person convicted under §
76.25 shall pay any and all reasonable charges incurred by the landowner or
other person or entities in having any motor vehicle unlawfully parked
hereunder removed form the property and stored.
      (2)   Upon conviction, the Court shall confiscate any placard which is
not valid or used fraudulently, report the conviction, and send the placard to
the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 76.26) (Ord. 2005-489, passed 11-15-2005)
CHAPTER 77: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
77.01   Application of bicycle regulations
   
77.02   Application of traffic laws to bicycles
   
77.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
77.04   Riding on bicycles
   
77.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
77.06   Speed of bicycle
   
77.07   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
77.08   Carrying articles
   
77.09   Parking
   
77.10   Riding on sidewalks
   
77.11   Lamps and equipment on bicycles
Motorcycles and Motorscooters
   
77.25   Operator to ride on permanent seat only
   
77.26   Carrying passengers
   
77.27   Headgear for operators and riders
   
77.28   Windshield; goggles or face shield for operator
   
77.29   Maximum height for handlebars
   
77.30   Rearview mirrors
   
77.31   Brakes
   
77.32   Lights
   
77.33   Speedometer
   
77.34   Fenders
   
77.35   Riding on sidewalks prohibited
   
77.36   Rider not to hold to other moving vehicle
   
77.37   Speed limit
   
77.38   Operating motorized scooters
Golf Carts and Utility Vehicles
   
77.50   Definitions
   
77.51   Policy statement
   
77.52   Rules and regulations
   
77.53   Permits
   
77.54   Other provisions
 
   
77.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 77.01 APPLICATION OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated
upon any street or upon any public way, or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 77.01)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle rules generally, see 47 O.S. §§ 11-1201 to 11-1208
   Local powers to regulate, see 47 O.S. § 15-102
§ 77.02 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS TO BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of this state and the traffic provisions of this code applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature are
inapplicable to such persons.
(Prior Code, § 77.02)
§ 77.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions
of such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any
such turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to the pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 77.03) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.04 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Prior Code, § 77.04) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.
   (C)   If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 77.05) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.06 SPEED OF BICYCLE.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 77.06) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or
driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk
or sidewalk area.
   (B)   Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways.
(Prior Code, § 77.07) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.08 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 77.08) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.09 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 77.09) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.10 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk within a
business district.
   (B)   The City Council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have
erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles or
skateboards thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person
shall disobey the same.
   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk,
such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 77.10) (Ord. 2000-461, passed 6-6-2000) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.11 LAMPS AND EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   Bicycles in use at night-time shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
      (2)   A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet.
   (C)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any
siren or whistle.
   (D)   Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator
to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 77.11) Penalty, see §
77.99
MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS
§ 77.25 OPERATOR TO RIDE ON PERMANENT SEAT ONLY.
   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
(Prior Code, § 77.25) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1103
§ 77.26 CARRYING PASSENGERS.
   (A)   No driver or operator of a motorcycle shall carry any other person on,
upon, or within such vehicle on any street or highway in the city; provided,
however, that if any motorcycle with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or greater
has either a double seating device with double footrests, or a sidecar
attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for
each person riding therein, so that such person shall be seated entirely within
the body of such sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has
attained the age of 16 years or older to carry a passenger.
   (B)   A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his or her employee is
excepted from the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 77.26) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1103
§ 77.27 HEADGEAR FOR OPERATORS AND RIDERS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall operate or ride upon any
motorcycle, unless such person is equipped with and wearing on his or her head
a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by the operators of
such vehicles.
   (B)   All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding, and chin straps,
and shall be of such type as not to distort the view of the wearer.
(Prior Code, § 77.27) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-609
§ 77.28 WINDSHIELD; GOGGLES OR FACE SHIELD FOR OPERATOR.
   All motorcycles shall be equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality,
size, and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects, except that,
in lieu of such windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or a face shield of
material and design to protect him or her from foreign objects.
(Prior Code, § 77.28) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-609
§ 77.29 MAXIMUM HEIGHT FOR HANDLEBARS.
   Handlebars shall not be higher than eye level of the operator.
(Prior Code, § 77.29) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-609
§ 77.30 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   All motorcycles shall be equipped with two mirrors, containing a reflection
surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of
the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the
roadway for a distance of 200 feet to the rear of his or her vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 77.30) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-609
§ 77.31 BRAKES.
   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of same to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of
applying the brakes, one means to be effective to apply the brakes to the front
wheel and one means to be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheel.
(Prior Code, § 77.31) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-608
§ 77.32 LIGHTS.
   All motorcycles shall carry at least one lighted head lamp capable of
showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which the
same are proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear. Such
lights shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during the period
from one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise and at any
other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at
a distance of at least 500 feet ahead.
(Prior Code, § 77.32) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. §§ 12-601 through 12-606
§ 77.33 SPEEDOMETER.
   All motorcycles shall be equipped with a properly operating speedometer
capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 77.33) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-609
§ 77.34 FENDERS.
   All motorcycles shall be equipped with a fender over each wheel. All fenders
shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer.
(Prior Code, § 77.34) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 12-609
§ 77.35 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   No motorcycle shall be ridden upon any sidewalk within the city.
(Prior Code, § 77.35) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.36 RIDER NOT TO HOLD TO OTHER MOVING VEHICLE.
   No rider of a motorcycle shall hold to any other moving vehicle for the
purpose of being propelled.
(Prior Code, § 77.36) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1103
§ 77.37 SPEED LIMIT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motorcycle at a speed greater than the
speed limit legally posted.
   (B)   In no event nor at any time may an operator under the age of 16 years
operate a motorcycle at a speed greater than 35 mph.
(Prior Code, § 77.37) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-805
§ 77.38 OPERATING MOTORIZED SCOOTERS.
   (A)   Every person operating a motorized scooter for which an operator’s
license is not required, on any road in the city limits, shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle regulated under 47 O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq., except those
provisions which by their nature can have no application and except as to
special regulations in this section.
   (B)   The operation of such a motorized scooter shall be prohibited on any
road in the city limits where the speed limit is in excess of 25 mph.
   (C)   The operation of such a motorized scooter shall be permitted only
during daylight hours.
(Prior Code, § 77.38) (Ord. 2004-481, passed 1-6-2004) Penalty, see §
77.99
GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY VEHICLES
§ 77.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the city, except
for state highways.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license issued to operate a motor vehicle issued
by the state or any other state.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart and
utility vehicle in an amount not less than required by the state law for motor
vehicles operated on public roadways and highways in the state.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
   OPERATOR. Only persons 16 years of age or older and holding a valid driver’s
license may operate a golf cart and utility vehicle on the streets of the city.
   UTILITY VEHICLE. A self-propelled, electronically powered fourth-wheeled
motor vehicle (or a self-propelled, gasoline powered four-wheeled motor vehicle
with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) which is capable of
attaining in one mile a speed of more than 20 mph, but not more than 25 mph.
(Prior Code, § 79.01) (Ord. 2012-530, passed 2-21-2012)
§ 77.51 POLICY STATEMENT.
   This subchapter is adopted in the interest of public safety. Golf carts and
utility vehicles are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets
and roads, hereinafter “street(s),” and the city in no way advocates or
endorses their operation on streets. The city, by regulating such operation is
merely addressing safety issues. This subchapter is not to be relied upon as
determination that operation on streets is safe or advisable even if done in
accordance with this chapter. All persons operating golf carts and neighborhood
vehicles must be observant of and attentive to the safety of themselves and
others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians. All persons who operate or ride golf carts and utility vehicles on
streets inside the city do so at their own risk and peril. The city has no
liability under any theory of liability for permitting golf carts to be
operated on city streets.
(Prior Code, § 79.02) (Ord. 2012-530, passed 2-21-2012)
§ 77.52 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Golf carts and utility vehicles may only be operated on streets within
the city in accordance with the following rules and regulations.
      (1)   Any person who operates a golf cart and utility vehicle in the city
takes full responsibility for all liability associated with operating the golf
cart or utility vehicle.
      (2)   Any person who operates a golf cart or utility vehicle must be at
least 16 years of age and possess a valid driver’s license to operate a motor
vehicle issued by the state or any other state.
      (3)   Any person who operates a golf cart or utility vehicle must possess
proof of liability insurance, meeting state statutes requirements.
      (4)   Golf carts and utility vehicles may be driven on streets only from
sunrise to sunset.
      (5)   Golf carts or utility vehicles may not be operated when visibility
is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions or at any time when
there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway
at a distance of 500 feet.
      (6)   Golf carts or utility vehicles may not be operated on sidewalks or
city parks other than parking areas.
      (7)   Golf carts or utility vehicles may be operated on city streets
which have a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less, but golf carts and utility
vehicles may never exceed 20 mph.
      (8)   The operator of the golf carts and utility vehicles shall comply
with all traffic rules and regulations adopted by the state and the city which
governs the operation of motor vehicles.
      (9)   Golf carts or utility vehicles may not be operated on the following
streets. These streets may only be crossed at a proper intersection:
         (a)   Seventh Street (State Highway 5); and
         (b)   Missouri Street (State Highway 5 and 53).
   (B)   Golf carts and utility vehicles must be equipped as follows:
      (1)   Horn;
      (2)   Brakes and brake lights;
      (3)   Turn signals;
      (4)   A steering wheel apparatus;
      (5)   Seat belt/belts;
      (6)   Tires;
      (7)   Full windshield;
      (8)   Full roof;
      (9)   Rearview mirror;
      (10)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front which must illuminate when in operation or a roof-mounted
white low density strobe light;
      (11)   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet
from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation;
      (12)   The permit number, at least three inches high, shall be affixed to
the right upper corner of the front windshield of the vehicle; and
      (13)   Current state vehicle license plate.
   (C)   Any person who operates a golf cart utility vehicle on the streets in
the city must adhere to all applicable state laws concerning the possession and
use of alcoholic beverages, and all other illegal drugs, as well as all other
state traffic laws.
   (D)   Golf cart or utility vehicle drivers must yield the right-of-way to
overtaking vehicles at all times.
   (E)   The maximum occupancy of golf carts or utility vehicles traveling on
city streets will be one person per bucket seat or two people per bench seat.
   (F)   Children must be properly seated, with seatbelts for children under
six years of age, while the golf cart or utility vehicle is in motion, and may
not be transported in a negligent manner.
   (G)   Golf carts or utility vehicles are only allowed to park in physically
disabled parking spaces if the driver or at least one passenger has a valid
physically disabled parking sticker.
   (H)   No unsafe modifications may be made to the vehicle’s suspension or no
speed modifications permitted to engine or motor.
(Prior Code, § 79.03) (Ord. 2012-530, passed 2-21-2012) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.53 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart or utility vehicle
without obtaining a permit from the city as provided in this section.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
city and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name of liability insurance carrier;
      (3)   The serial number, make, model, and description of golf cart or
utility vehicle;
      (4)   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit;
      (5)   A permit application fee in an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time; and
      (6)   Such other information as the city may require.
   (C)   Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and may be renewed
annually, for the period January 1 to December 31.
   (D)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The vehicle must be inspected by the designated representative to
ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on city streets and is in compliance
with this chapter and with the State Motor Vehicle Code.
      (2)   A physically disabled applicant must submit a certificate signed by
the physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified golf cart and utility vehicle on city streets.
      (3)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of the state statutes regarding minimum liability insurance.
   (E)   Insurance coverage will be verified as in effect by the city when
issuing or renewing a permit.
   (F)   The city may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter or
there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate a qualified golf cart on
the designated roadways.
   (G)   The city and the city’s Police Department shall monitor the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 79.04) (Ord. 2012-530, passed 2-21-2012) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.54 OTHER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Upon investigation by and the recommendation of the city, the Police
Department may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding that
there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf
cart or neighborhood vehicles on the designated streets.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any
time, and if such amendment or repeal affects the rights of permit holders, all
permit holders will be notified thereof by the city by certified mail.
   (C)   No person receiving a permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall have any legal right to the continuation of said ordinance regardless of
the cost of rendering a golf cart or utility vehicle in compliance with this
subchapter for the purpose of its operation in the city pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (D)   The city shall not under any circumstances be liable for any expenses
incurred by, an applicant or licensee for that applicant or licensees cost for
the acquisition and/or modification of such golf cart or utility vehicle to
comply with the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 79.05) (Ord. 2012-530, passed 2-21-2012) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of §§
77.50 to
77.54 shall be punishable by a fine in an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time, nor more than $150 for each violation.
      (2)   A second violation of §§
77.50 to
77.54 shall, in addition to being subject to time, be grounds for the
revocation of the vehicle’s permit issued for a period up to one year.
(Prior Code, § 79.99)
(Ord. 2012-530, passed 2-21-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FAIR HOUSING
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   PARKS, RECREATION, AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Enforcement
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Dogs to be restrained; cats subject to regulations
   
90.04   Permitted zoning; breeding prohibited
   
90.05   Keeping of certain animals within the city limits; health and noise
nuisance
   
90.06   Animal boarding facility regulations; permits
   
90.07   Keeping birds, fowl
   
90.08   Keeping animals for breeding purposes
   
90.09   General maintenance requirements for premises where kept
   
90.10   Construction and maintenance of buildings used to house animals
   
90.11   Disposition of manure
   
90.12   Noisy animals
   
90.13   General prohibition against running at large
   
90.14   Unlawful opening of enclosures
   
90.15   Staking out, confining animals on public property or on private
property without consent of owner
   
90.16   Vaccination; tags; collar
   
90.17   Impoundment
   
90.18   Redemption of impounded animals
   
90.19   Impoundment fees
   
90.20   Confinement of certain dogs and other animals
   
90.21   Rabies control
   
90.22   Investigations
   
90.23   Records
   
90.24   Exemptions
   
90.25   Interference with city officers
Bird Sanctuary
   
90.40   Designated
   
90.41   Shooting birds
   
90.42   Exceptions; nuisances
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Health Officer or Chief of Police may inspect any structure or place
where animals are kept, on his or her own initiative, and may issue any such
reasonable order as he or she deems necessary to the owner or keeper of such
animals to cause them to be kept as provided in this chapter, or in a manner so
as not to constitute a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 90.01)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
words or phrases used herein shall be defined and interpreted according to
their common usage. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY. A facility providing for grooming, veterinary, or
boarding services for dogs and cats on a temporary basis, which is totally
enclosed and designed and constructed for such purposes.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by action of the City Council for
the purposes of impounding and caring for animals.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The person or persons employed by the city as its enforcement
officers.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be AT LARGE when it is off the property of its
owner and not under the control of a competent person.
   CITY HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the County-City Health Department, or
his or her authorized agent.
   DOMESTIC BIRDS. Canaries, parrots, parakeets, mynah birds, peacocks, birds
of paradise, or other birds tamed to the household or pertaining thereto.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. Any animal that has been bitten by or exposed to any
other animal known to have been infected with rabies.
   FOWL. Chickens, guineas, geese, ducks, and pigeons.
   KENNEL. Any person, group of persons, or corporations keeping on any
premises any combination of four or more dogs and cats more than four months of
age.
   LIMITATION. Three cats and three dogs.
   NUISANCE. As is ascribed to it by the ordinances of the city or the statutes
of the state.
   OWNER or KEEPER. Any person, group of persons, or corporation owning,
keeping, or harboring an animal or animals or fowl or birds.
   RAT-PROOF. Being constructed so as to effectively preclude the entry of
rats.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is controlled by leash or tether beside a competent
person and obedient to that person’s command, or within any vehicle, trailer,
or other conveyance being pulled, driven, or parked on the street or confined
within the property limits of its owner or keeper.
   SANITARY. Any condition of good odor and cleanliness, which precludes the
probability of disease transmission and which preserves the health.
   SPAYED FEMALE. Any female dog or cat that has been operated on to prevent
conception.
(Prior Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974; Ord. 2004-483, passed 7-6-
2004; Ord. 2007-496, passed 1-2-2007)
§ 90.03 DOGS TO BE RESTRAINED; CATS SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The owner or keeper shall keep all dogs under restraint at all times.
Failure of the owner or keeper to properly secure all dogs which results in
such dogs to be at large off the premises or property of the owner or keeper
shall be unlawful.
   (B)   Cats must wear a vaccination tag at all times and are subject to the
same regulations as dogs.
(Prior Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974; Ord. 99-457, passed 12-7-
1999) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 PERMITTED ZONING; BREEDING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Permitted zoning. No animal boarding facility shall be maintained on
any property within the city limits unless such property has been zoned
commercial or industrial pursuant to the zoning regulations of the city.
   (B)   Breeding prohibited. No animal boarding facility shall be maintained
for breeding purposes.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 2007-496, passed 1-2-2007) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS; HEALTH AND NOISE
NUISANCE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep, board, possess,
or have within the city any cattle, horses, goats, sheep, mules, donkeys,
swine, hogs, poultry, fowl, or animals or birds of any kind except:
   (A)   In or on the fairgrounds;
   (B)   Where specifically permitted in the city’s zoning ordinance, including
any future revisions and amendments to the same;
   (C)   No more than three dogs or three cats;
   (D)   Household pets kept within the house, including small caged birds,
aquatic, amphibian, or reptilian pets, other than poisonous animals;
   (E)   Not more than six rabbits; and
   (F)   Not more than six chickens, solely for household use and under the
conditions prescribed in the city code for health nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) (Ord. 414, passed 10-7-1986; Ord. 97-449, passed 10-7-
1997) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY REGULATIONS; PERMITS.
   (A)   Animal boarding facility regulations.
      (1)   All such facilities shall be maintained in a manner which shall not
create a public nuisance by reason of noise or emission of offensive odors, and
which shall not pose a danger to human life or property.
      (2)   The facilities shall be of sufficient size to permit each animal
housed therein to stand freely, sit, turn around and lie in a comfortable and
normal position, and which are consistent with the humane treatment of animals
as required by the Animal Welfare Act, 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq. An exercise
area shall be maintained on the premises which provides such animals the means
to exercise; however, no such animal shall be left in the exercise area
overnight.
      (3)   Each animal housed in the facility shall be seen at least once
during each 24-hour period by the animal caretaker.
      (4)   Excrement shall be removed from the primary enclosures or
restraining area as often as necessary to prevent contamination, reduce disease
hazards, minimize odors, and in compliance with all state and federal laws.
      (5)   Each animal housed in the facility shall be fed a nutritionally
adequate meal on a daily basis in accordance with commonly accepted practices
or consistent with the instructions from a veterinarian.
      (6)   Storage of all supplies shall be maintained in such a manner to
prevent vermin infestation and to minimize the chance for disease.
      (7)   Each animal housed in the facility shall be given a sufficient
amount of water to drink on a daily basis in accordance with commonly accepted
practices or consistent with the instructions from a veterinarian.
      (8)   Each animal shall be restrained, when necessary, in a manner which
prevents entanglement with other animals and with devices that are designed for
such purposes which are properly fitted.
      (9)   All animals shall be properly inoculated against rabies and any
other necessary diseases and proper documentation thereof shall be maintained.
      (10)   Said facility shall be clean at all times.
      (11)   Said facility shall be subject to inspection by the city at any
reasonable time for compliance.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   No person shall operate an animal boarding facility without first
obtaining a permit in compliance with this section.
      (2)   The permit period shall begin with the first day of the calendar
year and shall end on the last day of the calendar year. Renewal applications
for permits may be made within 60 days prior to the expiration date.
      (3)   Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the following
applicable fees:
         (a)   For each facility housing ten or less animals, the sum of an
amount to be set by the City Council from time to time; and
         (b)   For each facility housing more than ten but less than 20
animals, the sum in an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time,
per year.
(Prior Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974; Ord. 2004-483, passed 7-6-
2004; Ord. 2007-496, passed 1-2-2007) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 KEEPING BIRDS, FOWL.
   (A)   The housing and keeping of domestic birds shall be in such a manner as
not to create a nuisance.
   (B)   Facilities for the keeping of domestic birds and fowl shall not be
closer than 40 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling resided in by
anyone other than the owner.
   (C)   Every keeper of domestic birds or fowl shall confine the same in an
enclosure sufficient to prevent their being at large and shall provide a
shelter area of sufficient size to be conducive to good sanitation practices,
and shall provide adequate sanitary drainage for the shelter area.
(Prior Code, § 90.07) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 KEEPING ANIMALS FOR BREEDING PURPOSES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal for breeding
purposes, except in private enclosed locations, entirely out of the public
view.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as permitting the keeping of any
animals otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 GENERAL MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES WHERE KEPT.
   Every structure, pen, lot, or place wherein any animal or fowl is kept or
permitted to be shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid
of rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable odors.
(Prior Code, § 90.09) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS USED TO HOUSE ANIMALS.
   Every building wherein any animal is kept within the city shall be
constructed of such material and in such manner that it can be kept clean and
sanitary at all time. Every such building, if located within 200 feet of any
tenement, apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, retail food store,
building used for educational, religious, or hospital purposes, or residence,
other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which
such animal is kept, shall be provided with a water-tight and fly-tight
receptacle for manure of such size as to hold all accumulations of manure. Such
receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent
it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept covered at all times,
except when open during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse. No manure
shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises except in such receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 90.10) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 DISPOSITION OF MANURE.
   Manure shall be hauled outside the city in a manner which does not
jeopardize the public health, or spread upon cultivated plots of ground used
for garden or plants and covered with soil immediately.
(Prior Code, § 90.11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 NOISY ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any dog or
other animal which barks, howls, or otherwise disturbs the peace and quiet of
any person.
(Prior Code, § 90.12) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 GENERAL PROHIBITION AGAINST RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit any animal or fowl owned by him or
her or under his or her control to run at large within the city at any time.
This section shall not apply to dogs and cats.
(Prior Code, § 90.13) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 UNLAWFUL OPENING OF ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for any person to open any enclosure in which any animal or
fowl is confined so as to permit such animal or fowl to escape and run at
large.
(Prior Code, § 90.14) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 STAKING OUT, CONFINING ANIMALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER.
   It is unlawful for any person to stake out, confine, or pasture any animal
on any public school ground, on any federal, state, city, or other public
property, or on any railroad right-of-way or on any other property, without the
consent of the person owning or controlling such property.
(Prior Code, § 90.15) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 VACCINATION; TAGS; COLLAR.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat within the city
limits unless such dog or cat is vaccinated as herein provided. All dogs and
cats must be vaccinated each year, not later than May 1, and must bear a
current tag showing such vaccination.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to remove any vaccination tag from the
collar of any dog or cat, without the owner’s consent, except where it is
necessary for a police officer to examine such tag.
   (C)   Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to
the choke chain, collar, or harness of the dog or cat and must be worn by the
dog or cat at all times.
   (D)   No person shall use a vaccination receipt for any dog or cat other
than the animal for which the receipt was originally issued.
   (E)   Any personnel authorized by the city or animal warden may check any
residence at any time and demand proof of rabies shots on any animal or animals
kept by the people living at that residence. Any owner not possessing a current
vaccination receipt on an animal over four months of age shall be guilty of an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.16) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any dog or cat or other small animal kept as a house pet found running
at large shall be picked up and immediately impounded in the animal shelter and
there confined in a humane manner. Dogs and cats and other small animals not
claimed by their owners before the expiration of 72 hours shall become the
property of the city and shall be disposed of at the discretion of the city.
All animals, except those under quarantine, may be disposed of at the end of
five days.
   (B)   When dogs or cats are found running at large and their ownership is
known to the agents of the city, such dogs or cats need not be impounded, but
the agent may, at his or her discretion, cite the owner of such dog or cat to
appear in court to answer to charges of violations of this chapter.
   (C)   Immediately upon impounding dogs or cats or other animals, the agent
of the city charged with the enforcement hereof shall make every possible
effort to notify the owners of such dog, cat, or other animal so impounded and
inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such
animal or animals. A description of the animal shall also be made on records
kept by the animal warden.
   (D)   Small unlicensed animals, other than dogs or cats, shall be impounded
when found running at large within the city limits and disposed of in
accordance with the terms heretofore stated or other applicable law.
   (E)   No animal may be adopted from the animal shelter by any employee of
the animal shelter, for any reason. Any employee adopting, giving away, or
selling any animal from the shelter, except in accordance with this chapter,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.17) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dog
or cat or other small animal kept as a house pet, excepting as hereinafter
provided in the cases of certain dogs, or cats or other small animals kept as
house pets upon compliance with the vaccination provisions of this chapter, and
payment of impoundment fees as set forth herein.
   (B)   Any small animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be
reclaimed by the owner upon the payment of the impoundment fee as set forth
herein.
   (C)   Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter and not
reclaimed by its owner within 72 hours may be adopted between the third and
fifth day, but may be destroyed at the end of five days.
(Prior Code, § 90.18) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974)
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDMENT FEES.
   (A)   Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed by its owner upon
payment of an impoundment fee in an amount to be set by the City Council from
time to time for the first impoundment, and another amount to be set by the
City Council from time to time for each subsequent impoundment. Said fee shall
be paid for each animal impounded.
   (B)   Such owner shall also pay a daily maintenance fee in an amount to be
set by the City Council from time to time per day for each day such animal has
been impounded. Such owner shall also comply with division (B) below.
   (C)   (1)   Within five days after the owner reclaims any animal which may
be of the type to contract rabies, such owner shall provide proof of current
rabies vaccination from a veterinarian.
      (2)   Failure to provide such proof within such time period shall result
in the re-impoundment of such animal.
(Prior Code, § 90.19) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974; Ord. 2000-460, passed 6-6-
2000)
§ 90.20 CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every
fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog or other animal, and not take such dog or
other animal out of such building or secure enclosure unless such animal is
securely muzzled.
   (B)   No undomesticated wild animals shall be kept within the city limits;
provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by a
circus, zoos, and by educational institutions, and medical institutions in
accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the City Council by
resolution or motion.
   (C)   Any animal described in divisions (A) and (B) above found at large
shall be impounded by the city and shall not be redeemed by the owners until
such redemption is authorized by a court having jurisdiction and, after a
hearing by the City Council upon reasonable notice to the owner or owners, any
fierce, dangerous, or vicious dog or other animal may be destroyed.
   (D)   Every female dog or cat in season (heat) shall be kept confined in
such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with other
animals, except for controlled breeding purposes.
   (E)   When in the judgment of the animal warden an animal should be
destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed.
   (F)   Female animals picked up by the animal warden which are in season
(heat) shall be kept separate from all other animals (male) at all times.
   (G)   All dogs, cats, and other small animals kept as house pets within the
city limits shall be housed, fed, and protected from the weather in such a
manner as not to create a nuisance.
   (H)   Any person who shall willfully or maliciously beat, injure, maim, or
mutilate any animal whether belonging to himself or herself or another, or fail
to provide an animal of necessary food, drink, or shelter shall be guilty of an
offense.
(Prior Code, § 90.20) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Every animal that bites or scratches a person shall be reported within
four hours to the Chief of Police or the animal warden and shall thereupon be
securely quarantined at the veterinarian hospital of the owner’s choice and
expense for a period of ten days, and shall not be released from such
quarantine except by permission of the veterinarian in charge of the
quarantined animal. Such quarantine may be at any veterinary hospital chosen by
the owner. Failure of the owner to quarantine his or her animal will make him
or her guilty of an offense.
   (B)   In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose
ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the animal shelter. No
animal whose ownership is known may be quarantined at the animal shelter.
   (C)   The owner, upon demand by an employee empowered to enforce this
chapter, shall forthwith surrender any animal that has bitten or scratched a
human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised
quarantine, the expenses for which shall be borne by the owner, and the animal
may be reclaimed by the owner, if adjudged free of rabies.
   (D)   When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or
suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such
observation, the animal warden or veterinarian shall immediately send the head
of such animal to the State Health Department for pathological examination, and
shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts and
diagnosis made of the suspected animal.
   (E)   When one or both reports give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the
agents of the city may recommend a city-wide quarantine for a period of six
months, and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into
the streets, or permitted to be in the streets during such period of
quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal shall be taken or shipped from
the city without written permission of the health officer of the city or the
animal warden.
   (F)   During such period of rabies quarantine as herein designated, every
animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be treated for such
rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held under six months’
quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
   (G)   In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring
during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended
for an additional six months.
   (H)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any
animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting or
scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor to remove same from the city
limits without written permission from the agents of the city or the animal
warden.
   (I)   The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand,
be surrendered to the animal warden.
   (J)   The animal warden shall direct the disposition of any animal found to
be infected with rabies.
   (K)   No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine
or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by an employee
empowered to enforce this chapter. Such refusal shall be deemed an offense.
   (L)   It is the duty of every physician, veterinarian, or other practitioner
to report to the animal warden the names and addresses of persons treated for
bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be
helpful in rabies control.
   (M)   It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city
animal warden his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or her to be a
rabid suspect.
(Prior Code, § 90.21) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 INVESTIGATIONS.
   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and to
enforce its provisions, any police officer is empowered to call upon the
residents of any premises upon which a dog or cat or small animal is kept or
harbored, and to demand the exhibition by the owner of such dog or cat or small
animal, or the license for such dog or cat or other small animal. It is further
provided that any police officer with a search warrant may enter the premises
where any animal is kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to
examine such animal, and to take possession of such animal when, in his or her
opinion, it requires humane treatment. The animal warden may demand, at the
front door of any residence, exhibition by the owner of current proof of
vaccination at any time.
(Prior Code, § 90.22) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 RECORDS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the animal warden to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of impounding and disposition of all
animals, fowl, and domestic birds coming into his or her custody.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the animal warden to keep, or cause to be
kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to him or her
and to the city, with a complete report on investigations of same.
(Prior Code, § 90.23) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Hospitals, clinics, and other premises operated by licensed
veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals, are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, except where duties are expressly stated.
   (B)   The vaccination requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any
dog or cat belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the city for
no longer than 30 days, provided all such dogs or cats shall at all times,
while in the city, be kept within a building, enclosure, or vehicle, or be
under restraint by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 90.24) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.25 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICERS.
   No person shall interfere with, or hinder, or molest any agent of the city
in the performance of any duty of such agent, or seek to release any animal in
the custody of the city or its agents, except as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 90.25) (Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
BIRD SANCTUARY
§ 90.40 DESIGNATED.
   The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
designated as a bird sanctuary.
(Prior Code, § 90.40) (Ord. 378, passed 2-5-1974)
§ 90.41 SHOOTING BIRDS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot or molest any
bird or wild fowl, or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests within the limits of
the city; provided, however, this subchapter shall not prevent the hunting of
game birds during the hunting season as provided by the laws of the state.
   (B)   No person shall trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot any game bird
within 100 feet of any residence or dwelling within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 90.41) (Ord. 378, passed 2-5-1974) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.42 EXCEPTIONS; NUISANCES.
   This subchapter shall not apply to starlings or similar type of birds found
to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they
constitute a nuisance or menace to the health or property of any resident or
property owner in the city. In the event starlings or similar type of bird
increase in such numbers or are found to be congregating in such numbers as to
constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property to any resident or
property owner in the city, such resident or property owner may eliminate such
birds after having notified the Chief of Police of the city of such condition
and having received his or her permission to eliminate them. The Chief of
Police or any police officer of the city shall supervise such elimination.
(Prior Code, § 90.42) (Ord. 378, passed 2-5-1974)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.25 shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and for
a first offense, shall be fined in an amount to be set by the City Council from
time to time, plus CLEET (Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training)
and court costs; for a second offense, shall be fined in another amount to be
set by the City Council from time to time, plus CLEET and court costs; for a
third offense, shall be fined in another amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time, plus CLEET and court costs; for four or more offenses, shall
be fined in another amount to be set by the City Council from time to time,
plus CLEET and court costs.
      (2)   The penalty for violating the provisions of §§
90.04 and
90.06 shall be a fine of not to exceed an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time and/or revocation of the permit.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
90.40 through
90.42 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 90.99) (Ord. 378, passed 2-5-1974; Ord. 381, passed 6-25-1974;
Ord. 2004-483, passed 7-6-2004; Ord. 2005-490, passed 12-6-2005; Ord. 2007-496,
passed 1-2-2007)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
91.01   Policy
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Unlawful practice
   
91.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
91.05   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
91.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
91.07   Exemption
   
91.08   Administration
   
91.09   Education and conciliation
   
91.10   Enforcement
   
91.11   Investigation; subpoenas; giving of evidence
   
91.12   Enforcement by private persons
   
91.13   Interference, coercion, or intimidation
   
91.14   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations,
for fair housing throughout the city.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
91.04 through
91.06.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below and §
91.07, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
set forth in this section shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) below;
   (B)   Nothing in §
91.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided:
         (a)   Such private individual owner does not own more than three such
single-family houses at any one time;
         (b)   In the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or
who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the
exemption granted by this division (B) shall apply only with respect to one
such sale within any 24-month period;
         (c)   Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; and
         (d)   The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or
rented:
            1.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or
salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such
facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting
dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson,
or person; and
            2.   Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of §
91.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow, agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
91.03 and except as exempted by §
91.03(B) and §
91.07, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, or familial status;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, sex, color, religion,
national original, handicap, or familial status;
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, or national origin,
handicap, or familial status or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, or discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; or
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color,
religion, or national origin, handicap, or familial status.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building, and loan association, insurance
company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their
financial assistance, because of the race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, or familial status of such person or of any person associated
with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or
the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or
prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings
in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or
given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope
or effectiveness of the exception contained in §
91.03(B).
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, rental, or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on
account of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial
status.
(Prior Code, § 91.06) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of
dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, sex, color,
national origin, handicap, or familial status, nor shall anything in this
chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which, as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its
members.
(Prior Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall
be in the chief executive officer of the city.
   (B)   The chief executive officer may delegate any of these functions,
duties, and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or
otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. The
chief executive officer shall, by rule, prescribe such rights of appeal from
the decisions of his or her hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to
other officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself or herself, as
shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the chief executive officer to further such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 91.08) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.09 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the chief executive officer
shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the
housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the
provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it,
and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 91.09) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the chief executive officer. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as
the chief executive officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the
chief executive officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or
within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under division
(C) below, the chief executive officer shall investigate the complaint and give
notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to resolve
it. If the chief executive officer decides to resolve the complaints, he or she
shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing
practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made
public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter
without the written consent of the persons concerned.
   (B)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and, with the leave of the chief executive officer, which
shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend
his or her answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   (C)   If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the chief executive
officer, the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The chief executive officer will assist in this filing.
   (D)   If the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30
days hereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the
respondent names in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or protected by
this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If
the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about
to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or
order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the
chief executive officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance.
(Prior Code, § 91.10) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 INVESTIGATION; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   (1)   In conducting an investigation, the chief executive officer
shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents,
individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may
examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or
statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of
the investigation; provided, however, that the chief executive officer first
complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable
searches and seizures.
      (2)   The chief executive officer may issue subpoena to compel his or her
access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such
persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and
subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or
interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United
States District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking
place. The chief executive officer may administer oaths.
   (B)   Upon written application to the chief executive officer, a respondent
shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in
the name of the chief executive officer to the same extent and subject to the
same limitations as subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show
on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they
were issued at his or her request.
   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the chief executive officer shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her.
   (D)   (1)   Within five days after services of a subpoena upon any person,
such person may petition the chief executive officer to revoke or modify the
subpoena.
      (2)   The chief executive officer shall grant the petition if he or she
finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable
time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to
any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly
onerous, or for other good reason.
   (E)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief
executive officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition
for its enforcement in the Municipal or State Court for the district in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts
business.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the chief
executive officer participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.11) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   The rights granted by §§
91.03 through
91.06 may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general
jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the
court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or §
91.10(D) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes
that the conciliation efforts of the chief executive officer are likely to
result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice
complained of in the complaint made to the chief executive officer and which
practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided, however, that
any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court
order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a bona fide
purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the existence of
the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be affected.
   (B)   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may
award to the plaintiff actual damages and punitive damages as provided by law,
together with court costs and reasonable attorneys fees in the case of a
prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the plaintiff, in the opinion of the
court, is not financially able to assume the attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 91.12) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
§ 91.13 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
91.03 through
91.06. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
(Prior Code, § 91.13) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.14 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force, willfully injures, intimidates, or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, or familial status and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, sex,
color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)
above; and
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
(Prior Code, § 91.14) (Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall engage in any activity for
which a license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this
chapter, without having a valid license, permit, certificate, or registration
as required, or who shall fail to do anything as required by this chapter or by
any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall otherwise violate any provision
of the chapters of this chapter or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who
shall violate any lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers
provided for in this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter shall interfere with
the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for a
mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against such person, firm,
or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 91.99)
   (C)    Any employee of the chief executive officer who shall make public any
information in violation of §
91.10(A) shall be (upon conviction) punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 91.10)
   (D)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence,
if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
of the chief executive officer, as provided in §
91.11, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the chief executive
officer, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in
any report, account, record, or other document submitted to the chief executive
officer pursuant to his or her subpoena or other order, or shall willfully
neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries in
such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully
mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 91.11)
   (C)   Any citizen, because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
ace, sex, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, in any
of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in §
91.14(A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any
denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 91.14)
(Ord. 389, passed 1-4-1977; Ord. 93-425, passed 3-2-1993; Ord. 2004-477, passed
5-20-2004)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
92.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
92.02   Fire Department to enforce Code
   
92.03   Limits within which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground
tanks, LPG, explosives, are prohibited
   
92.04   Modifications
   
92.05   New materials, processes, or occupancies which may require permits
   
92.06   Appeals
   
92.07   Transportation of inflammable liquids
   
92.08   Burning trash
   
92.09   Commercial storage, transportation of butane or propane prohibited
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, that certain code known as Fire Prevention Code,
recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the
latest edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as
are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by this code.
   (B)   At least one copy of the Fire Prevention Code is on file in the office
of the City Clerk.
   (C)   The Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein.
   (D)   From the date on which this section shall initially take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 92.01)
Charter reference:
   Authority to adopt codes by reference, see Charter §
18
§ 92.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE CODE.
   (A)   (1)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Fire
Department of the city, under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
      (2)   For the purpose of the Fire Prevention Code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION and CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
The Fire Department and Chief of the Fire Department, respectively, of this
city.
         CORPORATION COUNSEL. The City Attorney of this city.
         MUNICIPALITY. This city.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as may from time to time be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 92.02)
§ 92.03 LIMITS WITHIN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND
TANKS, LPG, EXPLOSIVES, ARE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage
of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby
established as the city’s fire district.
   (B)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as the
city’s fire district.
   (C)   (1)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum has been prohibited, are hereby established
as the city’s fire district.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct, or
enlarge a new plant or place of business within the city limits for
manufacturing, distributing, or handling liquefied petroleum gas or gases.
   (D)   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which storage
of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the
city’s fire district.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager and Fire Chief, with the approval of the City
Council, shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or
her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that the spirit of the
Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
   (B)   The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Manager, Fire Chief, and Council thereon shall be entered upon
the records of the Council, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 92.04)
§ 92.05 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Manager, the Chief of the Fire Department, and one person
appointed by the City Manager shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new
materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition
to those now enumerated in the Fire Code.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his or
her office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(Prior Code, § 92.05)
§ 92.06 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Fire Chief or the City Manager shall disapprove an application
or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the City Manager to the City Council within 30 days from
the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 92.06)
§ 92.07 TRANSPORTATION OF INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to transport, to
deliver, unload, or transfer at any point within the city any gasoline,
kerosene, or other inflammable or combustible substance in or from a tank, tank
truck, transport, or vehicle; however, such transporting, delivering,
unloading, or transferring may be done with and from a tank truck if the
following safety precautions are observed.
   (A)   The tank vehicle, during unloading or loading, must have the driver
thereof in attendance at the shut-off valve at all times during such operation.
   (B)   No person shall smoke or be permitted to smoke in the vicinity of such
vehicle during the unloading or transferring operations.
   (C)   No unloading or transferring from any tank truck shall be made to any
storage tank within the fire limits unless such storage tank has above the
ground level a vent pipe of at least eight feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 BURNING TRASH.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to burn, join in, or assist in the
burning of or to permit the burning of, trash, wood, garbage, refuse, leaves,
or other combustible material in the city’s fire district.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, TRASH shall be as defined by §
93.026.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to the burning of any such combustible as
fuel in a properly constructed firebox, nor to any burning of trash, garbage,
or refuse within the confines of a building or as may be approved pursuant to
state rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 92.08) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 COMMERCIAL STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION OF BUTANE OR PROPANE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to store for sale, either above or
underground, in any character of tank or container, butane or propane gas in
any quantity within the corporate limits of the city. The parking of any truck,
car, or other vehicle used in the transportation of butane or propane gas upon
any street, alley, or thoroughfare within the city is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 92.09) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine as
provided in §
10.99. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not
otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 92.99)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Nuisances defined; public nuisances; private nuisances
   
93.002   Persons responsible
   
93.003   Time does not legalize
   
93.004   Remedies against public nuisances
   
93.005   Remedies against private nuisances
   
93.006   City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances
   
93.007   Certain public nuisances in the city defined
   
93.008   Summary abatement of nuisances
   
93.009   Abatement by suit in District Court
   
93.010   Nuisance unlawful
   
93.011   Health nuisances; abatement
   
93.012   Toilet facilities required; nuisance
   
93.013   Procedure cumulative
Weeds and Trash
   
93.025   Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful
   
93.026   Definitions
   
93.027   Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds, or trash on property
   
93.028   Notice, administrative order, and violation notice
   
93.029   Work done by employees or contract
   
93.030   Determination and assessments of costs
   
93.031   Lien on the property
   
93.032   Service of notice
   
93.033   Unlawful to deposit rubbish
   
93.034   Removal of dead animals
   
93.035   Litter
   
93.036   Unauthorized person not to remove garbage or rubbish
   
93.037   Abandoned ice boxes, refrigerators
   
93.038   Premises used for storing junk to be fenced
   
93.039   Deposit of glass, nails, or other injurious matter in streets
Abandoned or Junked Personal Property
   
93.050   Nuisance
   
93.051   Order to remove abandoned or junked property
   
93.052   Notice to the owner or occupant of the premises and any known lien
holder
   
93.053   Public hearing
   
93.054   No removed motor vehicle to be reconstructed or made operable
   
93.055   Disposal of abandoned or junked personal property
   
93.056   Effect of removal
   
93.057   Notice to State Tax Commission, owner, and lien holder
   
93.058   Administration and supervision
   
93.059   Immediate removal of vehicle obstructing traffic
Enforcement
   
93.070   County Health Department designated to enforce health ordinances
   
93.071   Obstructing Health Officer
   
93.072   Quarantine; violations
 
   
93.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 NUISANCES DEFINED; PUBLIC NUISANCES; PRIVATE NUISANCES.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE NUISANCE. Every nuisance not included in the definition of “public
nuisance” below is a PRIVATE NUISANCE.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. One which affects at the same time an entire community or
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal.
   NUISANCE. Unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is any
thing or condition which either:
      (1)   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;
      (2)   Offends decency;
      (3)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal, or
basin, or any public park, square, street, or other public property; or
      (4)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of
property.
(Prior Code, § 93.001) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to define and abate nuisances, see 50 0.S. § 16
§ 93.002 PERSONS RESPONSIBLE.
   Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing
nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is
liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first
created it.
(Prior Code, § 93.002) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.003 TIME DOES NOT LEGALIZE.
   No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual
obstruction of public right.
(Prior Code, § 93.003) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.004 REMEDIES AGAINST PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The remedies against a public nuisance are:
   (A)   Prosecution on complaint before the Municipal Court;
   (B)   Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate
court;
   (C)   Civil action; or
   (D) Abatement:
      (1)   By person injured as provided in 50 O.S. § 12; or
      (2)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 93.004) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.005 REMEDIES AGAINST PRIVATE NUISANCES.
   The remedies against a private nuisance are:
   (A)   Civil action; and
   (B)   Abatement:
      (1)   By person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and 15; or
      (2)   By the city in accordance with law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 93.005) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.006 CITY HAS POWER TO DEFINE AND SUMMARILY ABATE NUISANCES.
   As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city has power to determine what is and
what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the
protection of the public health, the public parks and the public water supply
outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city
has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner
and an opportunity for him or her to be heard, if this can be done.
(Prior Code, § 93.006) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.007 CERTAIN PUBLIC NUISANCES IN THE CITY DEFINED.
   (A)   In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of
this code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or
the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made;
      (2)   The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor
in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; or keeping of a place
where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation
of the state law or ordinances of the city;
      (3)   The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures,
books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents, or objects; or the keeping of a
place where such are exposed, displayed, sold, or distributed;
      (4)   The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot
machines, punchboards, or otherwise;
      (5)   The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual
intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced;
      (6)   The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law
or ordinance are practiced or carried on;
      (7)   The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the
ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held;
      (8)   The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease;
      (9)   The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons
of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises;
      (10)   The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which
materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others;
      (11)   Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which
causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or
sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be
authorized by law or ordinance;
      (12)   Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow
to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk;
      (13)   All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies, or containers of water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed,
formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (14)   Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse,
or other things, which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies,
mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist;
      (15)   Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health
or safety because of damage, decay, or other condition;
      (16)   Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed,
conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety;
      (17)   Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety;
      (18)   Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace,
health, morals, safety, or welfare;
      (19)   Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any
trailer without a current vehicle plate and current insurance verification as
required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept
in a residence district;
      (20)   Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become
obnoxious or annoying to any resident of this city, by reason of any noise or
noises made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance;
      (21)   Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and
dangerous from fire, decay, or other cause, or shall become hazardous from
fire, by reason of age, decay, or construction, location, or other cause, or
shall be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of this city or its
inhabitants from any cause, is hereby declared to be a nuisance;
      (22)   Unlawfully performing an act or omitting to perform a duty or
condition which:
         (a)   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;
         (b)   Offends public decency;
         (c)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for use, any lake, drainage way or easement, stream, stream
basin, public park, street, or other public property; or
         (d)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use
of property.
      (23)   A NUISANCE shall further be defined by mention or definition of
any act, omission, or thing constituting a nuisance or public nuisance anywhere
within this code, which shall include, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Dilapidated or unsecured buildings;
         (b)   Weeds, tall grass, untrimmed trees, shrubbery;
         (c)   Trash, junk;
         (d)   Graffiti; and
         (e)   Abandoned, wrecked, junked, or non-operating vehicles.
   (B)   The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative
and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private
nuisances either in more general or more specific terms.
(Prior Code, § 93.007) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.008 SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and
immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare of one or
more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances
may be such as to justify, and even to require, the City Manager or other
appropriate officer or agency of the city government to take immediate and
proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the
danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of Police, the City
Attorney, the Building Inspector, the Electrical Inspector, the Plumbing
Inspector, or any other officer subordinate to the City Manager may submit,
through or with the consent of the Mayor to the City Council, a statement as to
the existence of a nuisance as defined by the ordinances of the city or law,
and a request or recommendation that it be abated. The City Manager himself or
herself, the Health Officer, any Council member, or any resident or residents
of the city may submit such a statement and request a recommendation to the
City Council.
   (C)   The Council shall determine whether or not the alleged nuisance is a
nuisance in fact. For the purpose of gathering evidence on the subject, the
Council shall have power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers, and
other effects. Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or have it abated, the
Council shall give notice of a hearing on the proposed abatement to the owner
of any property concerned and to any other person alleged or deemed responsible
for or to be causing the nuisance, and an adequate opportunity to be heard, if
such notice and opportunity for a hearing can be given. Such notice to the
owner and other persons concerned shall be given in writing by mail or by
service by a police officer if their names and addresses are known; but, if the
names or addresses are not known, and the peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the necessary delay, a notice of the hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation within the city.
   (D)   If the Council finds that a nuisance does in fact exist, it shall
direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance to
abate it within a specified time if the peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the person or persons or public adversely affected would not be
unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If such peace, health, safety,
morals, or welfare would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if
the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance do not abate
it within the specified time, the Council shall direct the City Manager to
abate the nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as
authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The City Clerk shall send a statement of the cost
of such summary abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or
causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names
and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the
city collectible as other debts of the city may be collected.
(Prior Code, § 93.008) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.009 ABATEMENT BY SUIT IN DISTRICT COURT.
   In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the
city may bring suit in the District Court of the county where the nuisance is
located, as provided in 50 O.S. § 17.
(Prior Code, § 93.009) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.010 NUISANCE UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner,
lessee, or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to
permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his or her control within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 93.010) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.011 HEALTH NUISANCES; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the Health Officer
shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in
the city to remove from such premises, at his or her own expense, any source of
filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or
rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other
condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within
such other time as may be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute
an offense.
      (1)   Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the
owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the Health
Officer or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual
place of abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state.
      (2)   If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner,
occupant, or agent is unknown, or is without the state, the order may be served
by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one
issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city.
   (B)   If the order is not complied with, the Health Officer may cause the
order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified
to the City Clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be
added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if
he or she is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility
service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it
is added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same
regulations relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If
such owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost,
after certification to the City Clerk, may be collected in any manner in which
any other debt due the city may be collected.
(Prior Code, § 93.011) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Power to abate health nuisances, see 63 O.S. § 1-1011
§ 93.012 TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED; NUISANCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HUMAN EXCREMENT. The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
      SANITARY PIT PRIVY. A privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as
to conform with the specifications approved by the State Health Department.
      SANITARY WATER CLOSET. The flush type toilet which is connected with a
sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the
contents at all times.
   (B)   Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside,
are employed, or congregate within this city shall install, equip, and maintain
adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a
sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets hereby
required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within 200
feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the sanitary water
closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the
water closet type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A
septic tank system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only if it meets
the standards of and is approved by the State Health Department.
   (C)   All human excrement disposed of within this city shall be disposed of
by depositing it in closets and privies of the type provided for in this
section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit the
disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to
dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner.
   (D)   All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the
covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the
privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other than
human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement
from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel
disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet
until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Health
Officer.
   (E)   All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner
different from that required by this section, and all privies and closets so
constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as
such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense, and
each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 93.012) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.013 PROCEDURE CUMULATIVE.
   The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and
by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative onto any other
penalties or procedures authorized.
(Prior Code, § 93.013) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
WEEDS AND TRASH
§ 93.025 ACCUMULATION OF TRASH OR WEEDS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner and/or persons otherwise in possession or
control of any lot, tract, or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within
the corporate limits of the city to allow trash, lawn clippings, weeds, grass,
leaves, or low hanging or dead tree limbs to grow, stand, or to be discharged
on or accumulate upon such premises or on any street, alley, avenue, or
easement adjoining such lot, tract, or parcel of land. It is the duty of such
owner or occupant to mow such grass or weeds, and to remove or destroy any such
trash, lawn clippings, weeds, grass, leaves, or limbs.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: any
property zoned and used for agricultural purposes or to railroad property under
the jurisdiction of the State Corporation Commission; however, the city may
cause the removal of weeds or trash from property zoned and used for
agricultural purposes pursuant to the provisions of this section when such
grass, weeds, or trash pose a hazard to traffic, are located in, or within ten
yards of, the public right-of-way at intersections, or pose a health hazard to
the general public.
   (C)   Notice of such violation shall be given to the property owner, and/or
person otherwise in possession or control of any lot, tract, or parcel of land,
by mailing the notice and administrative order, if one be issued, concerning
such violation, and by personal delivery to such property owner or person
otherwise in possession or control of any lot, tract, or parcel of land.
      (l)   At the time of mailing, the administrative officer shall obtain
from the postal service a receipt showing the date of mailing and the name and
address of the mailee.
      (2)   If the owner cannot be located within ten days from the date of
mailing by the administrative officer, notice shall be given by posting a copy
of the notice and administrative order on the property not less than ten days
prior to any hearing or action taken on the property by the city.
      (3)   The administrative order and notice may be posted at the same time
as the mailing is provided to the postal service.
(Prior Code, § 93.025) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to order removal of accumulations of weeds, trash and charge
costs, see 11 O.S. § 22-111
§ 93.026 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. Without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol,
slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible
to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched, or etched on a rock,
tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building, or other structure; provided, this
definition shall not include advertising or any other letter, word, name,
number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of
any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property, a tenant of
the property, or by an authorized agent for such owner or tenant.
   OWNER. The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the
County Treasurer.
   TRASH and JUNK. Any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper,
combustible materials, rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form
which is uncared for, discarded, abandoned, inoperable, or non-maintained
equipment, objects, or tangible property.
   WEEDS.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak, or poison
sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which:
         (a)   Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or
produce for human consumption or grown in a tended and cultivated garden,
unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a
detriment to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and community or a
hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise
interfere with the mowing of the weeds;
         (b)   Regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites deposits or
accumulation of refuse or trash;
         (c)   Harbors rodents or vermin;
         (d)   Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors;
         (e)   Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or
         (f)   Is dead or diseased.
      (2)   The term WEED does not include tended crops on land zoned for
agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for
other than agricultural use.
(Prior Code, § 93.026) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.027 REPORTS OF ACCUMULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS, OR TRASH ON PROPERTY.
   (A) Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an accumulation of
trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any
premises within the limits of the city, shall report the condition to the City
Manager if, as a result of the accumulation or growth, the premises appear to
be:
      (1)   Detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and
the community;
      (2)   A hazard to traffic; or
      (3)   A fire hazard to property.
   (B)   The Chief or Assistant Chief of Police, Chief or Assistant Chief of
the Fire Department, or the County Sanitarian or other representative of the
Department of Public Health, and any other person authorized by the City
Manager shall, on citizen complaint or upon their own notice, inspect subject
property. If their inspection reveals a violation of one or more of the above
named conditions, and their decision must be unanimous, they shall report their
findings to the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 93.027) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Cleaning and mowing of property, procedures and powers, see 11 O.S. § 22-111
§ 93.028 NOTICE, ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER, AND VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon receiving the report provided for in §
93.027, or upon receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source, the
administrative officer for code enforcement shall mail to the property owner a
notice and administrative order and violation notice advising the property
owner that the property is in violation of this code, specifically setting
forth the condition constituting such violation, the code section violated, and
that the property owner has ten days from the date of receipt of such notices
and order in which to correct such condition. Such mailing shall be mailed to
the last known mailing address of the property owner as verified by the County
Treasurer, with documentation of such mailed to be provided by certificate of
mailing. If the mailing address or whereabouts of the property owner are not
known and cannot be ascertained with the exercise of due diligence, such notice
and administrative order and violation notice shall be posted at the property
address or the notice and administrative order shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city one time and allowing the property
owner ten days from the date of publication in which to correct such condition.
   (B)   Such notice and administrative order and violation notice shall advise
the property owner that unless the condition which constitutes the code
violation is corrected and the property is brought into compliance with this
code within ten days from the date of service of such notice and administrative
order and violation notice, that the city shall take all necessary action to
bring such property into compliance with this code and that the costs of such
action shall be charged to the property owner. Such notice shall also advise
the property owner that charges may be filed in Municipal Court, resulting in
the assessment of fines for such violation(s). The city may take whatever
action legally necessary to collect such costs, including the filing of a lien
on the property and the taking of legal action.
   (C)   If the property owner takes action to correct the property condition
which constitutes the violation(s) within ten days from the service of the
notice and administrative order, and the administrative officer for code
enforcement determines that such corrective action brings the property into
compliance with this code, no further action shall be taken by the city unless
the condition reoccurs within the six-month time frame granted by the original
administrative order. In which case, no further notice shall be required for
the city to abate the nuisance.
   (D)   The property owner may, within ten days from the date of service of
the notice and administrative order, file an appeal of such order with the City
Clerk asking that such order be considered by the City Council prior to its
enforcement. Such appeal shall be heard at the next regular or special City
Council meeting next following the filing of such appeal, and the decision of
the Council shall be final.
   (E)   No extensions of time shall be granted by the administrative officer
for code enforcement to correct the code violations and no extension of time
for appeal to the City Council shall be allowed.
   (F)   The City Council shall approve the appointment of the administrative
officer for code enforcement, who shall be responsible for the enforcement of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 93.028) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.029 WORK DONE BY EMPLOYEES OR CONTRACT.
   The work ordered to be performed under §
93.028 may be done by the employees of this city under supervision of the City
Manager, or it may be let by contract to the lowest and best bidder, after
appropriate notice, in the manner for letting other contracts by public bid.
(Prior Code, § 93.029) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.030 DETERMINATION OF ASSESSMENTS OF COSTS.
   (A)   (1)   Effective October 1, 2019, amounts charged by the city for
mowing, clean-up, removal of trash, waste, or abatement procedures, will be
charged using actual labor, equipment, material, transportation, and
administrative expense.
      (2)   Equipment charges will be calculated using FEMA’s Schedule of
Equipment Rates in effect at the time services are performed. Labor charges
will be calculated per individuals current wage and benefits rate. Materials
will be billed at actual cost to the city.
      (3)   Administrative expense will be billed as line items for actual
costs of postage, copies, inspections, travel, photos, and any other expense
incurred by the city to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under §
93.029, the City Manager shall report the cost thereof to the City Council.
      (1)   Such report shall be itemized as to each tract of property
involved.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall forward a statement and demand payment of the
total cost by mail, documented with a certificate of mailing, to the owner of
the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the
Treasurer of the county in which the property lies.
(Prior Code, § 93.030) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.031 LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.
   (A) If the costs of the work performed under this subchapter are not paid
within 30 days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by §
93.028, the City Clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the
costs to the County Treasurer in which the property upon which the work was
done is located, in order that the amount be levied upon the property and be
collected by the County Treasurer in the manner prescribed by the law of this
state. The certified statement of costs must be filed with the County Treasurer
between the thirty-first day and the sixtieth day after the property owner was
billed.
   (B)   The lien is coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other
taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and
liens against the property.
   (C)   The lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid.
      (1)   After filing the certified statement of costs with the County
Treasurer, payment shall only be made to the County Treasurer, who will then
forward the moneys received to the city. If the city and the County Treasurer
deem this lien noncollectable, the city may pursue any civil remedy for
collection of the amount owing and interest thereon.
      (2)   Upon receiving payment, if any, the City Clerk shall forward to the
County Treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien.
(Prior Code, § 93.031) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.032 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   The service of all notices prescribed by this subchapter shall be evidenced
by the return of the officer making such service, certified in his or her
official capacity, and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 93.032) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.033 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT RUBBISH.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place, or deposit any rubbish,
trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush, or any
other refuse or waste matter in or around any trash container located within
the city, except when such person is using a trash container assigned for his
or her use by the city or an authorized trash-hauling service or with the
express consent of the person(s) to whom the trash container has been assigned.
(Prior Code, § 93.033) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.034 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city
shall, within 24 hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass.
(Prior Code, § 93.034) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
Cross-reference:
   Animals generally, see
Chapter 90
§ 93.035 LITTER.
   (A)   Unlawful to litter. It is unlawful for any person to allow any trash,
refuse, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, abandoned appliances, paper
wrappings, cigarette butts, cardboard, yard clippings, leaves, wood, grass,
bedding, waste paper, tin cans, bottles, or any other discarded, unusable, or
uncared for objects or substances to accumulate, litter, or otherwise lie on or
about any public or private property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 93.035)
   (B)   Unlawful to litter from automobiles. It is unlawful for any person to
throw from any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and
over the streets, alleys, and roadways of the city any litter, trash, waste
paper, tin cans, or any other substance or refuse whatever.
(Prior Code, § 93.036)
   (C)   Litter not to accumulate on property. It is hereby declared to be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, occupying any real property,
either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, waste paper, litter, bottles, tin
cans, or any other used, unusable, uncared for, discarded, or disposed of
objects to accumulate upon such real property or premises or on the sidewalk in
front of such property or premises. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation occupying any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow
accumulated trash, waste paper, litter, bottles, tin cans, or any other used or
disposed of objects to be carried from the occupied premises, either by the
wind, elements, or otherwise to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned
or occupied by the offender.
(Prior Code, § 93.037)
(Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.036 UNAUTHORIZED PERSON NOT TO REMOVE GARBAGE OR RUBBISH.
   It is unlawful for any person, unless authorized so to do by the city, to
remove from any premises or premises situated in the city or to transport
through the streets, alleys, or public places of the city any garbage or
rubbish.
(Prior Code, § 93.038) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.037 ABANDONED ICE BOXES, REFRIGERATORS.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container
which has an air-tight door with a lock or other fastening device which cannot
be easily released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator, or
container, without first removing the door, lock, or fastener.
(Prior Code, § 93.039) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.038 PREMISES USED FOR STORING JUNK TO BE FENCED.
   It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying, in possession of, or in any
manner having charge of, a building, house, or structure of any kind, or any
vacant lot or parcel of ground within the limits of the city, or within 3,000
feet thereof, to place or permit to be kept therein or thereon, any motor
vehicle not in running order, or any parts of same, or any other material
whatsoever which is in fact what is commonly known as junk or trash, unless the
same is completely enclosed or screened by a privacy type fence or barrier at
least four feet to six feet tall, so as to hide the view of same from the
general public using the streets, highways, or alleys within the city.
(Prior Code, § 93.040) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.039 DEPOSIT OF GLASS, NAILS, OR OTHER INJURIOUS MATTER IN STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, or let fall
and remain, in or upon any street, any scrap iron, nail, tack, glass, stick, or
other thing which is likely to injure persons or damage property, or to render
a street unsafe for traffic.
(Prior Code, § 93.041) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 47 O.S. § 11-1110
ABANDONED OR JUNKED PERSONAL PROPERTY
§ 93.050 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any abandoned or junked personal property is hereby declared a
nuisance and is prohibited, and is subject to abatement as provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED or JUNKED.
         (a)   Any such motor vehicle, equipment, boat, or trailer which is
located on a public place or public right-of-way or in any place where it is
visible from a public place or public right-of-way and which:
            1.   Does not have lawfully affixed thereto, if required by law,
both an unexpired license plate or plates and a valid insurance verification;
            2.   Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded,
uncared for, or inoperable; or
            3.   Is not being used.
         (b)   A presumption shall exist that vehicles have been ABANDONED
when:
            1.   Weed and/or grass undergrowth indicates to a reasonable person
that the vehicle has not been moved, thereby permitting such growth to occur;
            2.   One or more wheels/tires are flat or missing;
            3.   Portions of the vehicle, which are needed for its operation or
control, are missing;
            4.   Statements provided by neighbors or witnesses as to the time
length such vehicle has been standing in one place without removal, or
statements that parts are taken from or added to such vehicle or added to such
vehicle which would indicate a salvage or garage operation; or
            5.   Evidence exists that provisions of this code pertaining to
zoning or to junk and salvage yards are being violated.
      BOAT. Any fishing boat, rowboat, canoe, sail boat, power boat, or other
device designed to float on water and carry cargo, passengers, or occupants.
      EQUIPMENT. Any farm implement (including, without limitation, a tractor,
thresher, and combine), oil field apparatus of any kind or nature, or any other
piece of equipment of any kind or nature whether or not on wheels.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle as defined in 47 O.S. and includes
without limitation an automobile, truck, tractor-trailer, bus, pick-up truck,
van, motorhome, and motorcycle.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Motor vehicles, equipment, boats, and trailers.
      TRAILER. Any camping trailer, stock trailer, float, or any other
apparatus which is designed to be towed behind a motor vehicle.
   (C)   However, this subchapter shall not apply to personal property or parts
thereof maintained in a
manner:
      (1)   Which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner
and where it is not visible from the street or other public or private
property; or
      (2)   Which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer, salvage yard, or a junkyard.
   (D)   All of the foregoing shall be referred to as abandoned or junked
property or as the property.
(Prior Code, § 93.055) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.051 ORDER TO REMOVE ABANDONED OR JUNKED PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Chief of Police of the city may order the removal of any abandoned
or junked personal property. Any order requiring the removal of such abandoned
or junked personal property or part thereof shall include a description of the
abandoned or junked personal property and, if applicable, the correct
identification number and license number of the abandoned or junked personal
property if available at the site.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or any police officer may enter upon private real
property for the purposes specified in this subchapter relative to removal of
abandoned or junked personal property to examine the abandoned or junked
personal property or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of
the abandoned or junked personal property, and to remove or cause the removal
of the abandoned or junked personal property or parts thereof declared by the
Chief of Police to be a nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 93.056) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.052 NOTICE TO THE OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF THE PREMISES AND ANY KNOWN LIEN
HOLDER.
   (A) Prior to removal of abandoned or junked personal property by the city as
provided in this subchapter, notice shall be given to:
      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises whereupon such nuisance
exists;
      (2)   Any registered owner of the abandoned or junked personal property;
and
      (3)   (a)   Any lien holder claiming an interest in the abandoned or
junked personal property, if known, in person or by mail, documented by a
certificate of mailing, stating the nature of the public nuisance and giving
the owner or occupant, registered owner or lien holder 20 days from the date of
delivery of such notice in which to remove the abandoned or junked personal
property or take sufficient action to abate the nuisance.
         (b)   If unable to ascertain all parties with an interest in the
abandoned or junked vehicle, the notice or administrative order may be posted
on said vehicle 20 days prior to removal.
   (B)   Such notice shall provide that if the owner or occupant, registered
owner or lien holder fails to remove the abandoned or junked personal property
or take sufficient action to abate the nuisance within said 20-day period, that
a hearing shall be conducted on a certain date as provided in §
93.053.
   (C)   If delivery of the notice to the owner or occupant, registered owner,
or any lien holder cannot be made in person or by certificate of mailing, such
notice shall be given by posting order on the vehicle or by publication for two
successive weeks in a newspaper published in the city.
   (D)   If notice is given by publication or posting to the vehicle the above-
referenced 20-day period shall commence from the first date of publication or
posting.
   (E)   Such prior notice shall not be required in cases where an emergency
exists or where the danger to the public requires immediate removal.
(Prior Code, § 93.0357) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.053 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   A public hearing shall be conducted prior to the removal by the city
of any abandoned or junked personal property, or after removal in the cases
where removal was done by reason of emergency or immediate danger.
   (B)   Such hearing shall be conducted before the City Manager, where the
owner or occupant, registered owner, or lien holder shall appear and show cause
why the abandoned or junked personal property should not be removed.
   (C)   In cases where such property was removed prior to notice by reason of
an emergency or immediate danger, such owner or occupant, registered owner, or
lien holder shall show cause why the removed property should be returned.
   (D)   The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council
at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting called for such purpose.
   (E)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 93.058) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.054 NO REMOVED MOTOR VEHICLE TO BE RECONSTRUCTED OR MADE OPERABLE.
   No motor vehicle removed under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
reconstructed or made operable.
(Prior Code, § 93.059) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.055 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED OR JUNKED PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police shall dispose of abandoned or junked personal property
or parts thereof by removal to a scrap yard or salvage yard or cause it to be
demolished as scrap or salvage, but subject to the provision of §
93.054.
(Prior Code, § 93.060) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.056 EFFECT OF REMOVAL.
   Effective upon removal of the abandoned or junked personal property, the
right, title, and interest of the owner thereof or any other person claiming
any interest therein shall cease immediately.
(Prior Code, § 93.061) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.057 NOTICE TO STATE TAX COMMISSION, OWNER AND LIEN HOLDER.
   Notice shall be given by the Chief of Police to the State Tax Commission and
owner of any registered motor vehicle, equipment, boat, or trailer within five
days of the date of removal identifying the abandoned or junked personal
property or part thereof and stating its disposition.
(Prior Code, § 93.062) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.058 ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION.
   Administration and supervision of the removal of abandoned or junked
personal property or part thereof as provided in this subchapter shall be by
the Chief of Police of the city, except that the removal of the abandoned or
junked personal property or part thereof declared to be a nuisance may be by
any other person duly authorized by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 93.063) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.059 IMMEDIATE REMOVAL OF VEHICLE OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall affect the provisions permitting
immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.
(Prior Code, § 93.064) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 93.070 COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT DESIGNATED TO ENFORCE HEALTH ORDINANCES.
   Anywhere in this chapter where the word or words HEALTH OFFICER are used,
they shall be construed to mean the Director of the County Health Department,
or his or her duly designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of
the Mayor and City Council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances
of this city as set out in this section and any such decisions rendered under
this section shall be subject to review by the governing board upon an appeal
from an offender.
(Prior Code, § 93.075) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 93.071 OBSTRUCTING HEALTH OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with
any Health Officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the health laws
of this city.
(Prior Code, § 93.076) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.072 QUARANTINE; VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully violate or refuse or omit
to comply with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule, or regulation of
the Board of Health, or any officer charged with enforcement of such order,
direction, prohibition, rule, or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 93.077) (Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of §§
93.025 through
93.039 or shall allow the premises occupied to become unsanitary, or who shall
in any manner violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in
§
10.99.
      (3)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
93.070 through
93.072 or any law or code adopted by reference in this chapter is guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations.
(Prior Code, § 93.999)
   (B)   Failure to comply with §
93.034 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Abandoned or junked personal property (§§
93.050 et seq.): $50 fine for the first violation; $100 fine for each
subsequent violation.
   (D)   Litter (§§
93.035 et seq.): $50 fine for each violation.
   (E)   Accumulation of trash and/or weeds (§§
93.025 et seq.): $50 fine for the first violation; $75 fine for the second
violation; $100 fine for the third violation; and $125 fine for each subsequent
violation.
(Ord. 2019-560, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 592, passed 5-6-2025)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS, RECREATION, AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Golf course; golf cart storage sheds
   
94.002   Walters Skateboard Park
   
94.003   City swimming pool
   
94.004   Walters Tower Reserve
Public Library
   
94.015   Purpose
   
94.016   Library established
   
94.017   Governing board
   
94.018   Term of office
   
94.019   Removal from office
   
94.020   Election of Chairperson; rules of the Board
   
94.021   Appointment of members of the Library Board; hiring of librarian;
contracts; budgets
   
94.022   Annual financial report
   
94.023   Annual appropriations
   
94.024   Fee established
Cemeteries
   
94.035   Cemetery Association
   
94.036   Definitions
   
94.037   Association authority and powers
   
94.038   Cemetery ownership
   
94.039   Rules and regulations
   
94.040   Superintendent
   
94.041   Lot conveyance
   
94.042   Records of ownership
   
94.043   Abandonment
   
94.044   Funds; collection and accounting
   
94.045   Reports
   
94.046   Concrete curbing in or around cemetery lots
Lake Boyer
   
94.060   Definitions
   
94.061   Polluting or littering
   
94.062   Wading
   
94.063   Swimming
   
94.064   Hunting and fishing
   
94.065   When operation of boats permitted
   
94.066   Boats, regulations for use
   
94.067   City not liable for damages resulting from activities at lake
   
94.068   Water skiing, when and where permitted
   
94.069   Water skiing, regulations for use
Sultan Park
   
94.080   Vehicles
   
94.081   Weapons
   
94.082   Bird sanctuary
   
94.083   Acts prohibited
   
94.084   Fireworks
Walters Youth Park and Kidtopia Playground Facility
   
94.095   Access to Walters Youth Park
   
94.096   Access to and use of Kidtopia Playground Facility
   
94.097   Weapons
 
   
94.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001 GOLF COURSE; GOLF CART STORAGE SHEDS.
   (A)   Charge for golf cart storage sheds. The owner of each golf cart
storage shed maintained at the Lakeside Golf Course shall pay a fee based on
the capacity of the shed, which shall be an amount to be set by the City
Council from time to time per cart per year or any portion thereof for each
year beginning 1992, which shall be fully earned when due. The fee for 1992
shall be due March 15, 1992. The fee for each year thereafter shall be due
January 1 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 94.095)
   (B)   Failure to pay. If any storage shed owner fails to pay the fee or
remove the storage shed by the due date, the city shall have a lien thereon for
the total amount due plus any expenses which may be incurred related thereto,
including, without limitation, the expenses of enforcing the lien, which may be
enforced in accordance with 42 O.S. § 91.
(Prior Code, § 94.096)
(Ord. 92-423, passed 2-4-1992) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.002 WALTERS SKATEBOARD PARK.
   (A)   The City Council deems that it is necessary and expedient to the city
and to the best interests of the city to set the following rules regarding use
of the Walters Skateboard Park Facility.
      (1)   Use this park at your own risk. This is a high risk activity and is
non-supervised. The city does not assume any responsibility for injuries that
may occur during the use of this park.
      (2)   No bicycles permitted.
      (3)   The park is open to all patrons, but it is strongly recommended
that children under ten years of age be accompanied by a parent or guardian,
      (4)   There is no charge to use this facility.
      (5)   Skate park hours: Daily 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. No usage from 10:01
p.m. to 7:59 a.m. Violators will be prosecuted.
      (6)   Safety gear such as helmets, knee and elbow pads, wrist guards, and
gloves must be worn at all times.
      (7)   No profanity, drugs, alcohol, tobacco products, weapons, or
defacing public property.
      (8)   No glass containers.
      (9)   No motorized equipment allowed (except motorized wheel chairs).
      (10)   Keep noise to a minimum. No loud music.
      (11)   Keep food and drink off skate surface. Use trash receptacles.
      (12)   Use only obstacles put in place by the city. No using trash cans,
makeshift or homemade items as obstacles.
      (13)   Do not use facility if hazardous conditions exist including rain,
snow, or ice.
      (14)   Do not overcrowd facility.
      (15)   Horseplay, fighting, or other destructive behavior prohibited.
   (B)   All skaters and visitors must follow these rules or you will be asked
to leave. This facility is provided for all of you. Keeping it open is
everyone’s responsibility.
   (C)   Report any hazards, unsafe conditions, vandalism, or violators to the
City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 94.160) (Ord. 2008-503, passed 8-19-2008) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.003 CITY SWIMMING POOL.
   (A)   The City Council of the city deem that it is necessary and expedient
to the city and to the best interests of the city to set a new fee structure
for admission to and use of the Walters Public Swimming Pool and to adopt this
section setting such fees, to-wit:
   (B)   The fees to be charged for admission to and use of the Walters Public
Swimming Pool shall be subject to change at the discretion of the City Council
from time to time:
      (1)   Children (18 years of age and under): $2.50;
      (2)   Adults (over 18 years of age): $3;
      (3)   Parties:
         (a)   Twenty-five people or less, two-hour minimum: $45 per hour;
         (b)   Twenty-five people or more, two-hour minimum: $60 per hour; and
         (c)   Extra life guard for each 25 people: $15 per hour.
      (4)   Summer pass: $50; and
      (5)   Family pass: $125 for three and $25 for each additional.
(Prior Code, § 94.170) (Ord. 2015-544, passed 4-21-2015)
§ 94.004 WALTERS TOWER RESERVE.
   (A)   Access. Access to the Walters Tower Reserve property located in Block
90, Addition to Walters, Oklahoma, located between Seventh Street and Nebraska,
Walters, Oklahoma, shall be limited to individuals, businesses, corporations,
or entities for the temporary location of campers, fifth wheels, trailers, or
motor homes for overnight accommodation purposes. The use shall be limited to
no more than 14 consecutive days unless prior written approval is granted by
the City Manager. Permit fees shall be charged for any use or occupancy
permitted hereby.
(Prior Code, § 94.145)
   (B)   Permits; fees. A permit issued by the city shall be required prior to
access to said property. A permit fee in an amount to be set by the City
Council from time to time shall be charged for each night of use by any
individual, business, corporation, or entity for each camper, fifth wheel,
trailer, or motor home caused to be located thereon, provided, that should a
permit issue for a period of seven consecutive nights the permit fee shall be
in the amount in another amount to be set by the City Council from time to time
for the seven consecutive night period.
(Prior Code, § 94.146)
   (C)   Dwelling and camping prohibited. No person shall be permitted to
maintain a temporary or permanent residence on the Walters Tower Reserve at any
time, and no camping shall be permitted thereon.
(Prior Code, § 94.147)
(Ord. 2005-486, passed 6-21-2005; Ord. 2011-522, passed 4-19-2011) Penalty, see
§
94.999
PUBLIC LIBRARY
§ 94.015 PURPOSE.
   It is the desire and intent of the governing body of the city to provide
free public library service to the residents of the city for the benefit of the
city, the state, and the nation.
(Prior Code, § 94.001) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.016 LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.
   The city public library is hereby established.
(Prior Code, § 94.002) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal libraries, power to establish, see 11 O.S. §§ 31-101 et seq.
§ 94.017 GOVERNING BOARD.
   (A)   The public library shall be governed by a board of five members,
appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Appointments to the Library Board shall be made on the basis of
ability, understanding of the total responsibilities and objectives of public
libraries, and an active interest in the attainment of these goals.
   (C)   All Library Board members shall serve thereon without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 94.003) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.018 TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The Board members shall hold office as follows: initial appointments
shall be for one-year terms, two-year terms, and two three-year terms.
   (B)   Subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms, except in the
case of an appointment to fill a vacancy, which appointment shall be for the
remainder of the unexpired term which is vacant.
   (C)   All terms of initial and succeeding appointees shall expire on June 20
of the designated year.
(Prior Code, § 94.004) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.019 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Any Board member may be removed by the appointing authority for misconduct,
failure to attend Board meetings, or other neglect of duty.
(Prior Code, § 94.005) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.020 ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON; RULES OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   Immediately after the initial appointments and annually thereafter,
the Library Board shall meet and organize by an election of one of its number
as Chairperson, and by the election of such other officers as it deems
necessary.
   (B)   They may adopt such laws, rules, and regulations for their own
guidance and for the government of the library as may be expedient and not
inconsistent with this subchapter and the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 94.006) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.021 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE LIBRARY BOARD; HIRING OF LIBRARIAN;
CONTRACTS; BUDGETS.
   (A)   The members of the Library Board of the city shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   The City Manager shall hire the librarian for the city library.
   (C)   All contracts affecting the city library shall be approved by the City
Council.
   (D)   The budget for the city library shall be approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 94.007) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981; Ord. 2002-472, passed 9-3-
2002; Ord. 2002-473, passed 9-17-2002)
§ 94.022 ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT.
   (A)   The Library Board shall submit an annual financial and statistical
report to the Mayor and City Council and the State Department of Libraries for
each fiscal year ending June 30.
   (B)   The report shall include an accounting for moneys received and
expended and such other statistics about library use, collections, and staff
which may be deemed necessary to account for their trust.
(Prior Code, § 94.008) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.023 ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS.
   The Mayor and City Council shall annually appropriate to the Library Board
from funds available to the city such moneys as are deemed necessary to operate
and maintain the city public library for the education and cultural enrichment
of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.009) (Ord. 403, passed 8-18-1981)
§ 94.024 FEE ESTABLISHED.
   The fee for utilizing equipment owned or operated by the Public Library of
Walters, Oklahoma, to copy, print, generate, or otherwise produce poster-size
pages shall be $7 per page.
(Ord. 588, passed 11-5-2024)
CEMETERIES
§ 94.035 CEMETERY ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   A board is hereby established, to be known as the Walters Cemetery
Association. It shall consist of five Trustees, to be appointed and removed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. One Trustee shall be
Chairperson, one Vice Chairperson, and one Secretary whose terms shall expire
July 31 of each year.
   (B)   In July of each year, the members of the Board shall elect their
officers for the next ensuing fiscal year. Trustees shall be appointed to serve
terms of five years, and terms of office shall be staggered at one-year
intervals; provided, however, that the terms of the existing Trustees shall
continue as originally appointed pursuant to Ord. 94-437 in 1994, that is: one
member shall serve a term of two years, one member shall serve a term of four
years, and one member shall serve a term of six years. Of the new Trustees, one
member shall be appointed to a term expiring July 31, 1998, and the other to a
term expiring July 31, 2000. A majority of all the members of the Cemetery
Association shall constitute a quorum. The Association shall hold quarterly
meetings, at such times and places as it shall select, and special meetings as
the Association Chairperson shall deem necessary. A complete copy of the
minutes of each meeting shall be kept by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 94.020) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994; Ord. 96-446, passed 11-
5-1996)
§ 94.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSOCIATION. The Walters Cemetery Association.
   DEPARTMENT. The Parks and Recreation Department of the city.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. The rules and regulations established by the
Association for cemetery operations.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person employed as caretaker for the cemeteries owned
and operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.021) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.037 ASSOCIATION AUTHORITY AND POWERS.
   (A)   The Association shall function as both an advisory and administrative
body.
   (B)   It shall have the power to:
      (1)   Adopt rules and regulations for cemetery operations;
      (2)   Make rulings on the applicability of rules and regulations for the
cemetery;
      (3)   Make recommendations affecting cemetery management to the City
Manager;
      (4)   Make recommendations to the City Council for budgetary items;
      (5)   Make recommendations to the City Council with respect to the
employment of a Superintendent; and
      (6)   Set fees and charges for spaces and services rendered at city’s
cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 94.022) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.038 CEMETERY OWNERSHIP.
   The city shall own the municipal cemeteries, i.e., Walters Cemetery and
Hillside Cemetery, and all other land hereafter acquired by the city for use as
a cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 94.023) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.039 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Association shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the
city’s cemeteries, concerning lots, deeds, plats, monuments, and fees which
shall become effective after approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 94.024) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.040 SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   The Association shall recommend to the City Council a person or
persons to be considered for employment as the Cemetery Superintendent for the
city.
   (B)   The Superintendent’s duties shall be to officially manage the
cemeteries under the direction of the City Manager and to enforce the rules and
regulations adopted by the Association.
   (C)   The cemeteries shall be included within the Parks and Recreation
Department.
(Prior Code, § 94.025) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.041 LOT CONVEYANCE.
   (A)   Lots in the cemetery shall be conveyed by certificate or deed signed
by the Chairperson of the Association and attested by the Secretary of the
Association, under the seal of the city.
      (1)   The certificate shall show the price for which the lots are sold
and specify that the person to whom it is issued is the owner of the lot or
lots described therein by number, as laid down in the plat, for the purpose of
interment.
      (2)   The certificate shall vest in the purchaser and his or her heirs a
right to the lot or lots, for the sole purpose of interment, under the
regulations of the Association and city.
   (B)   Before recording any conveyance between purchasers and sellers, proof
of ownership and documentation of lot conveyance, as required by the city,
shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 94.026) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.042 RECORDS OF OWNERSHIP.
   The City Clerk shall maintain full and complete records of ownership of all
lots and spaces in the cemetery, of the burial capacity of each lot, whether
sold and unsold, of the location of each grave, of the name of the person
buried in each grave that has been or shall thereafter be used, and of the
burial of each.
(Prior Code, § 94.027) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.043 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   The city will deem a lot or space abandoned by its owner if:
      (1)   The space or lot has not been used during the past 70 years; and
      (2)   No contact or indication of interest has been shown by the owners
of the space or lot.
   (B)   If a space or lot has been abandoned, it may be reclaimed by the city
using the following procedure:
      (1)   One publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city of the city’s intent to reclaim the space or lot described by its deed
or cemetery description; and
      (2)   Attempt to contact the person(s) or heirs of the person(s) shown to
be the legal owner(s) of the cemetery space or lot to ascertain whether he or
she desires to use the space or lot or sell it.
   (C)   After the procedure outlined in division (B) above is completed
without response from the owner(s) or his or her heirs within 30 days of the
publication date, the space or lot may be reclaimed by the city and sold.
   (D)   If an abandoned space or lot is resold and a person appears with a
deed or other reliable proof showing ownership to the space or lot, the
Association and the city shall make another space or lot available to him or
her as a substitute at no additional charge.
   (E)   No space or lot held in trust pursuant to 11 O.S. § 26-104 shall be
considered abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 94.028) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994; Ord. 95-440, passed 6-6-
1995) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.044 FUNDS; COLLECTION AND ACCOUNTING.
   (A)   General Care Fund. The General Care Fund shall be comprised of 87.5%
of all money received from the sale of lots and interments plus all donations
specifically designated to this fund by the donor. If no such designation is
made by the donor, a gift in an amount to be set by the City Council from time
to time or less shall be deposited in the General Care Fund. Sums of more than
an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time, but less than
another amount to be set by the City Council from time to time, may be placed
in the General Care Fund if necessary for cemetery operating expenses. Both the
principal and interest generated by the General Care Fund shall be utilized for
the day-to-day operations and maintenance of cemeteries owned by the city. The
City Council shall administer the General Care Fund with due consideration to
the recommendations presented by the Association.
(Prior Code, § 94.029)
   (B)   Permanent Care Fund. The Permanent Care Fund shall be a separate
account comprised of 12.5% of all money received from the sale of lots and
interments plus all un-designated donations that are not deposited with the
General Care Fund pursuant to division (A) above. The fund principal shall be
used to purchase additional cemetery land and to make capital improvements in
the cemetery. The balance of the fund may be invested in the manner provided by
law for the investment of municipal funds. Interest from the investments shall
be used for the same purpose as the principal or to construct lots, walks,
drives, or parks, or to purchase necessary cemetery equipment. The fund shall
be administered by the City Council with due consideration to the
recommendations of the Association.
(Prior Code, § 94.030)
   (C)   Deposit and accounting. It is the duty of the Superintendent, or other
city officials as designated by the City Council, to account for all money
received from the sale of lots or from interments, or from any other source,
and to deposit such funds with the city in the appropriate accounts as outlined
in this subchapter. The city shall make provision and separate accounting in
its yearly budget for operation and maintenance of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 94.031)
(Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Cemetery Care Fund, see 11 O.S. § 26-109
§ 94.045 REPORTS.
   The Superintendent shall make a report on the condition of the cemetery at
each Association meeting. An annual written report shall be presented to the
Association in July of each year with all information necessary for
recommending the amount that should be requested for the cemetery budget.
Further, the Association shall, on the first Monday in January and July of each
year, make a full report to the City Council of all lots sold, interments made,
and all money received and expended by the Association.
(Prior Code, § 94.032) (Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994)
§ 94.046 CONCRETE CURBING IN OR AROUND LOTS.
   (A)   Permit. All persons desiring to construct concrete curbing in and
around cemetery lots shall first apply to the Superintendent in charge of the
cemetery and obtain a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 94.033)
   (B)   Specifications. All concrete curbing in or around cemetery lots must
be at least six inches in depth and 14 inches in width and shall not extend
above the ground grade or level. Such curbing must also contain four, one-half
inch rebars running parallel to each other.
(Prior Code, § 94.034)
(Ord. 94-437, passed 5-17-1994) Penalty, see §
94.999
LAKE BOYER
§ 94.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LAKE. The body of water owned by the city and known as Lake Boyer. Such term
shall also include all property surrounding the lake and owned or controlled by
the city, unless clearly indicated to the contrary.
   WATER SKIING or SKIING. The act of being towed by boat and motor on properly
designed wooden or metal skis, wherein the person being towed holds or secures
to his or her person a towline direct from the boat.
(Prior Code, § 94.045)
§ 94.061 POLLUTING OR LITTERING.
   It is unlawful for any person to leave or deposit in the lake or on the lake
property any substance or refuse which may tend to pollute the waters of the
lake, or to leave or deposit any cans or rubbish thereon.
(Prior Code, § 94.046) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.062 WADING.
   It is unlawful for any person to wade in the lake, unless he or she is
wearing rubber boots that will not leak, or to wade in water that will come
over the boot tops.
(Prior Code, § 94.047) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.063 SWIMMING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to swim in the lake.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to a person skiing on the lake in accord
with the provisions of this subchapter, while he or she is making a reasonable
and uninterrupted attempt to regain his or her skis or boat, or both, but in
the event that an uninterrupted attempt is not made to do so, such person shall
be in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 94.048) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.064 HUNTING AND FISHING.
   (A)   No person shall fish or hunt on the lake or lake property without
first securing a permit therefor from the City Clerk and paying such fees as
may, from time to time, be prescribed by the City Council. No free permits
shall ever be issued.
   (B)   No game, except migratory birds, shall be killed upon the lake or lake
property.
   (C)   No fishing shall be allowed in the lake, except at such times as the
same may be recommended by the State Fish and Game Commission.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to exceed the limit, as to size and
number, of fish taken from the lake, as such limit is fixed by the State Fish
and Game Commission.
(Prior Code, § 94.049) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.065 WHEN OPERATION OF BOATS PERMITTED.
   (A)   Boats propelled by a motor of ten or less horsepower may be operated
on the lake from sunup to sundown on any day.
   (B)   Boats propelled by a motor of more than ten horsepower may be operated
on the lake on any Sunday or Wednesday between 1:00 p.m. and sundown. Such
boats may also be operated, for the purpose of towing skiers, at any time that
skiing is permitted by §
94.068.
   (C)   Boats which are not propelled by a motor may be operated on the lake
on any day between sunup and 11:00 p.m.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to operate any boat on the lake, except
during the times that such operation is permitted by this section.
(Prior Code, § 94.050) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.066 BOATS, REGULATIONS FOR USE.
   (A)   Permits for motorboats.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor boat on the lake, unless a
current permit has been issued for such boat by the City Clerk. No such permit
shall be issued unless the boat is in compliance with all applicable provisions
of this subchapter.
      (2)   (a)   An annual boat permit, valid for the calendar year, may be
obtained upon payment of a fee as set by the Council, by motion or resolution,
for boats propelled by a motor of more than ten horsepower, or boats propelled
by a motor of ten horsepower or less.
         (b)   A daily permit, valid only for the day for which issued, may be
obtained for a boat propelled by a motor of more than ten horsepower, upon
payment of a fee as set by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 94.051)
   (B)   Boats to be equipped with floats. It is unlawful for any person to
operate or maintain any character of boat in and upon the waters of the lake,
for pleasure, fishing, or any other purpose, without first providing such boat
with at least two air chambers or floats of such size and capacity and with
sufficient buoyancy to keep such boat afloat under all reasonable circumstances
and conditions of the weather.
(Prior Code, § 94.052)
   (C)   Boat operation while intoxicated or under influence of drugs; reckless
operation. It is unlawful for any person to operate any boat, motorboat, or any
other type of watercraft on the lake while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or narcotics or other habit-forming drugs, or to operate any boat,
motorboat, or any other type of watercraft on the lake in a careless, wanton,
or reckless manner so as to endanger the life or property of another.
(Prior Code, § 94.053)
   (D)   Speed limit for boats near shore or dam. It is unlawful for any person
to operate any motorboat on the lake at a speed in excess of five mph when such
boat is within 200 feet of the shoreline or 300 feet of the dam.
(Prior Code, § 94.054)
Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.067 CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ACTIVITIES AT LAKE.
   The city shall not be liable, by reason of the provisions of this subchapter
or the issuance of any license or permit hereunder, for damages resulting from
injury to persons or property or loss of life, and any person operating any
boat or occupying any boat as a passenger, or otherwise using the lake or lake
property, shall do so solely at his or her own risk and responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 94.055) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.068 WATER SKIING, WHEN AND WHERE PERMITTED.
   (A)   Water skiing shall be permitted upon Lake Boyer, between May 30 and
September 30 of each year, each day between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and sundown.
It is unlawful for any person to ski upon the lake at any other time.
   (B)   The skiing area upon the lake shall be in and upon the main body of
water 300 feet from the dam and 200 feet from the remaining surrounding
shoreline. Skiing nearer to the dam than 300 feet or the shoreline than 200
feet is prohibited, except from the takeoff point and incoming point upon the
shore to the skiing area.
   (C)   No person shall ski in the sloughs of the lake.
(Prior Code, § 94.056) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.069 WATER SKIING, REGULATIONS FOR USE.
   (A)   License.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to ski on the lake, unless he or she
has a current license to do so issued by the City Clerk.
      (2)   A seasonal license, valid from May 30 through September 30 of the
year in which issued, may be obtained under this section, upon payment of a fee
as set by the Council by motion or resolution. If a person holds such a
seasonal license, other members of his or her immediate family living in his or
her home may obtain a similar license upon payment of a fee as set by the
Council for each such license.
      (3)   A daily license, valid only for the day for which issued, may be
obtained under this section, upon payment as set by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 94.057)
   (B)   Minimum length of skis; skis to be easily removed. Skis used on the
lake shall be not less than five feet in length, and shall be constructed so as
to permit easy removal. Skis available on the commercial market shall be deemed
to comply with this section.
(Prior Code, § 94.058)
   (C)   Minimum length of towline. Any line or rope used to tow a skier on the
lake shall be at least 30 feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 94.059)
   (D)   Life jackets. It is unlawful for any person to ski on the lake, or to
operate or ride in a boat towing a skier, unless he or she is wearing a
regulation life jacket.
(Prior Code, § 94.060)
   (E)   Boat not to tow more than two skiers. Not more than two skiers shall
be towed on the lake by the same boat at the same time.
(Prior Code, § 94.061)
   (F)   Towboat meeting or passing other boats. Boats towing skiers on the
lake shall keep to the right of other boats approaching from the opposite
direction and shall pass to the left of other boats proceeding in the same
direction.
(Prior Code, § 94.062)
Penalty, see §
94.999
SULTAN PARK
§ 94.080 VEHICLES.
   (A)   Speed. No vehicle shall be driven in Sultan Park at a greater speed
than 15 mph at all times.
(Prior Code, § 94.110)
   (B)   Driving on roadways. All vehicles shall be driven only on designated
roadways. No off-road driving shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 94.113)
   (C)   Parking. All vehicles shall be permitted to park off-road.
(Prior Code, § 94.114)
   (D)   Permitted vehicles. Only the operation of registered vehicles shall be
permitted. All non-registered vehicles (including four-wheelers, but excluding
bicycles) shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 94.115)
(Ord. 2001-468, passed 12-18-2001; Ord. 2004-482, passed 6-18-2004; Ord. 2011-
524, passed 9-6-2011) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.081 WEAPONS.
   At no time shall any weapons, including, but not limited to, any instruments
which launch any type of projectile, be permitted in Sultan Park.
(Prior Code, § 94.111) (Ord. 2001-468, passed 12-18-2001) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.082 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   The island located in the central part of Sultan Park is hereby declared a
bird sanctuary.
(Prior Code, § 94.112) (Ord. 2001-468, passed 12-18-2001) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.083 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   The following acts in Sultan Park are prohibited:
   (A)   Jumping or diving from the bridges or dock;
   (B)   Swimming or wading (including fishing waders);
   (C)   Camping without a permit;
   (D)   Fishing without a state fishing license;
   (E)   Littering;
   (F)   Operating any type of motorized water craft on the waterways
(excluding toy boats);
   (G)   Operating any vehicle on the swinging bridge;
   (H)   Molesting the goldfish;
   (I)   Use of glass bottles or glass containers; and
   (J)   The taking of bait fish in the Ox Bow pond, by any means, is
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 94.116) (Ord. 2004-482, passed 6-18-2004; Ord. 2011-524, passed
9-6-2011) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.084 FIREWORKS.
   No fireworks of any kind shall be discharged at Sultan Park, except on the
date designated by the City Manager, for the official celebration of
Independence Day each year, and only inside an area described as follows:
between the western most internal road of Sultan Park to the county road
bordering Sultan Park on the west side of the park; from the southern bottom
edge of the berm on the south side of the softball field southerly to the road
which serves as the western exit of Sultan Park; from the road which serves as
the western exit of Sultan Park southerly to the ditch which forms the southern
boundary of Sultan Park at that point; and from a point 50 feet west of the
gold fish pond to the county road bordering Sultan Park on the west side of the
park, and that said area shall be clearly marked so that all persons can
identify said area.
(Prior Code, § 94.117) (Ord. 2005-485, passed 5-17-2005) Penalty, see §
94.999
WALTERS YOUTH PARK AND KIDTOPIA PLAYGROUND FACILITY
§ 94.095 ACCESS TO WALTERS YOUTH PARK.
   (A)   Access to the Walters Youth Park located on East Kansas Street shall
be prohibited between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. during the week
(Monday through Thursday) and 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekends (Friday
through Sunday) for children under the age of 18 years, except as follows.
      (1)   Attendance at properly supervised practices or games of little
league softball, baseball, football, or other sports shall be permitted until
such practices or games are concluded.
      (2)   Use of the basketball courts for practices or games and the tennis
courts for practice or matches shall be permitted until such practices, games,
or matches are concluded.
   (B)   The City Council deems that it is necessary and expedient to the city
and to the best interests of the city to set the following rules regarding use
of the Walters Youth Park.
      (1)   Use this park at your own risk. This is a high risk activity and is
non-supervised. The city does not assume any responsibility for injuries that
may occur during the use of this park.
      (2)   The park is open to all patrons, but it is strongly recommended
that children under ten years of age be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
      (3)   There is no charge to use this facility.
      (4)   Hours: daily from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. No use from 12:01 a.m. to
5:00 a.m. Violators will be prosecuted.
      (5)   No smoking in park. Smoking is permitted in the parking lot only.
      (6)   No profanity, drugs, alcohol, tobacco products, or weapons shall be
allowed on the premises.
      (7)   Defacing public property is prohibited.
      (8)   No glass containers are allowed on the premises.
      (9)   Motorized equipment is not allowed on the premises including ATVs,
go-carts, golf carts, scooters, dirt bikes, or any other motor driven
recreational vehicles (except motorized wheel chairs).
      (10)   Keep noise to a minimum. No loud music.
      (11)   Gates shall be secured at all times.
      (12)   No hanging from basketball rims.
      (13)   All trash must be picked up. The use of trash receptacles is
required.
      (14)   Do not use facility if hazardous conditions exist.
      (15)   Vehicles are allowed in designated areas only.
      (16)   Horseplay, fighting, or other destructive behavior is prohibited.
      (17)   No open fires, fire pits, or any other burning is permitted.
      (18)   Guests, parents, or others interfering with a youth game will be
ejected or banned from park.
      (19)   Drunkards and all persons who have consumed alcohol prior to
coming to the Youth Park are not allowed on the premises.
      (20)   All visitors must follow these rules or you will be asked to
leave. Those who violate these rules will be prosecuted. Where applicable,
fines will be imposed for violation of these rules. This facility is provided
for all of you; keeping it open is everyone’s responsibility.
      (21)   Report any hazards, unsafe conditions, vandalism, or violators to
the City Hall at 129 E. Colorado, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday:
875-3337. After hours: Call Central Dispatch at 580-875-6061. Weekends,
holidays: 875-2060. Emergency: 911. Ambulance: 911.
(Prior Code, § 94.130) (Ord. 2003-480, passed 11-14-2003; Ord. 2011-529, passed
12-20-2011) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.096 ACCESS TO AND USE OF KIDTOPIA PLAYGROUND FACILITY.
   Access to and use of the Kidtopia Playground Facility shall be permitted
only for children 12 years of age or under and only with proper supervision by
their parents, legal guardians, or other responsible persons. The hours of
access to the Kidtopia Playground Facility shall be governed by the terms of §
94.095.
(Prior Code, § 94.131) (Ord. 2003-480, passed 11-14-2003) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.097 WEAPONS.
   At no time shall any weapons, including, but not limited to, any instruments
which launch any type of projectile, be permitted at the Walters Youth Park.
(Prior Code, § 94.132) (Ord. 2003-480, passed 11-14-2003) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
      (2)   The penalty for violating the provisions of §§
94.080 through
94.084 shall be a fine of not to exceed $200, restitution, community service,
or a combination of fine, restitution, and community service.
      (3)   Violation of any of the provisions of §§
94.004 shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine of up to $100,
plus costs, restitution, and community service.
(Prior Code, § 94.999)
   (B)   An person who discharges any fireworks in violation of §
94.084 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay
a fine in accordance with §§
32.27 and
32.29, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 94.117)
   (C)   Any violation of §§
94.095 to 94.097 shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as
provided in §
10.99. As an additional condition to the penalties provided in §
10.99, restitution may be ordered for any vandalism or damages to city property
located at the Walters Youth Park.
(Prior Code, § 94.133)
(Ord. 2003-480, passed 11-14-2003; Ord. 2004-482, passed 6-18-2004; Ord. 2005-
485, passed 5-17-2005; Ord. 2005-486, passed 6-21-2005; Ord. 2011-524, passed
9-6-2011)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
95.01   Plants, shrubs prohibited when a traffic hazard
   
95.02   Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery
   
95.03   Unlawful to obstruct sidewalks, parkways, streets, and alleys with
merchandise
   
95.04   Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets
   
95.05   Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks
   
95.06   Owner or occupant not to permit sidewalk or sidewalk area to become a
hazard
   
95.07   Certain obstructions prohibited
   
95.08   Display of address
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PLANTS, SHRUBS PROHIBITED WHEN A TRAFFIC HAZARD.
   No owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the city shall allow or
permit any tree, shrub, or plant, or any fence, wall, sign, or billboard,
building, or other object to grow or to be built or moved upon the street or
alley right-of-way abutting such lot or parcel of ground when the same shall
constitute a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of any vehicle on any
street of the city.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or
alley in the city. This section shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care
and removal of such trees and shrubbery.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS, STREETS, AND ALLEYS WITH
MERCHANDISE.
   Except when otherwise proclaimed as lawful by public proclamation of the
Mayor of the city, it is unlawful for any person to place upon or permit to be
placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets, and alleys of the city any goods,
wares, articles of merchandise, or any other obstruction, and leave same
thereon; or to use the same as a place to display goods or to carry on a
business or trade.
(Prior Code, § 95.03) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT UNDULY SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   It is unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city
in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to
use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to
interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon.
(Prior Code, § 95.04) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT TRASH UPON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, or sweep into or upon a
street, alley, parking, or sidewalk of the city any paper, rubbish, grass,
weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes, or other refuse of any kind,
except as may be specifically authorized in this code.
(Prior Code, § 95.05) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 OWNER OR OCCUPANT NOT TO PERMIT SIDEWALK OR SIDEWALK AREA TO BECOME A
HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a
sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to
the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(Prior Code, § 95.06) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 CERTAIN OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may obstruct any street, avenue, alley, crosswalk, sidewalk,
right-of-way, easement, or public ground in the city by any one of the
following:
      (1)   Placing, erecting, constructing, or maintaining any structure over,
upon, or across any such area or by placing any bush, hedge, or fence on such
area or by blocking by any means except as authorized in this code;
      (2)   Parking or working on any automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other
vehicle which is not in a condition to be operated in its normal manner of
operation or which is partially dismantled or is in the process of or is
completely dismantled or junked, except minor emergency repairs; and/or
      (3)   Parking, from sunset to sunrise, any truck, tractor, trailer, or
other vehicle having dual wheels, or the chassis thereof, any boat trailer,
motor home, or camping trailer of any size, or any vehicle having a width
greater than 84 inches within the area of the city zoned as R-1 Single-R Family
Residential District and R-2 Mixed Residential District.
   (B)   Any of the acts hereby prohibited shall constitute an obstruction even
though it is only a partial obstruction of the public’s free and unrestricted
use of such street, avenue, alley, crosswalk, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement,
or other public ground.
(Prior Code, § 95.07) (Ord. 97-450, passed 10-7-1997) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS.
   All owners of residential and business structures located in the city shall
cause the street address numbers of such structures to be displayed in a manner
so that such numbers are clearly visible from the street. Such numbers shall be
a minimum of three inches and a maximum of six inches in height, shall be a
maximum one and one-half inches in width, and must be located on or near the
structure.
(Prior Code, § 95.08) (Ord. 2003-475, passed 6-3-2003) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §
95.01 shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
10.99; however, no party shall be deemed to be in violation thereof until and
unless he or she has had notice by certified mail of such purported traffic
hazard and has failed to abate such hazard during the ten days next succeeding
receipt of such notice.
(Prior Code, § 95.01)
   (C)   Failure to display the street address number of a structure, as
required in §
95.08, shall be a violation hereof punishable in accordance with §§
10.99 and
32.29.
(Prior Code, § 95.08)
(Ord. 2003-475, passed 6-3-2003)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   FOOD AND RESTAURANTS
      
112.   MASSAGE BUSINESSES
      
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
114.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Unlawful receipt; possession; sale
   
110.03   Loitering on premises used for illegal sale
   
110.04   To be purchased only from licensed dealers
   
110.05   Package store occupation tax
   
110.06   Package store premises to be separated from premises where other
business conducted
   
110.07   Sale or delivery to minors
   
110.08   Minors not to misrepresent age for purpose of buying
   
110.09   Sale or delivery to intoxicated, insane, or mentally deficient person
   
110.10   Public intoxication; drinking intoxicating liquor in public
   
110.11   Adoption of state laws
   
110.12   Gatherings where minors are consuming alcoholic beverages
Low-Point Beer
   
110.25   Definitions
   
110.26   License for retail sale
   
110.27   On-premises sale prohibited near school or church
   
110.28   On-premises sale prohibited between certain hours
   
110.29   Sale to minors; consumption by minors
   
110.30   Employment of minors
   
110.31   Adoption of state laws
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all words, phrases, and terms used in this
chapter and not defined herein shall be interpreted and construed in conformity
with the definitions of the same set forth in 37A O.S. § 1-103, with the same
force and effect as if set forth in full herein, and such definitions are made
a part hereof by reference.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995)
§ 110.02 UNLAWFUL RECEIPT; POSSESSION; SALE.
   (A)   No person shall receive, possess, sell, barter, give away,
manufacture, or use any alcoholic beverages in violation of the constitution
and statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city.
   (B)   No person holding a license or permit under 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.,
the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, shall receive, possess, or sell any
alcoholic beverages, except as authorized by law and by the state license or
permit which he or she holds.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent or
employee thereof, to keep, maintain, or aid or abet in keeping or maintaining,
a place where any alcoholic beverage is manufactured, sold, bartered, given
away, or otherwise furnished in violation of law.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-101
§ 110.03 LOITERING ON PREMISES USED FOR ILLEGAL SALE.
   It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any place where alcoholic
beverages of any kind are bartered, sold, given away, or otherwise furnished
contrary to law.
(Prior Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 TO BE PURCHASED ONLY FROM LICENSED DEALERS.
   No person shall buy any alcoholic beverages, either at retail or wholesale,
from any person other than a dealer licensed under the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 PACKAGE STORE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied upon each person holding a lawful license
issued by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board for the operation of a
retail package store within the corporate limits of the city an annual
occupation tax in the maximum amount allowed by state law, as it may be amended
from time to time.
   (B)   All occupation taxes levied under the provisions of this section shall
expire on June 30 of each year, and shall be computed pro rata upon the months
remaining in the year ending June 30. Such taxes paid on or before the
fifteenth of any month shall be on the basis of the first day of each month,
and such taxes paid after the fifteenth day of any month shall be on the basis
of the first day of the next succeeding month.
   (C)   No retail package store shall be operated in the city until the
occupation tax levied by this section has been paid in full to the City Clerk
and his or her receipt has been issued therefor. The City Clerk shall make and
transmit to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board an annual report showing
the number of licenses upon which occupation taxes were levied under this
section, and the amount of money collected from such taxes.
(Prior Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy above tax, see 37A O.S. § 4-104
§ 110.06 PACKAGE STORE PREMISES TO BE SEPARATED FROM PREMISES WHERE OTHER
BUSINESS CONDUCTED.
   Except as may be permitted by state law, no retail package store shall be
conducted upon any premises, unless such premises are separated from the
premises on which any other goods, wares, or merchandise are sold or services
are rendered by non-transparent walls, which may be broken by a passageway to
which the public is not admitted. It is unlawful for any person to take any
alcoholic beverage from such store through such passageway for the purpose of
selling, reselling, or delivering in connection with the sale of such alcoholic
beverage.
(Prior Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 SALE OR DELIVERY TO MINORS.
   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver, or furnish any alcoholic beverage
to any person under 21 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-101A.1.
§ 110.08 MINORS NOT TO MISREPRESENT AGE FOR PURPOSE OF BUYING.
   No persons under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his or her age in
writing or by presenting false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing
any person to sell him or her alcoholic beverages.
(Prior Code, § 110.08) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-119A
§ 110.09 SALE OR DELIVERY TO INTOXICATED, INSANE, OR MENTALLY DEFICIENT PERSON.
   No person shall knowingly sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages to
an intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally
deficient.
(Prior Code, § 110.09) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-121
§ 110.10 PUBLIC INTOXICATION; DRINKING INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN PUBLIC.
   It is unlawful for any person who is drunk or in a state of intoxication to
appear or be upon or in any street, alley, or other public place, or for any
person to drink intoxicating liquor or beverage upon or in any street, alley,
or other public place within the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.10) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. § 6-101A.8
§ 110.11 ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS.
   In addition to the foregoing restrictions, the provisions of the state law
regarding the sale, possession, manufacture, distribution, or use of any
alcoholic beverages, including, without limitation, 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.,
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and are enforceable by
the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein and any
violation thereof is punishable in the Municipal Court, the same as violation
of any other city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 110.11) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995)
§ 110.12 GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
This term includes intoxicating beverages and low-point beer as defined herein.
      GATHERING. A party, gathering, or event where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
      INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. Includes beverages containing more than 3.2%
alcohol by weight.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
the Court.
      LOW-POINT BEER. Includes beverages containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume, and not more than 3.2% alcohol by weight, including, but not limited
to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion of barley or other grain, malt, or similar products.
      MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent,
or stepparent of another person.
      PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
      RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement,
fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent
responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the
administrative costs attributable to such response(s);
         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
         (c)   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged,
and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at
or leaving the scene of a gathering; and
         (d)   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
   (B)   Consumption of alcohol by minor in public place, place open to public,
or place not open to public. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful
for any minor to:
      (1)   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public
alcoholic beverage; or
      (2)   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage, that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where
minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited.
      (1)   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises, to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at such gathering. Reasonable steps in preventing the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by any minor at such gatherings shall include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at such gathering;
         (b)   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at such
gathering;
         (c)   Verifying the age of persons attending such gathering by
inspecting drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering;
and
         (d)   Supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at such premises whenever such
person knows or should have known that the consumption of alcohol by any minor
has occurred.
      (3)   Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any
religious practice which includes the use of alcohol; however, if a minor
leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public then
said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a non-
religious gathering.
      (4)   This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state
to dispense alcoholic beverages.
      (5)   The city may seek administrative fees and response costs associated
with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures provided by
statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace
officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising
out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall they limit the city’s
ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same
circumstances necessitating the application of this section.
      (6)   This section shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state
or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 2008-506, passed 11-18-2008) Penalty, see §
110.99
LOW-POINT BEER
§ 110.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, all words, phrases, and terms used in
this subchapter and not defined herein shall be interpreted and construed in
conformity with the definitions of the same set forth in 37A O.S. § 1-103, with
the same force and effect as if set forth in full herein, and such definitions
are made a part hereof by reference.
(Prior Code, § 110.25) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995)
Statutory reference:
   State law definitions, low-point beer, see 37A O.S. § 1-103
§ 110.26 LICENSE FOR RETAIL SALE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or temporary
at any place within the limits of the city, to sell, distribute, or dispense
any low-point beer without having first applied for and received a license from
the City Clerk. The annual fee for such a license shall be an amount to be set
by the City Council from time to time for a retail dealer selling low-point
beer for consumption on and off the premises, and another amount to be set by
the City Council from time to time for a retail dealer selling low-point beer
in original packages and not for consumption on the premises. Such fee shall be
paid to the City Clerk at the time of issuance of the license.
   (B)   No license shall be issued under this section without a satisfactory
showing that the applicant has obtained all state and county permits required
by law, and has in all other respects complied with the laws of the state
relating to the sale and distribution of low-point beer. All licenses issued
under this section shall expire on June 30 of each year. No such license shall
be transferable.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the term RETAIL DEALER means and
includes any and all persons, firms, corporations, associations, or
concessionaires who sell, distribute, or dispense, at retail, any low-point
beer within the city, without regard as to any place where such beverages may
be consumed or used.
(Prior Code, § 110.26) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to impose above license fee, see 37A O.S. § 4-104
§ 110.27 ON-PREMISES SALE PROHIBITED NEAR SCHOOL OR CHURCH.
   It is unlawful for any person to locate, operate, or maintain any tavern or
other place where low-point beer is sold or dispensed, for consumption on the
premises, within 300 feet of any school or any church located within the city
limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.27) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.28 ON-PREMISES SALE PROHIBITED BETWEEN CERTAIN HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any place licensed to sell beverages containing
more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2% of alcohol be weight
to sell, dispense, or serve such beverages for consumption on the premises
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. or allow such beverages to be
consumed on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. excepting
Saturday nights when such beverages may not be sold, dispensed, served, or
consumed on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on
Sundays.
(Prior Code, § 110.28) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   On-premises sale prohibited between certain hours, 37A O.S. § 3-125
§ 110.29 SALE TO MINORS; CONSUMPTION BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any person who holds a license to sell and dispense beer
or any agent, servant, or employee of the license holder to sell, barter, or
give to any person under 21 years of age any low-point beer. No person under 21
years of age shall consume low-point beer as defined in this subchapter, in any
public place.
(Prior Code, § 110.29) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 37A O.S. §§ 6-101, 6-120
§ 110.30 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work, in any
capacity whatsoever, in a place where low-point beer is sold or dispensed for
consumption on the premises. A parent as regards the employment of his or her
own child or children is excepted from this provision; however, such employment
shall in no capacity whatsoever be related to the selling or dispensing of such
beverages. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any business or
establishment where sales of the beverages do not exceed 25% of the gross sales
of the business or establishment.
(Prior Code, § 110.30) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, 37A O.S. §§ 2-121, 6-102
§ 110.31 ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS.
   In addition to the foregoing restrictions, the provisions of the state law
regarding the sale, possession, manufacture, distribution, or use of any
alcoholic beverages, including, without limitation, 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 et seq.,
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and are enforceable by
the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein and any
violation thereof is punishable in the Municipal Court, the same as violation
of any other city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 110.31) (Ord. 95-443, passed 11-21-1995)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
110.12 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, such
person shall pay a fine in an amount to be set by the City Council from time to
time, plus court costs.
(Prior Code, § 110.99)
CHAPTER 111: FOOD AND RESTAURANTS
Section
   
111.01   Food service sanitation provisions adopted
   
111.02   Milk provisions adopted
   
111.03   Grades of milk which may be sold
   
111.04   Enforcement by whom
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 FOOD SERVICE SANITATION PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The unabridged form of the latest edition of the United States Public
Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code is hereby adopted and
incorporated in this code by reference.
   (B)   At least one copy of the Sanitation Ordinance and Code shall be on
file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
   (C)   The Sanitation Ordinance and Code shall govern the definitions;
inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and
revocation of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting
of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food or drink and the enforcement of
this section.
   (D)   In the Sanitation Ordinance and Code, however, all parenthetical
phrases referring to grading and the following subsections shall be understood
to be deleted: Subsection H.2.e., H.7. and H.8. HEALTH AUTHORITY shall mean the
Director of the County Health Department or his or her designated
representative.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   State food regulations, see 63 O.S. 1-1101 et seq.
§ 111.02 MILK PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination,
grading, labeling and sale of all milk and milk products sold for the ultimate
consumption within the city, or its police jurisdiction; the inspection of
dairy herds, dairy farms, and milk plants; the issuing and revocation of
permits to milk producers, haulers, and distributors shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions
of the Milk Ordinance - Recommendations of the Public Health Service Revised to
Comply with Oklahoma State Statutes, a copy of which shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk. Sections 9 and 16 of the unabridged ordinance shall
be replaced, respectively by §§
111.03 and
111.04.
(Prior Code, § 111.02)
Statutory reference:
   State regulations on milk and milk products, see 2 O.S. §§ 7-21 et seq. and
§§ 7-401 et seq.
§ 111.03 GRADES OF MILK WHICH MAY BE SOLD.
   Only certified pasteurized and Grade A pasteurized, and certified raw or
Grade A raw milk and milk products shall be sold to the final consumer, or to
restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores, or similar establishments;
however, in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk products which
have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized by
the health authority; in which case, such milk and milk products shall be
labeled “ungraded.”
(Prior Code, § 111.03)
§ 111.04 ENFORCEMENT BY WHOM.
   All sampling, examining, grading, and regrading of milk and milk products
and all inspections, and issuing and suspension of, revocation of permits shall
be done by the Director of the County Health Department or his or her
authorized representative, who shall be a registered professional sanitarian.
(Prior Code, § 111.04)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)    Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
111.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99. In addition thereto, any person convicted of violation may be enjoined
from continuing the violation.
(Prior Code, § 111.01)
CHAPTER 112: MASSAGE BUSINESSES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License
   
112.03   Exemptions
   
112.04   Fees and renewal
   
112.05   Applications
   
112.06   Denial or issuance
   
112.07   Display or license and identification card
   
112.08   Transfer prohibited
   
112.09   Bogus checks
   
112.10   Operating requirements
   
112.11   Records to be kept
   
112.12   Inspections
   
112.13   Revocation
   
112.14   Notice
   
112.15   Enforcement
   
112.16   Appeals
   
112.17   Sale
   
112.18   Location
   
112.19   Branch operations
   
112.20   Remedies cumulative
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Personal
pronouns, when used in the masculine or neuter gender, mean the masculine,
feminine, and neuter gender.
   CITY. The City of Walters, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation.
   CLERK. The City Clerk for the City of Walters or his or her authorized
representative.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Walters.
   DIRECT SUPERVISION. On-the-premises control and responsibility for the
massage apprentice by and in the physical presence of the massage technician.
   EXTERNAL BATH. The bathing of another person by a massage technician or
massage apprentice by immersion, shower, or steaming any part of the body.
   LICENSEE. Any massage establishment operator, outcall massage service
operator, massage technician, or massage apprentice appropriately licensed by
the city.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against by stroking, rubbing,
kneading, tapping, pounding, manipulating, vibrating, or stimulating the
external parts of the human body with the hands, feet, or otherwise, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics,
oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointment, or other preparations, sun lamps,
infrared heat, vibrators, mechanical or electrical appliances, and external
baths, for any type of consideration or gratuity.
   MASSAGE APPRENTICE. Any person employed by a massage establishment or
outcall massage service and directly supervised by a massage technician for the
purpose of learning the method and practice of massage.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment or place of business where any
person engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted,
or carried on, any business of the manipulation of the body by means of massage
as herein defined.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any person who administers to another person, for any
consideration or gratuity, a massage, external bath, electric or magnetic
massage procedure, manipulation of the body, or other similar procedure.
   OPERATOR, MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT OPERATOR or OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE
OPERATOR. Any person owning or operating a massage establishment or an outcall
massage service. In the event of a corporate owner, OPERATOR shall mean the
manager or person in charge. If a sole proprietorship, OPERATOR shall mean such
individual alone.
   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE. A business which provides licensed massage
technicians or massage apprentices to perform a massage at a private location.
   PATRON. Any person who receives a massage.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company,
corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
   SEXUAL BODY AREAS. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, and perineum of
any person and the vulva and breasts of a female person.
(Prior Code, § 112.01) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.02 LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a
massage establishment in the city without having first obtained a license to do
so as herein provided.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to perform or offer
or agree to perform the services of a massage technician or massage apprentice
in the city without first having obtained a license to do so as herein
provided.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for an operator of a massage
establishment to permit any person in his or her massage establishment to act
as a massage technician or massage apprentice in the city unless such person is
duly licensed as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for a person to operate an outcall
massage service in the city without first having obtained a license to do so as
herein provided.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any outcall massage service
operator, owner, or manager to permit any person to work out of such service
who is not a duly licensed massage technician or massage apprentice as provided
in this chapter, regardless of where the massage is performed.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any massage apprentice to
perform a massage unless acting under the direct supervision of a duly licensed
massage technician.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following persons while engaged in the
personal performance of the duties of their respective professions:
   (A)   Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state;
   (B)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, chiropodists, podiatrists,
osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their
respective professions in the state;
   (C)   Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the
state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the
neck, face, scalp, and hair of a patron for cosmetic purposes; or
   (D)   Any employee or student of any nonprofit organization such as a
hospital, clinic, nursing and convalescent home, university, college, or
seminary licensed or accredited by the state or organized as exempt from
taxation by the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, when massages are
performed as part of such service or education and not for any consideration or
gratuity.
(Prior Code, § 112.03) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.04 FEES AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Every original application for a massage establishment license shall
be accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee of an amount to be set by the
City Council from time to time per establishment. Applications for an outcall
massage service, massage technician or massage apprentice, shall be accompanied
by a non-refundable processing fee of an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time per person.
   (B)   Annual license fees set forth herein shall be due and payable by the
licensee at the time the city license is issued; provided, however, that fees
for the initial applications for massage establishments, outcall massage
services, and massage technicians may be prorated quarterly. The following fees
are subject to change at the discretion of the City Council from time to time:
      (1)   Massage establishment: $125;
      (2)   Outcall massage service: $75;
      (3)   Massage technician: $25; and
      (4)   Massage apprentice: $15.
   (C)   Each licensee, except a massage apprentice, shall reapply for a
license annually and the license shall be renewed automatically, unless the
Clerk determines that the licensee should be reexamined for health reasons or
should be denied a license for a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
Massage apprentice licenses are not renewable.
   (D)   (1)   Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year, except for
massage apprentice licenses which shall expire one year from date of issuance.
      (2)   Applications for renewal of the license may be submitted along with
the appropriate annual license fee as herein provided at any time prior to 30
days before the date of expiration.
   (E)   In the event that the licensee shall cease operation, either
voluntarily or involuntarily, before the end of the period for which a license
is issued, the annual license fee shall not be refundable.
(Prior Code, § 112.04) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.05 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Massage establishments and outcall massage services.
      (1)   Any applicant for a license for a massage establishment or outcall
massage service shall submit to the Clerk a written application on a form
furnished by the Clerk.
      (2)   Before issuing a license, the Clerk shall determine that the
following requirements are met by each applicant.
         (a)   The applicant or members of the applying firm, partnership, or
association, or if a corporation, the manager, (“applicant” herein) shall be 21
years of age or older by proof acceptable to the Clerk. The applicant’s name,
place of birth, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, business and
home address and telephone numbers, and any other names by which the applicant
was known in the past shall be included in the application. The applicant shall
specify the exact name and address of the proposed massage establishment or
outcall massage service location.
         (b)   The applicant shall be of good moral character.
         (c)   The applicant, who is or intends to be a massage establishment
operator or outcall massage service operator engaged in on-the-premise
supervision of massage technicians or who performs the duties of a massage
technician, shall be duly licensed by the city as a massage technician as
provided in this chapter.
         (d)   The applicant shall furnish to the Clerk two full face
photographs of the applicant, one inch by one and one-half inches, one of which
shall be attached to a city-furnished identification card, and the other shall
be delivered to the Police Department of the city. Such photographs must have
been taken within 30 days preceding the date of the application and must be
considered by the Clerk suitable for the purposes of this chapter.
         (e)   The applicant shall furnish massage or similar business license
history disclosing whether the applicant, in previously operating under license
in this or another city or state has had his or her license revoked or
suspended, and if so, the reason therefor, and business activity or occupation
of the applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation.
         (f)   The applicant shall have been fingerprinted on all fingers by
the City Police Department on a form provided by the Police Department within
30 days preceding the date of the application, which fingerprints and one
photograph as required herein shall be retained in the Police Department for as
long as deemed necessary by the Clerk. The Police Department may verify
identification of any applicant by appropriate means and shall notify the Clerk
immediately in the event a false identification is discovered.
         (g)   The applicant shall list on the application form all felony and
misdemeanor convictions other than minor traffic violations. For the purposes
of this disclosure, no conviction need be listed for a misdemeanor more than
five years preceding the date of the application or for a felony for which a
pardon has been granted.
         (h)   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include
the state of incorporation, the name and address of the corporation, the
registered service agent in the state, the date authorized to do business in
the state, and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
corporation.
         (i)   If the application is for an outcall massage service, the
applicant shall have secured a location in the city for the outcall massage
service that complies with the restrictions of §
112.19 and which shall be described by name and address, and if leased, a copy
of the lease agreement shall be provided. All telephone numbers of each and
every massage technician or massage apprentice working from such service
location or requested through such service’s telephone numbers shall be
provided.
         (j)   If the application is for a massage establishment, the applicant
shall have secured a location in the city that complies with the restrictions
of §
112.19 and which is described by address and name for the massage
establishment, and if leased, a copy of the lease agreement, which location has
been inspected and approved by the County Health Department as to the following
requirements.
            1.   Steam rooms, shower compartments, steam compartments, tub
compartments, toilet rooms and adjacent exits thereto shall have smooth,
nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable floors, walls, and ceilings.
            2.   Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched
to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer, except that dry
heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and
floor drains.
            3.   A source of hot water must be available within the immediate
vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
            4.   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting
and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used to administer
massages.
            5.   Massage tables shall have a cleanable plastic liner covering
the entire top surface.
            6.   Closed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean
linen, towels, and other materials used in connection with administering
massages.
            7.   Separate toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient
locations for each sex; a single water closet per sex shall be provided for
each 20 employees and patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time;
urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been
provided; toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein;
toilet room floors and walls shall be smooth, non-absorbent, easily cleanable,
with the walls painted in a light color; toilet facilities shall be vented to
the outside air.
            8.   A minimum of one separate wash facility per toilet room shall
be provided in each massage establishment for the use of patrons and employees,
which shall provide an approved basin, soap or detergent and hot and cold
running water at all times; in addition, there shall be provided at each wash
basin sanitary towels or other approved facilities placed in permanently
installed dispensers.
         (k)   The applicant shall comply with applicable provisions of the
city’s Building, Electrical, Plumbing, Sign, and Mechanical Codes, and in the
case of a massage establishment, the following requirements:
            1.   A readable sign in compliance with all provisions of the City
Sign Code, posted at the main entrance, identifying the business as a massage
establishment; and
            2.   Minimum lighting in accordance with the City Building Code,
and direct or indirect lighting of not less than 40 foot-candles in each room
or enclosure where services are performed on patrons.
         (l)   The applicant’s massage establishment location shall have been
inspected and approved by the City Fire Marshal as to the following
requirements:
            1.   Accessible exits for patrons and employees in case of fire;
            2.   No unsafe storage areas of combustible material;
            3.   Adequate fire-extinguishing equipment available and usable by
employees instructed by the Fire Marshal as to proper procedure; and
            4.   Approved smoke, heat, and incendiary gas detectors in
operating condition.
   (B)   Massage technician or massage apprentice.
      (1)   Any individual seeking to obtain a city license as a massage
technician or massage apprentice shall submit to the Clerk a written
application on a form furnished by the Clerk.
      (2)   The Clerk shall determine that the following requirements are met
by each applicant.
         (a)   The applicant shall be 18 years of age or older. The applicant’s
name, place of birth, sex, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair,
residence and business addresses and phone numbers shall be included in the
application.
         (b)   The name, address, and city license number of the massage
establishment or outcall massage service where the technician or apprentice
will be employed shall be included in the application.
         (c)   The applicant shall be of good moral character.
         (d)   The applicant shall furnish to the Clerk two full face
photographs of the applicant, one inch by one and one-half inches, one of which
shall be laminated on a city-furnished identification card, and the other shall
be delivered to the Police Department of the city. Such photographs must have
been taken within 30 days preceding the date of the application and must be
considered by the Clerk suitable for the purposes of this chapter.
         (e)   The applicant shall have been fingerprinted on all fingers by
the City Police Department on a form provided by the Police Department within
30 days preceding the date of the application, which fingerprints and one
photograph as required herein will be retained in the Police Department for as
long as deemed necessary by the Clerk. The Police Department may verify
identification of any applicant by appropriate means and shall notify the Clerk
immediately in the event a false identification is discovered.
         (f)   The applicant shall list on the application form all felony and
misdemeanor convictions other than minor traffic violations. For the purposes
of this disclosure, no conviction need be listed for a misdemeanor which is
more than five years preceding the date of the application or for a felony
conviction for which a pardon has been granted.
         (g)   The applicant shall have been examined by a medical doctor or
doctor of osteopathy within the 30 days preceding the date of the application
and, on a form provided by the Clerk, shall be found to be free of any evidence
of a contagious disease. If a laboratory analysis is performed in connection
with the physical examination, such analysis must be done in a laboratory
approved by the Health Department of the state.
         (h)   The applicant shall furnish massage or similar business license
history disclosing whether the applicant, in previously operating in this or
another city or state, has had his or her license revoked or suspended, and if
so, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation of the
applicant subsequent to such suspension or revocation.
         (i)   The applicant shall furnish his or her residence and employment
addresses for the preceding two years.
         (j)   If the application is for a license as a massage technician, the
applicant shall provide at least one of the following:
            1.   A graduation certificate from a school or other institution of
learning recognized by the Clerk wherein the method, profession, and work of
massage technicians is taught;
            2.   A photocopy of applicant’s grade record reflecting successful
completion of at least three semester hours of applied anatomy and physiology
at any institution of higher learning accredited by the state wherein such
institution is located;
            3.   A sworn affidavit, on a form provided by the Clerk, from a
city-licensed massage technician that the applicant has completed a minimum of
250 hours of on-the-job, supervised training in the art of massage as a city-
licensed massage apprentice, and is thereby fully qualified to be a technician;
or
            4.   Evidence that the applicant has heretofore been licensed by
the city as a massage operator and is currently the holder of a valid massage
operator’s license.
         (k)   The applicant shall furnish such other information and
identification as the Clerk shall require to verify the matters herein
specified.
(Prior Code, § 112.05) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.06 DENIAL AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter for each license are cumulative, and
the failure of the applicant to comply with any requirement shall be grounds
for denial of such license.
   (B)   Each and every applicant who satisfactorily complies with the license
requirements of this chapter shall be immediately issued the appropriate
license by the Clerk. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from
simultaneously holding a massage establishment and an outcall massage service
license if requirements for both are satisfactorily met.
   (C)   On the face of each license for a massage establishment or outcall
massage service, the Clerk shall list by name those persons processed and
approved by the Clerk as owner or partner. The Clerk shall issue to each person
and each applicant licensed as a massage technician or massage apprentice a
city identification card.
(Prior Code, § 112.06) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   (A)   Every massage establishment or outcall massage service shall display,
in a well-lighted area on the wall near the front entrance at the licensed
address, the city license authorizing the operation of such business.
   (B)   Each individual approved by the Clerk and licensed by the city as the
owner, operator, partner or manager of a massage establishment or outcall
massage service, or as massage technician or massage apprentice, shall wear on
the upper front torso area of his or her clothing, at all times when engaged in
the licensed business or when upon the licensed premises during authorized
hours of operation, the city identification card issued to such individual.
(Prior Code, § 112.07) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   No license for the operation of any establishment, service, or occupation
issued to a particular person or for a particular location shall be transferred
to another person or another location unless approved by the Clerk. No more
than one license per address location or per individual may be issued at any
one time by the city under the provisions of this chapter, except as provided
by §
112.06(B).
(Prior Code, § 112.08) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 BOGUS CHECKS.
   (A)   Any applicant or licensee who pays any fee with a check which is
subsequently dishonored for any reason shall be automatically suspended from
license operation authority without further notice until payment satisfactory
to the Clerk is made.
   (B)   This provision shall not prevent the filing of criminal charges if and
when applicable.
(Prior Code, § 112.09) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.10 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following operating requirements shall apply to massage
establishments and outcall massage services.
   (B)   A violation of any of the following divisions shall be unlawful and an
offense.
   (C)   Any person responsible for such violation may be charged and tried
accordingly before the Municipal Court.
   (D)   Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (1)   Every portion of the facility, including appliances and apparatus,
shall be kept clean, in good repair, and shall be operated in a sanitary
manner.
      (2)   A price schedule for all services shall be prominently posted in
the reception area of a massage establishment in a location visible to all
prospective patrons.
      (3)   All employees, patrons, persons, managers, owners, operators,
technicians, and apprentices shall be clean and shall wear clean, non-
transparent outer garments, covering the sexual body areas.
      (4)   All massage establishments and outcall services shall be provided
with a sufficient quantity of clean sheets and towels, which shall be laundered
after each use and shall be stored in a sanitary manner. All soiled linens,
towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or
cabinets, which shall be kept separate from the storage areas for clean
supplies.
      (5)   No patron shall receive the services of any massage establishment,
outcall service, technician, or apprentice, unless such patron is at least 18
years of age.
      (6)   No person shall sell, give, dispense, consume, provide, or keep, or
cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided, or kept any alcoholic beverage or
beer on the premises of any massage establishment or from any outcall massage
service.
      (7)   No massage establishment or outcall massage service shall be
operated after 8:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m.
      (8)   No person may act as manager for a corporate licensee, unless such
person has been approved by the Clerk and listed on the license of the massage
establishment or outcall massage service.
      (9)   No owner, operator, partner, or manager may supervise massage
technicians, unless such person is approved and licensed as a massage
technician as provided in this chapter.
      (10)   No technician, apprentice, owner, operator, partner, manager,
patron, or person shall do or permit to be done the massage or touching, or the
offer or agreement to massage or touch any person’s sexual body areas,
including his or her own.
      (11)   No technician, apprentice, owner, operator, partner, manager,
patron, or person shall do or permit to be done the exposing, or the offer or
agreement to expose to the view of any other person, his or her sexual body
areas, or the sexual body areas of any other person.
      (12)   All massages at a massage establishment shall be performed in a
massage room designed for such purpose. No doorway to such room shall be fitted
with a door capable of being locked. All doors or doorway coverings to any
massage room shall have an unobstructed opening, one foot by one foot in size,
capable of clear two-way view. Such opening shall not be less than four and
one-half feet nor more than five and one-half feet from the floor.
      (13)   No patron who is affected with any contagious disease or with any
disease of the skin shall be massaged in any massage establishment or by any
outcall massage service.
      (14)   No person holding a massage establishment or outcall massage
service license shall operate under a name not specified in the license, nor
shall business be conducted under any designation or location not specified in
the license.
      (15)   No licensee, patron, or any other person shall be intoxicated
while upon the premises of a massage establishment or while performing or
receiving the services of an outcall massage service.
      (16)   No person owning, operating, or managing an outcall massage
service shall knowingly cause, allow or permit any patron, technician, or
apprentice to do any acts prohibited in this section.
      (17)   All instruments, apparatus, equipment, or appliances of a
nondisposable nature shall be disinfected after each use.
      (18)   Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor
cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned
each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and massage tables shall be
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each patron’s use.
      (19)   Each patron and massage table shall be provided with clean and
sanitary linens, sheets, and towels.
      (20)   No massage establishment or outcall massage service shall be used
for any purpose, except that which is specifically authorized by this chapter.
      (21)   At each massage establishment:
         (a)   Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times;
         (b)   Minimum lighting, direct or indirect, of not less than 40 foot-
candles shall be provided and shall be in use when massage services are being
performed; and
         (c)   A separate dressing room for each sex shall be available on the
premises with individual lockers for each employee, technician, or apprentice.
Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
(Prior Code, § 112.10) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.11 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   (1)   The owner, operator, or manager of each massage establishment or
outcall massage service shall maintain a current register of all employees,
including their addresses, dates of birth, sexes, duties, and such other
information as the Clerk may reasonably require.
      (2)   Upon hiring or discharging any massage technician or apprentice,
the owner, operator or manager shall immediately notify the Clerk in writing,
and shall include in such notice the personal information required herein.
      (3)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this division (A) shall be
unlawful and an offense.
   (B)   (1)   Every owner, operator, or manager of a massage establishment or
outcall massage service shall keep a current record of all massage treatments
rendered, either on or off the premises, which record shall include the address
where the massage treatment was rendered, the name and address of the patron,
the technician, or apprentice rendering such treatment and the date of such
treatment. Such records shall be maintained for a period of one year.
      (2)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this division (B) shall be
unlawful and an offense.
(Prior Code, § 112.11) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.12 INSPECTIONS.
   Any licensed premises, establishment, service, or person shall be subject to
inspection at any time during working hours by any member of the City Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Protective Inspections
Department, or Legal Department to determine and ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person
or licensee to refuse to allow such inspections.
(Prior Code, § 112.12) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.13 REVOCATION.
   Any license issued hereunder shall be revoked by order of the Clerk upon his
or her determination that the licensee has committed any act which would have
been cause for denial of a license upon the original application, has made a
false statement on the application, or has committed any act in violation of
this chapter or in violation of the standards for good moral character.
(Prior Code, § 112.13) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.14 NOTICE.
   (A)   The Clerk shall give notice of denial of license to any applicant by
regular mail to his or her stated home address, or of revocation of license to
any licensee by regular mail to his or her stated business address.
   (B)   Such notice shall state the reasons for denial or revocation, the
effective date of such determination and shall advise the applicant or licensee
that the Clerk’s decision may be appealed to the Council by filing a written
request for a hearing with the City Clerk within ten days of the receipt of
such notice. All such licenses shall be suspended pending appeal.
(Prior Code, § 112.14) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any applicant who has been denied a license, or any licensee whose license
has been revoked or suspended hereunder who acts in violation of such denial,
revocation, or suspension, shall be guilty of an offense, and each day
constituting such violation is a separate and distinct offense with a separate
and distinct penalty.
(Prior Code, § 112.15) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 APPEALS.
   Appeals to the Council from any adverse decision of the Clerk hereunder
shall, when timely filed, be docketed on the Council’s next available agenda
and notice of the date and time of hearing shall be given to all parties
concerned. At such hearing, the Council shall receive any evidence it deems
appropriate and shall either affirm, reverse, or modify the Clerk’s decision.
(Prior Code, § 112.16) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.17 SALE.
   Any person desiring to purchase, own, operate, or manage a presently
licensed massage establishment or outcall massage service shall make
application for such license and must be approved by the Clerk and licensed by
the city before assuming such business.
(Prior Code, § 112.17) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.18 LOCATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or cause or permit to
be established a massage establishment or a massage outcall service facility
within 1,000 feet of another massage establishment or a massage outcall service
facility, or within 500 feet of any school, public park, or recreation area,
library, public building with programs for minors, residential zone, religious
institution, or any other business or facility that caters to people under the
age of 18 years.
   (B)   The distance between any two massage establishments and/or outcall
massage services shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest entrance of one such
premises to the nearest entrance of the other such premises. The distance
between any massage establishment and/or outcall message service premises and
any school, public park, or recreation area, library, public building with
programs for minors, residential zone, religious institution, or any other
business or facility that caters to people under the age of 18 years shall be
measured from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property
line of a school, public park, or recreation area, library, public building
with programs for minors, residential zone, religious institution, or any other
business or facility that caters to people under the age of 18 years.
   (C)   Any massage establishment or massage outcall service facility lawfully
established and lawfully operating under the Zoning Code and the provisions of
this chapter, and any other applicable provisions of the city code is not in
violation of these regulations by the subsequent establishment of school,
public park, or recreation area, library, public building with programs for
minors, residential zone, religious institution, or any other business or
facility that caters to people under the age of 18 years within the distances
specified in division (B) above for each type of use. This provision applies
only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an application
for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked or
upon transfer of ownership or control of said business.
   (D)   Except for those persons exempted under §
112.03, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to perform or
receive a massage on the premises of any school, public park, or recreation
area, library, public building with programs for minors, residential zone,
religious institution, or any other business or facility that caters to people
under the age of 18 years.
(Prior Code, § 112.18) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.19 BRANCH OPERATIONS.
   No branch operation shall be permitted by the holder of any license
hereunder, unless such operation is separately approved and licensed by the
city according to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 112.19) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.20 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for operating hereunder without
the appropriate license shall not relieve such person from paying any
appropriate license fee due, nor shall conviction and punishment prevent the
Clerk from denying the issuance of any license, nor shall the payment of any
license fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter. The conviction and punishment of any person for
violating any of the operating requirements herein shall not prevent the Clerk
from revoking any existing license for such violation, nor shall the revoking
of the license prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be
cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the
use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 112.20) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, patron, licensee, or individual found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount to be set by the City Council
from time to time, excluding costs.
(Prior Code, § 112.99) (Ord. 98-451, passed 11-17-1998)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Registration
§ 113.01 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any itinerant person or merchant to engage in any
activity listed below without first registering with the City Clerk and paying
a registration fee as follows:
      (1)   For each itinerant person selling or taking orders for goods,
wares, patent medicines, magazines, fruits, vegetables, or other things of any
kinds, $5 per day or $50 per year; provided that this shall not apply to
farmers selling anything grown in the county or withing a radius of 20 miles of
the city;
      (2)   For each itinerant person peddling or selling from a stand, car,
vehicle, basket, or similar thing, any drinks, ice cream or other frozen foods
of any kind, hot tamales, hamburgers, sandwiches, fruits, or any other kind of
food prepared or ready for human consumption, $5 per day or $50 per year; and
      (3)   For each itinerant person, $5 per day or $50 per year renewable
each January.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ITINERANT. Having no regular place of doing business or soliciting in the
city includes, but is not limited to, making regular delivery or providing
goods over an established route through the city.
      MERCHANT. Any institution, business, corporation, company, partnership,
or individual having a regular place of doing business in the city.
(Prior Code, § 113.01) (Ord. 2015-551, passed 12-15-2015; Ord. 2019-559, passed
7-2-2019; Ord. 2023-581, passed 9-5-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Legislative intent and purpose
   
114.02   Adoption of state regulations
   
114.03   Definitions
   
114.04   Defense to criminal prosecutions
   
114.05   Inspections
   
114.06   Cost of inspection and clean-up
   
114.07   Forfeiture of permit
   
114.08   Landlord duty
   
114.09   Locations of medical marijuana businesses
   
114.10   Commercial medical marijuana businesses prohibited
   
114.11   Application requirements
   
114.12   Modifications to approved commercial medical marijuana business
permits
   
114.13   Fees required
   
114.14   Inspection required
   
114.15   Application processing
   
114.16   Approval requirements
   
114.17   Persons prohibited as permittees
Commercial Medical Marijuana Business Permit
   
114.30   Permit required
   
114.31   Additional licenses and permits may be required
   
114.32   Permit does not provide any exception, defense, or immunity from other
laws
   
114.33   Separate permit required for each location
   
114.34   Permit nontransferable
   
114.35   Ventilation, fire, and life safety requirements
Requirements Related to the Operation of Medical Marijuana Businesses
   
114.50   Onsite use prohibited
   
114.51   Restriction on access to restricted area
   
114.52   Display of permit required
   
114.53   Businesses conducted within building
   
114.54   Use of pesticides
   
114.55   Ventilation required
   
114.56   Use of metals, butane, propane, or other flammable products
   
114.57   Disposal of medical marijuana and marijuana byproducts
   
114.58   Delivery between medical marijuana businesses
   
114.59   Advertisements
   
114.60   Organization of cultivation facilities
   
114.61   Reporting of source, quantity, and sales
   
114.62   Requirements for public health and labeling
   
114.63   Compliance with other applicable law
   
114.64   Revocation of permit upon denial or revocation of state license or
applicable federal prohibition
   
114.65   Revocable privilege
   
114.66   Prohibited acts
   
114.67   Suspension or revocation of permit; imposition of fines
   
114.68   Term of permit; renewals; expiration of permit
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to ensure the health and safety of all
state residents and provide reasonable and orderly regulation of medical
marijuana as authorized by the lawful passage of State Question 788. Only the
powers enumerated under this chapter shall be proper. Any power not
specifically enumerated is prohibited.
      (1)   Any person, persons, or entity violating any provisions of this
chapter, either by doing anything which is prohibited or by failing to do
anything which is commanded, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500, plus court
costs. Each separate violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. Where a lesser fine is mandated by state law, the lesser amount of
fine shall be applicable.
      (2)   The regulations are intended to apply to all medical marijuana for
personal use or any medical marijuana business permitted under the State
Question 788. The code is intended to provide regulations to limit the impact
that medical marijuana cultivation and production will have on health, safety,
and community resources.
      (3)   Use, distribution, cultivation, production, possession, and
transportation of medical marijuana remains illegal under federal law and
marijuana remains classified as a CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE by federal law.
      (4)   The regulations for medical marijuana uses are not adequate at the
state level to address the impacts of medical marijuana on the city, making it
appropriate for local regulation of the impacts of medical marijuana uses.
      (5)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to promote or condone the
production, distribution, or possession of marijuana in violation of any
applicable law.
      (6)   This chapter is to be construed to protect the public over medical
marijuana business interests. Operation of a medical marijuana business is a
revocable privilege and not a right in the city. There is no property right for
an individual or business to have medical marijuana in the city.
      (7)   Medical marijuana is a heavily regulated industry in the city and
all permittees are assumed to be fully aware of the law. The city shall not
therefore be required to issue warnings before issuing citations for violations
of this chapter.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare of the residents and patients of the city by prescribing the manner
in which medical marijuana businesses can be conducted in the city. Further,
the purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Provide for a means of cultivation, production, and distribution of
marijuana to patients who qualify to obtain, possess, and use marijuana for
medical purposes under the State Question 788;
      (2)   Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations on
business operations as they relate to noise, air, and water quality, food
safety, neighborhood and patient safety, security for the business and its
personnel, and other health and safety concerns;
      (3)   Impose fees to cover the cost to the city of permitting medical
marijuana businesses in an amount sufficient for the city to recover its cost
of the permitting program;
      (4)   Adopt a mechanism for monitoring compliance with the provisions of
this chapter;
      (5)   Create regulations that address the particular needs of the
patients and residents of the city and coordinate with laws that may be enacted
by the state regarding the issue;
      (6)   Facilitate the implementation of State Question 788 without going
beyond the authority granted by it; and
      (7)   Issue medical marijuana business permits only to individuals and
entities that have demonstrated an intent and ability to comply with this
chapter without monitoring by city officials.
(Prior Code, § 114.01) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.02 ADOPTION OF STATE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Oklahoma Medical Marijuana Authority (OMMA) rules regulating
medical marijuana, as they may from time to time be amended, is adopted by
reference and are made a part of the ordinances of the city, as if fully set
forth in this code. The provisions of these regulations shall take effect and
be controlling with the city limits so that a violation of the provisions of
the regulations will be a violation of this code. Nothing in this code shall
grant to the city the power or jurisdiction to prosecute offenses that a city
is not authorized to prosecute. Copies of the rules are on file in the office
of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Any crimes specified in the rules or other laws as felonies are
specifically excluded from inclusion in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 114.02) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The natural person in whose name a permit would be issued.
   COMPLETE APPLICATION. A document prepared in accordance with the rules and
the forms and instructions provided by the city, including any supporting
documentation required as well as the application fee.
   DISPENSARY. An entity that has been licensed by the State Health Department
pursuant to 63 O.S. § 421A and permitted by the city pursuant to this chapter,
which allows the entity to purchase medical marijuana from a processor
permittee or grower permittee and sell medical marijuana only to qualified
patients and caregivers.
   DISPENSE. The selling of medical marijuana or a medical marijuana product to
a qualified patient or the patient’s designated caregiver that is packaged in a
suitable container appropriately labeled for subsequent administration to or
use by a qualified patient.
   DOMICILE. A person’s true, fixed, primary permanent home and place of
habitation and the tax parcel on which it is located. It is the place where the
person intends to remain and to which the person expects to return when the
person leaves without intending to establish a new domicile elsewhere.
   ENTITY. An individual, general partnership, a limited partnership, a limited
liability company, a trust, an estate, an association, a corporation, or any
other legal or commercial entity.
   GROWER or COMMERCIAL GROWER. An entity that has been licensed by the State
Health Department and permitted by the city, which allows the entity to grow,
harvest, and package medical marijuana to a dispensary, processor, or
researcher.
   MANUFACTURE. The process of converting harvested plant material into medical
marijuana concentrate by physical or chemical means for use as an ingredient in
a medical marijuana product.
   MARIJUANA.
      (1)   All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a plant
of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin.
      (2)   MARIJUANA does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil,
or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination.
   MATURE PLANT. Harvestable female marijuana plant that is flowering. MATURE
PLANTS are not authorized under this section prior to 60 days after the
enactment of 63 O.S. §§ 420A et seq.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. Marijuana that is grown, processed, dispensed, tested,
possessed, or used for a medical purpose.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS. Any business licensed by the State Health
Department and permitted by the city to dispense, grow, research, or process
medical marijuana.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CONCENTRATE or CONCENTRATE. A substance obtained by
separating cannabinoids from any part of the marijuana plant by physical or
chemical means, so as to deliver a product with a cannabinoid concentration
greater than the raw plant material from which it is derived, intended to be
refined for use as an ingredient in a medical marijuana product and not for
administration to a qualified patient.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRODUCT. A product that contains cannabinoids that have
been extracted from plant material or the resin therefrom by physical or
chemical means and is intended for administration to a qualified patient,
including, but not limited to, oils, tinctures, edibles, pills, topical forms,
gels, creams, forms medically appropriate for administration by vaporization or
nebulizer, patches, and liquids excluding live plant forms.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA WASTE. Unused, surplus, returned, or out-of-date
marijuana; recalled marijuana; unused marijuana; plant debris of the plant of
the genus cannabis, including dead plants and all unused plant parts and roots;
and any waste water generated during growing and processing.
   PERMITTEE. Any natural born person or entity that holds a marijuana permit
provided for in this chapter.
   PRIVATE SCHOOL. An elementary, middle, or high school maintained by private
individuals, religious organizations, or corporations, funded at least in part
by fees or tuition, and open only to pupils selected and admitted based on
religious affiliations or other particular qualifications.
   PROCESSOR. An entity that has been licensed by State Health Department and
permitted by the city, which allows the entity to: purchase marijuana from a
commercial grower; prepare, manufacture, package, sell to, and deliver medical
marijuana products to a dispensary permittee or other processor permittee; and
may process marijuana received from a qualified patient into a medical
marijuana concentrate, for a fee.
   PUBLIC SCHOOL. An elementary, middle, or high school established under state
law, regulated by the local state authorities in the various political
subdivisions, funded and maintained by public taxation, and open and free to
all children of the particular district where the school is located.
   RESIDENT. An individual who is an income tax payer in the state and can
provide proof of residency as required by 63 O.S. §§ 420A et seq. and OAC 442:
10-1-6.
   RETAILER. As used in 63 O.S. §§ 421A, a dispensary.
   REVOCATION. The city’s final decision that any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter is rescinded because the individual or entity does not comply with
the applicable requirements in this chapter.
   SCHOOL. Either public or private nurseries, kindergartens, elementary, which
may include either K-6 or K-8, secondary schools and technology center schools,
not to exceed two years of junior college work, night schools, adult and other
special classes, vocational and technical instruction, and such other school
classes and instruction as may be authorized by laws which are now in effect or
which may hereafter be enacted.
   SEEDLING. An immature marijuana plant that has no flowers.
   STATE QUESTION. Oklahoma State Question No. 788 and Initiative Petition
Number 412.
(Prior Code, § 114.03) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-15-2020)
§ 114.04 DEFENSE TO CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall not provide an
exception, immunity, or defense to criminal prosecution under any applicable
law, except in the City Municipal Court, for a violation of this chapter as
specifically provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 114.20) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.05 INSPECTIONS.
   Every medical marijuana dispensary, commercial grower, and processor shall
permit the local permitting authority, and any agent of the local permitting
authority, or anyone authorized, to inspect the premises of the business
pursuant to the city code, or State Question 788, and any of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 114.21) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 COST OF INSPECTION AND CLEAN-UP.
   In the event the city incurs costs in the inspection, clean-up, surrender of
plants, or any other requirements to remove medical marijuana of any medical
marijuana business, or any person cultivating, producing, distributing, or
possessing marijuana, the business and responsible person shall reimburse the
city all actual costs incurred for such inspection or clean-up.
(Prior Code, § 114.22) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.07 FORFEITURE OF PERMIT.
   In the event that a commercial medical marijuana business does not commence
operations within 30 days of issuance of a permit from the city, the permit
shall be deemed forfeited and the business may not commence operations. This
requirement will go in effect beginning January 16, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 114.23) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.08 LANDLORD DUTY.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a building to lease space or allow the
use of any portion of the building by a commercial medical marijuana business
unless the tenant has a valid commercial medical marijuana business permit or
has applied for and not been denied a commercial medical marijuana business
permit or no marijuana is located on the premises until a permit has been
issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 114.24) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 LOCATIONS OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Fixed location required.
      (1)   Mobile medical marijuana sales of all types are prohibited within
the city. This includes, but is not limited to, trailers, recreational
vehicles, and trucks.
      (2)   With the exception of a commercial grower, it shall be unlawful to
operate a medical marijuana business outside of an enclosed, fixed building.
All medical marijuana business permits shall be issued for a specific fixed
location within an enclosed building.
   (B)   Permitted use in zoning district. A commercial medical marijuana
business permit may be issued only if the business qualifies as a use permitted
as a matter of right in the zoning district where it is proposed to be located.
Conditional use permits shall not be applicable for medical marijuana
businesses. Commercial medical marijuana business permits are permitted by
right:
      (1)   As “retail sales” for a medical dispensary in an area zoned
Commercial;
      (2)   As “agriculture” for a medical marijuana grower in an area zoned
Agricultural; and
      (3)   As “manufacturing and production” for a medical marijuana
manufacturer, storage, or processor in an area zoned Industrial.
(Prior Code, § 114.25) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.10 COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No commercial medical marijuana business within the fire limits. It
shall be unlawful to operate a commercial medical marijuana business or grow
medical marijuana within the city’s fire limits, which may be determined at a
later date.
   (B)   No commercial medical marijuana businesses with residences or in
residential zoning districts.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial medical marijuana
business in a building which contains a residence, or within a dwelling unit
within any zoning district, or within a residential zoning district, or within
a mixed-use development that includes a residence.
   (D)   No retail sales in cultivation facilities or manufacturing facilities.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit retail sales within a
medical marijuana business that is a cultivation or processing facility.
   (F)   No commercial medical marijuana permit shall be issued for a location
within 1,000 feet of any private or public school. Distances shall be measured
from any entrance of the school to the nearest property line point of the
medical marijuana business.
(Prior Code, § 114.26) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.11 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for a commercial medical marijuana permit shall be made to
the city on forms provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. The applicant
shall use the application to demonstrate its compliance with this chapter and
any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The application shall include
the following information:
   (A)   The State Medical Marijuana Authority Business License Number;
   (B)   Contact information for the owner or owners of the medical marijuana
business in whose name the permit is proposed to be issued.
      (1)   If an owner is a corporation, the name and address of any officer
or director of the corporation and of any person holding issued and outstanding
capital stock of the corporation.
      (2)   If an owner is a partnership, association, or company, the name and
address of any person holding an interest therein and the managing members. If
a managing member is an entity rather than an individual, the same disclosure
shall be required for each entity with an ownership interest until a managing
member that is a natural person is identified.
      (3)   If an owner is not a natural person, the organizational documents
for all entities identified in the application, identification of the natural
person that is authorized to speak for the entity, and contact information for
that person.
   (C)   An operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana business,
including the following information:
      (1)   A description of the products and services to be provided by the
medical marijuana business;
      (2)   A dimensioned floor plan, clearly labeled, showing:
         (a)   The layout of the structure and the floor plan in which the
medical marijuana business is to be located;
         (b)   The principal uses of the floor area depicted on the floor plan,
including, but not limited to, the areas where non-patients will be permitted,
private consulting areas, storage areas, retail areas, and restricted areas
where medical marijuana will be located;
         (c)   Areas where any services other than the distribution of medical
marijuana are proposed to occur in the premises; and
         (d)   The separation of the areas that are open to persons who are not
patients from those areas open to patients.
   (D)   For cultivating facilities, a plan that specifies the methods to be
used to prevent the growth of harmful mold, humidity, and other related
problems;
   (E)   A lighting plan showing the lighting outside of the medical marijuana
business for security purposes and compliance with applicable city
requirements;
   (F)   A fire separation plan showing a minimum of a two-hour fire separation
between a medical dispensary and any adjacent business, or a fire suppression
plan for all buildings containing cultivation, production, and manufacturing;
   (G)   A plan for disposal of any medical marijuana or medical marijuana
infused product that is not sold to a patient or primary caregiver in a manner
that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any
person or animal;
   (H)   A plan for ventilation of the medical marijuana business that
describes the ventilation system that will be used to prevent any odor of
medical marijuana off the premises of the business. For medical marijuana
businesses that grow medical marijuana plants, such plan shall also include all
ventilation systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe
how such systems operate with the systems preventing any odor leaving the
premises. For medical marijuana businesses that produce medical marijuana
infused products, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to
mitigate noxious gases or other fumes used or created as part of the production
process; and
   (I)   A description of all toxic, flammable, or other materials regulated by
a federal, state, or local government that would have authority over the
business if it was not a marijuana business, that will be used or kept at the
medical marijuana business, the location of such materials, and how such
materials will be stored.
(Prior Code, § 114.27) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.12 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS
PERMITS.
   (A)   Prior to making a modification of a commercial medical marijuana
business that would require a building permit or charge items required by §
114.11(D), (E), or (F), the permittee shall submit to the city and have
approved a completed application for modification of premises on a form
provided by the city.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable modification
application fee.
(Prior Code, § 114.28) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.13 FEES REQUIRED.
   Any application for a commercial medical marijuana permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by the
City Council. After the application review period, if the City Council or its
designee deem the application to be complete, a nonrefundable permit fee in an
amount established by the City Council will be due prior to the issuance of the
commercial medical marijuana permit.
(Prior Code, § 114.29) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.14 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   An inspection of the proposed medical marijuana business by the
Planning and Zoning Board or the Planning and Zoning Board’s designee shall be
required prior to issuance of a permit. Such inspection shall occur after the
premises are ready for operation, but prior to the stocking for the business
with any medical marijuana, and prior to the opening of the business to any
patients or the public.
   (B)   The inspection is to verify that the business facilities are
constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application submitted
and the applicable requirements of the chapter and any other applicable law,
rule, or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 114.30) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.15 APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   The processing of the application by the City Clerk is not complete until
the Planning and Zoning Board (or its designee) has:
   (A)   Determined the application is complete;
   (B)   Determined the medical marijuana business is prepared and able to
operate in compliance with all applicable laws;
   (C)   Conducted an inspection of the business;
   (D)   Obtained all other information the Planning and Zoning Board
determines necessary for the City Council or its designee to make a decision
whether to approve or deny the permit application, or approve it with
conditions; and
   (E)   Prepared the documentation necessary to support the recommendation
made by the Planning and Zoning Board to the City Council or its designee on
the application.
(Prior Code, § 114.31) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.16 APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Council (or its designee) may:
   (A)   Issue a commercial medical marijuana business permit if:
      (1)   The inspection, and all other information available to the city,
verify that the applicant has submitted a full and complete application; and
improvements have been made to the business location consistent with the
application;
      (2)   The applicant is prepared to operate the business with other owners
and managers as set forth in the application;
      (3)   The applicant and the business location are in compliance with this
chapter and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation; and
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Board (or designee) has previously
recommended the application for approval. No application shall be presented to
the City Council or its designee for approval unless and until it has first
been authorized by the Planning and Zoning Board for approval.
   (B)   (1)   Deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this
chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, or that contains any
false or incomplete information.
      (2)   The conditions of an approval of a medical marijuana business
permit shall include, at a minimum, operation of the business in compliance
with all of the plans and information made part of the application.
(Prior Code, § 114.32) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.17 PERSONS PROHIBITED AS PERMITTEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any of the following persons to have an ownership
or a financial interest in a medical marijuana business, and no permit provided
by this chapter shall be issued to or held by, and no medical marijuana
business shall be managed by:
   (A)   Any person until the annual fee for the permit has been paid;
   (B)   Any natural person who is under 18 years of age;
   (C)   Any person who operates or manages a medical marijuana business
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, any other applicable law, rule, or
regulation or conditions imposed on land use or permit approvals, or contrary
to the terms of the plans submitted with the permit application, as such plans
may be amended as provided in this chapter, or has operated a business in
violation of any law;
   (D)   A Sheriff, deputy, police officer, or prosecution officer, or an
officer or employee of the state licensing authority or a local permitting
authority; and/or
   (E)   A person whose authority to be a primary caregiver has been revoked by
the state health agency.
(Prior Code, § 114.33) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS PERMIT
§ 114.30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, or other business entity to
operate as a commercial medical marijuana dispensary, commercial medical
marijuana grower, commercial medical marijuana manufacturer, or commercial
medical marijuana processor within the corporate limits of the city without
first having obtained a permit therefor as provided herein. The fees for the
permits required hereunder shall be established by ordinance of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 114.10) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.31 ADDITIONAL LICENSES AND PERMITS MAY BE REQUIRED.
   The permit requirement set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by
any other federal, state, or local law, including, by way of example, any
applicable building permit.
(Prior Code, § 114.11) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.32 PERMIT DOES NOT PROVIDE ANY EXCEPTION, DEFENSE, OR IMMUNITY FROM OTHER
LAWS.
   The issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter does not create an
exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any potential
criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution, or
possession of marijuana.
(Prior Code, § 114.12) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.33 SEPARATE PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION.
   A separate permit shall be required for each premise from which a commercial
medical marijuana business is operated. Except as specifically provided in this
chapter, no two or more different commercial medical marijuana businesses may
be treated as one premises.
(Prior Code, § 114.13) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.34 PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   A permit that has been issued by the city for medical marijuana is
nontransferable. A commercial medical marijuana business permit is not
transferable or assignable, including, without limitation, not transferable or
assignable to a different premise, to a different type of business, or to a
different owner or permittee.
   (B)   A commercial medical marijuana business permit is valid only for the
owner named thereon, the type of business disclosed on the application for the
permit, and the location for which the permit is issued. The permittee of a
commercial medical marijuana business permit are only those persons disclosed
in the application or subsequently disclosed to the city in accordance with
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 114.14) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.35 VENTILATION, FIRE, AND LIFE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to state and local Building and Fire Codes, the following
requirements shall be enforced.
   (A)   Ventilation.
      (1)   A plan for ventilation of all medical marijuana facilities that
describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any odor of
marijuana off the premises of the establishment must be submitted to the city.
For retail and cultivation facilities, such plans shall also include all
ventilation systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe
how such systems operate with the systems preventing any odors leaving the
premises.
      (2)   The required outdoor ventilation rate required for each retail
marijuana establishment or a medical marijuana cultivation facility will be as
follows:
         (a)   For marijuana cultivation facilities, eight persons per 1,000
square feet with a ventilation rate of 60 cubic feet per minute per person; and
         (b)   For retail stores, the licensed premises for marijuana
transporters, retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and retail
marijuana testing facilities and medical marijuana testing facilities eight
persons for 1,000 square feet with a rate of 15 cubic feet per minute per
person.
   (B)   Fire separation requirements. For medical marijuana dispensaries, a
minimum of a two-hour fire separation will be required between all medical
dispensaries and any adjacent business, unless higher performance is required
by applicable law.
   (C)   Fire suppression requirements. For all buildings regardless of size
containing medical marijuana cultivation, production, storage, or
manufacturing, a Type 13 automatic sprinkler system will be required.
   (D)   Exterior electrical disconnect required. For all buildings containing
medical marijuana cultivation, production, storage, or manufacturing, a NEMA
Type 3 electrical disconnect will be required on the exterior of the building.
The electrical disconnect must be labeled and in an accessible location.
(Prior Code, § 114.15) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO THE OPERATION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
§ 114.50 ON-SITE USE PROHIBITED.
   No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten, or otherwise consumed or ingested
within the medical marijuana business.
(Prior Code, § 114.40) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.51 RESTRICTION ON ACCESS TO RESTRICTED AREA.
   (A)   No person, other than a patient, permittee, employee, or a caregiver,
shall be in the restricted area. No patient shall be allowed entry into the
restricted area without showing a valid state medical marijuana patient license
and a valid picture ID.
   (B)   (1)   No person, other than an employee or caregiver of the business,
shall be permitted in the restricted area of the business. No access to the
restricted area may be permitted by non-state residents or for compensation.
      (2)   A log shall be maintained on the business premises and available
for inspection upon request by the City Manager or City Manager’s designee.
(Prior Code, § 114.41) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.52 DISPLAY OF PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A valid city-issued commercial medical marijuana business permit shall be
conspicuously posted in the business.
(Prior Code, § 114.42) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.53 BUSINESS CONDUCTED WITHIN BUILDING.
   Any and all cultivation, production, distribution, possession, storage,
display, sales, or other distribution of marijuana shall occur only within the
restricted area of a commercial medical marijuana business and shall not be
visible from the exterior of the business.
(Prior Code, § 114.43) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.54 USE OF PESTICIDES.
   No pesticides or insecticides which are prohibited by applicable law for
fertilization or production of edible produce shall be used on any marijuana
cultivated, produced, or distributed by a medical marijuana business.
(Prior Code, § 114.44) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.55 VENTILATION REQUIRED.
   A commercial medical marijuana business shall be ventilated so that the odor
of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the
exterior of the medical marijuana business, or any adjoining use or property.
(Prior Code, § 114.45) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.56 USE OF METALS, BUTANE, PROPANE, OR OTHER FLAMMABLE PRODUCTS.
   (A)   No medical marijuana business may use metals, butane, propane, or
other flammable products, or produce flammable vapors, to process marijuana
unless the process used and the premises are verified as safe and in compliance
with all applicable codes by a qualified industrial hygienist.
   (B)   The city may require the business to obtain verification from a
qualified industrial hygienist that the manner in which the business is
producing medical marijuana complies with all applicable laws and does not
produce noxious or dangerous gases or odors or otherwise create a danger to any
person or entity in or near the businesses.
(Prior Code, § 114.46) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.57 DISPOSAL OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA BYPRODUCTS.
   (A)   All medical marijuana and any product containing a usable form of
marijuana must be made unusable and unrecognizable prior to removal from the
business in compliance with all applicable laws.
   (B)   This provision shall not apply to licensed law enforcement, including,
without limitation, the City Police Department and the City Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 114.47) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.58 DELIVERY BETWEEN MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport medical marijuana, except
as specifically allowed by applicable law, unless the medical marijuana being
transported meets the following requirements:
   (A)   All medical marijuana is transported in a locked container, shielded
from public view and labeled “Medical Marijuana or Derivative;”
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically allowed by applicable law, medical
marijuana may be transported only between medical marijuana businesses; and
   (C)   The medical marijuana must be accompanied by the manifest in
accordance with state requirements for transport of marijuana.
(Prior Code, § 114.48) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.59 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   (A)   A commercial medical marijuana business may not advertise in a manner
that is inconsistent with the medicinal use of medical marijuana. A medical
marijuana business may not advertise in a manner that is misleading, deceptive,
false, or designed to appeal to minors. Advertisement that promotes medical
marijuana for recreational or any use other than for medicinal purposes shall
be a violation of the code.
   (B)   The following conditions shall apply.
      (1)   Any person permitted as a medical marijuana business shall include
in any advertisement for medical marijuana or any medical marijuana infused
product the following language: “For registered state medical marijuana
patients only.” Provided, however, this language shall not be required to be
displayed upon any sign identifying a medical marijuana business, as permitted
by division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful
for any person permitted under this chapter or any other person to advertise
any medical marijuana or medical marijuana infused product anywhere in the city
where the advertisement is in plain view or in a place open to the general
public, including advertising utilizing any of the following media: any
billboard, or other outdoor general advertising device as defined by Zoning
Codes; any sign mounted on a vehicle; any hand-held or other portable sign; or
any handbill, leaflet, or flier directly handed to any person in a public
place, left upon a motor vehicle, or posted upon any public or private
property. The prohibition set forth in this division (B)(2) shall not apply to:
         (a)   Any sign located on the same zoned lot as a medical marijuana
business which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the
medical marijuana business and which otherwise complies with this code and any
other applicable city laws and regulations;
         (b)   Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine, or
other periodical of general circulation within the city or on the internet,
which may include coupons;
         (c)   Any products marked with the name or logo of a marijuana
business, including wearable or non-consumable merchandise, packaging in which
marijuana is sold, or on medical marijuana accessories sold;
         (d)   Advertising which is purely incidental to sponsorship of a
charitable event by a medical marijuana business;
         (e)   A booth at a job fair or educational seminar where the only
items distributed are company or educational materials, and no other items are
distributed, shown, or sold; or
         (f)   A booth at an adult event where the only items distributed are
company or educational materials, and no other items are distributed, shown, or
sold.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense if a medical marijuana business
employee provided another individual, upon request, a business card for the
purpose of providing that person’s name and business affiliation, including,
without restriction, title, mailing address, email address, and telephone
number.
      (4)   No medical marijuana business shall distribute or allow the
distribution of any marijuana or products marked with its name or logo without
charge within a marijuana business or any place open to the public for the
purpose of promotion or advertising except as permitted in divisions (B)(5) and
(B)(6) below.
      (5)   No medical marijuana business shall distribute or allow the
distribution of any coupon or similar writing, electronically or on paper,
which purports to allow the bearer to exchange the same for any marijuana
product, either free or at a discount except as permitted in this divisions (B)
(5) and (B)(6) below.
      (6)   No medical marijuana business shall sell, distribute, or provide,
or allow the sale, distribution, or provision of, products marked with its name
or logo, in child sizes, designed for the use of minors, or which is
misleading, deceptive, false, or appealing to minors.
(Prior Code, § 114.49) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.60 ORGANIZATION OF CULTIVATION FACILITIES.
   All cultivation facilities shall be organized in orderly rows with aisles at
least three feet wide, and no more than eight feet between an aisle and the
next aisle or an aisle and a wall, and with clear access to all exits, unless
the Planning and Zoning Board determines that the business has provided a
dimensioned floor plan that provides equivalent access and separation between
plants and to exits.
(Prior Code, § 114.50) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.61 REPORTING OF SOURCE, QUANTITY, AND SALES.
   The records to be maintained by each medical marijuana business shall
include the source and quantity of any marijuana distributed, produced, or
possessed within the premises. Such reports shall include, without limitation,
for both acquisitions from wholesalers and transactions to patients or care
givers, the following:
   (A)   State medical marijuana license number of seller or purchaser; and
   (B)   Date, weight, type of marijuana, and dollar amount or other
consideration of transaction.
(Prior Code, § 114.51) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.62 REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH AND LABELING.
   (A)   The production of any medical marijuana infused product shall be at a
medical marijuana infused product manufacturer that meets all requirements of a
retail food establishment as set forth in 63 O.S. §§ 1-1101 et seq., 63 O.S. §§
1-1401 et seq., OAC 310:257, and OAC 310:240. The production of any product
containing medical marijuana shall comply with all health and safety standards
thereof. The permittee shall comply with all applicable state and local health
regulations related to the production, preparation, labeling, and sale of
prepared food items as if the medical marijuana infused products were food
items.
   (B)   All medical marijuana sold or otherwise distributed by the permittee
shall be packaged and labeled in a manner that advises the purchaser that it
contains marijuana and specifies the amount of marijuana in the product, that
the marijuana is intended for medical use solely by the patient to whom it is
sold, and that any resale or redistribution of the medical marijuana to a third
person is prohibited. In addition, the label shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the state and any other applicable law.
   (C)   The product shall be packaged in a sealed container that cannot be
opened without obvious damage to the packaging.
(Prior Code, § 114.52) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.63 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE LAW.
   Except as may be provided otherwise in this chapter, or rules adopted
pursuant to this chapter or interpretations by the city, any law or regulation
adopted by the state governing the cultivation, production, possession, or
distribution of marijuana for medical use shall also apply to medical marijuana
businesses in the city. Provided however, if a state law or regulation permits
what this chapter prohibits, this chapter shall prevail. Compliance with any
applicable state law or regulation that does not permit what this chapter
prohibits shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of
any permit under this chapter, and noncompliance with any applicable state law
or regulation is unlawful and shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of
any permit issued under this chapter. No medical marijuana business shall
continue operations in violation of an additional state law or regulation,
which does not permit what this chapter prohibits, applicable within the city
after the effective date of the state law or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 114.53) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.64 REVOCATION OF PERMIT UPON DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE OR
APPLICABLE FEDERAL PROHIBITION.
   If the state prohibits the cultivation, production, possession, or other
distribution of marijuana through medical marijuana businesses, or if a medical
marijuana business is denied a commercial medical marijuana business permit or
has such permit revoked, or if a court of competent jurisdiction determines
that the federal government’s prohibition of the cultivation, production,
possessions, or other distributions of marijuana through medical marijuana
businesses supersedes state law, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be deemed to be immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground
for appeal or other redress on behalf of the permittee.
(Prior Code, § 114.54) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.65 REVOCABLE PRIVILEGE.
   A commercial medical marijuana business permit is a revocable privilege, and
no applicant therefor or holder thereof shall be deemed to have acquired any
property interest therein.
(Prior Code, § 114.55) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
§ 114.66 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts
unless such act is permitted under the provisions of State Question 788 or the
State Health Department regulations:
   (A)   Cultivate, distribute, or produce marijuana in plain view of or in a
place open to the general public;
   (B)   Smoke, use, or ingest any marijuana on the premise of the commercial
medical marijuana business;
   (C)   Operate or be in physical control of any commercial medical marijuana
business, liquor establishment, vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while under the
influence of alcohol, medical marijuana, or other intoxicant;
   (D)   Possess medical marijuana that is not in a sealed package in a
location where the possessor is not authorized to possess or consume medical
marijuana;
   (E)   Possess more than six mature and six seedling marijuana plants without
a commercial medical marijuana business permit for a cultivation facility;
   (F)   Possess any marijuana without a medical marijuana license or a
marijuana business permit; further a holder of a medical marijuana license
shall not possess more than three ounces of marijuana on his or her person;
   (G)   Possess more than one ounce of concentrated marijuana without a
commercial medical marijuana permit for a business or a medical marijuana
infused product manufacturer;
   (H)   Possess more than 72 ounces of edible marijuana without a commercial
medical marijuana permit for a business or a medical marijuana infused product
manufacturer;
   (I)   Possess more than eight ounces of marijuana in his or her residence;
   (J)   Obtain marijuana from a person who is not permitted as a commercial
medical marijuana business;
   (K)   Possess or operate a commercial medical marijuana business in
violation of this chapter;
   (L)   Produce, distribute, or possess more medical marijuana than allowed in
this chapter than disclosed in the application to the state for a medical
marijuana business permit or other applicable law;
   (M)   Distribute medical marijuana without a commercial medical marijuana
business permit or outside of the restricted area of the medical marijuana
business;
   (N)   Possess medical marijuana, own or manage a medical marijuana business,
or own or manage a building with a medical marijuana business, where there is
possession of medical marijuana by a person who is not a patient, caregiver, or
a permittee of a medical marijuana business;
   (O)   Possess or operate a medical marijuana business in a location or in a
manner for which a medical marijuana business permit is prohibited by the terms
of this chapter;
   (P)   Operate a medical marijuana business without a commercial medical
marijuana business permit from the city;
   (Q)   Operate a medical marijuana business in a manner that is not
consistent with the items disclosed in the application for the medical
marijuana business, or is in violation of any plan made part of the permit
application;
   (R)   Distribute medical marijuana infused product that was produced in a
manner that is not in compliance with this chapter (or own or manage a medical
marijuana business where such distribution occurs);
   (S)   Cultivate, manufacture, distribute, or possess any medical marijuana
at a location without a commercial medical marijuana business permit prior to
passing the inspection required by this chapter;
   (T)   Make any changes, or for the permittee to allow any changes, to the
items included in the plans submitted with the permit application and approved
by the City Council, or the individuals identified in the application, without
prior approval of the City Council;
   (U)   Attempt to use or display a medical marijuana business permit at a
different location or for a different business entity than the location and
business entity disclosed on the application for the issued permit;
   (V)   Cultivate, produce, distribute, or possess medical marijuana in
violation of this chapter or any other applicable law, or own or manage a
medical marijuana business in which another cultivates, produces, distributes,
or possesses medical marijuana violation of this chapter;
   (W)   Own, manage, or possess a medical marijuana business where medical
marijuana is outside of the restricted area portion of such business. It shall
be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if the medical
marijuana outside of the restricted area was:
      (1)   In the custody and control of a patient or caregiver;
      (2)   Purchased by that patient or caregiver from the business and the
patient or caregiver has not left the business since purchase; and
      (3)   The amount of medical marijuana in the custody and control of the
patient or caregiver does not exceed the amount that patient or caregiver may
possess lawfully;
   (X)   Dispose of medical marijuana or any by-product of medical marijuana
containing marijuana in a manner contrary to this chapter;
   (Y)   Deliver or transport medical marijuana between medical marijuana
business except in strict compliance with this chapter;
   (Z)   Advertise or publish materials, honor coupons, sell or give away
products, or display signs that are in violation of this code;
   (AA)   Violate any provision of this code or any condition of an approval
granted pursuant to this code or any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the
use of medical marijuana or operation of a medical marijuana business;
   (BB)   Permit any other person to violate any provision of this code or any
condition of an approval granted pursuant to this code, or any law, rule, or
regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or the operation of a
medical marijuana business;
   (CC)   Lease any property to a medical marijuana business that has marijuana
on the property without a medical marijuana business permit that has been
issued by the city;
   (DD)   Label or distribute a marijuana infused product that is not labeled
as required by this code or other applicable law;
   (EE)   Distribute or deliver marijuana from a medical marijuana cultivation
facility to any location other than a medical marijuana business;
   (FF)   Printing or allowing the printing of a coupon that is not a
newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation within the city
or on the internet; and/or
   (GG)   Fail to provide a copy or record of a coupon authorized under this
chapter upon request of an authorized city employee.
(Prior Code, § 114.56) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.67 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT; IMPOSITION OF FINES.
   (A)   A medical marijuana business permit may be suspended or revoked for
any of the following violations:
      (1)   Conviction of the business, a permittee, or any owner, or primary
caregiver of any violation of this chapter or any other law, rule, or
regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or operation of a medical
marijuana business;
      (2)   Misrepresentation or omission of any material fact, or false or
misleading information, on the application or any amendment thereto, or any
other information provided to the city related to the medical marijuana
business;
      (3)   Violation of any law which, if occurring prior to submittal of the
application, could have been cause for denial of the permit application;
      (4)   Distribution of medical marijuana, including, without limitation,
transporting marijuana, in violation of this chapter or any other applicable
law, rule, or regulation.
   (B)   In the event a business or permittee is charged with violation of any
law, upon which a final judgment would be grounds for suspension or revocation
of the permit, the city may suspend the permit pending the resolution of
charges.
   (C)   If the city revokes or suspends a permit, the business may not move
any marijuana from the premises except under the supervision of the city Police
Department.
   (D)   In the event of the suspension of a medical marijuana business permit,
during the period of suspension, the business:
      (1)   Shall post two notices provided by the City Clerk, in conspicuous
places, one on the exterior and one on the interior of its premises for the
duration of the suspension; and
      (2)   Shall not distribute or produce or test or transport marijuana, nor
allow any customers into the permitted premises.
(Prior Code, § 114.57) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.68 TERM OF PERMIT; RENEWALS; EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Term of permit. A commercial medical marijuana business permit shall
be valid for a period of one year. The permit shall expire on the last day of
the month in which the permit is issued of the year following issuance or
renewal of the permit.
   (B)   Renewal of permit. The permittee shall apply for renewal of the
commercial medical marijuana business permit at least 45 days prior to the
expiration of the permit. The permittee shall apply for renewal using forms
provided by the City Clerk. If the applicant fails to apply for renewal at
least 45 days prior to the expiration of the permit but does apply for renewal
prior to expiration of the permit, the City Clerk may process the renewal
application if the applicant submits a late filing fee of $500 at the time of
submittal of the renewal application.
      (1)   The renewal application fee, and late fee, if applicable, shall
accompany the renewal application. Once the application is deemed approved by
the city, a separate permit fee will be due prior to permit issuance. All fees
are nonrefundable.
      (2)   In the event there has been a change to any of the plans identified
in the permit application that were submitted to and approved by the City
Council or its designee, with the application or an earlier renewal, the
renewal application shall include the specifics of the changes or proposed
changes in any of such plans.
      (3)   In the event any person who has an interest as described in the
disclosures made to the city pursuant to this chapter, or any agent as defined
herein, or employee has been charged with or accused of violations of any law
since such disclosure, the renewal application shall include the name of the
violator, the date of violation, the court and case number where the violation
was filed, and the disposition of the violation with the renewal application.
      (4)   In the event the business permit has been suspended or revoked or a
permittee has received any notice of violation of any law that would impact
renewal, the renewal application shall include a copy of the notice,
suspension, or revocation.
      (5)   The renewal application shall include verification that the
business has a valid state license and the state license is in good standing.
      (6)   The renewal application shall include a summary report for the
previous 12 months showing the amount of marijuana purchased, the amount of
marijuana sold, the forms in which marijuana was sold, the number of patients,
and the number of primary caregivers who received medical marijuana, the police
report numbers or case numbers of all police calls to the medical marijuana
business and, for calls resulting in a charge of a violation of any law, the
charge, case number, and disposition of any of the charges.
      (7)   The City Clerk shall not accept renewal applications after the
expiration of the permit, but instead shall require the applicant to file a new
permit application.
      (8)   (a)   In the event there have been allegations of violations of
this code by any of the permittees or the business submitting a renewal
application, the city may hold a hearing prior to approving the renewal
application.
         (b)   The hearing shall be to determine whether the application and
proposed permittees comply with this chapter and whether the operation of the
medical marijuana business has been in compliance with this code.
         (c)   If the city does not hold a hearing and the application and the
permittees do not meet the requirements of this chapter, or the business has
been operated in the past in violation of this code, the renewal application
may be denied or issued with conditions, and the decision shall be final
subject to the City Manager’s review.
   (C)   Expiration of permit. Expiration of a commercial medical marijuana
business permit for any reason shall be considered an inactive local permit.
(Prior Code, § 114.58) (Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation of the rules as adopted by
this chapter shall be the maximum penalty allowed by state law but not
exceeding the jurisdictional limits of the City Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 114.02)
   (B)   Fines for violations of this chapter may be imposed by the city
against the person or any permittee up to $500 per person and any permittee per
occurrence. Any person or permittee subjected to fines, revocation, or
suspension of its permit shall be entitled to a hearing by the City Municipal
Court to contest such penalties.
(Prior Code, § 114.57)
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this chapter an
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a
misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful the violation of any provision of this code
or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500, plus costs. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation
of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 114.99)
(Ord. 2020-563, passed 1-16-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES IN GENERAL
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE, AND MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES IN GENERAL
Section
   
130.01   Attempts to commit an offense
   
130.02   Aiding in an offense
§ 130.01 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE.
   Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the
city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense,
but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty
of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted
offense itself.
(Prior Code, § 130.01)
§ 130.02 AIDING IN AN OFFENSE.
   When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a
particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who
counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or
misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender.
(Prior Code, § 130.02)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Petit larceny prohibited
   
131.02   Injuring automobiles and other vehicles
   
131.03   Destroying or injuring buildings and other property
   
131.04   Placing signs on property of another
   
131.05   Throwing or shooting at persons or property
   
131.06   Tampering with or damaging public utilities
   
131.07   Unlawful intrusion upon land
   
131.08   Illegal entrance
   
131.09   Throwing advertising on street prohibited
   
131.10   Throwing injurious substances
   
131.11   Injury to plants and trees
   
131.12   Public streets and trees
   
131.13   Trespass prohibited
   
131.14   Parking on property of another
   
131.15   Interference with fire hydrants
§ 131.01 PETIT LARCENY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   PETIT LARCENY is the taking of personal property of value not
exceeding $50 accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive
another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property from the
“person” of another.
   (B)   Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Petit larceny defined, see 21 O.S. §§ 1704, 1706
§ 131.02 INJURING AUTOMOBILES AND OTHER VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest,
enter, occupy or loiter in any automobile or other vehicle belonging to
another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.03 DESTROYING OR INJURING BUILDINGS AND OTHER PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest
any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property
wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use;
or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or
any other person entitled to its use.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.04 PLACING SIGNS ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint,
mark, write, or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement,
bill placard, device, or inscription upon any public or private building,
fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle, or other
property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.05 THROWING OR SHOOTING AT PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot, or other
object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he or she is
likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or
shoot any stone, shot, or other object at any person, vehicle, structure,
electric light, or other property of another (whether public or private),
except in case where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or
of property.
(Prior Code, § 131.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGING PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe,
wire, or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire, or other conductor carrying
gas, water, or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly
or privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him or her to consume or use
the gas, water, or electricity without it passing through the meter or any
other way so as to evade payment therefor.
   (B)   It is also unlawful for any person to damage, molest, tamper with, or
destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of any public utility,
including any telegraph or telephone system.
(Prior Code, § 131.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.07 UNLAWFUL INTRUSION UPON LAND.
   (A)   Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land
within the City of Walters, Oklahoma, without license or authority from the
owner thereof, or who erects or occupies thereon any hut, hovel, shanty, or
other structure without such license or authority, and every person who places,
erects, or occupies within the bounds of any street, alley, or avenue of the
town, any hut, hovel, shanty, or other structure whatever, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Living in tents; camping in tents; or placing tents on public or
private property.
      (1)   No person shall live in a tent, shack, shed or any other type of
structure within the city limits of the City of Walters, Oklahoma, except
residences, hotels, rooming houses, houses, and trailers constructed,
maintained and occupied according to the ordinances of the City of Walters,
Oklahoma.
      (2)   No person shall erect a tent within the city limits of the City of
Walters, Oklahoma, for the purpose of camping overnight, except in areas
authorized by the City Manager and the City Council, or their designees.
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   The violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to
$100, plus court costs.
      (2)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 131.07) (Ord. 587, passed 9-3-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.08 ILLEGAL ENTRANCE.
   It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into
an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area, or
structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by
signs or any notice or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except
when such entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed, or tacit consent
of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or
ordinance. It is unlawful for any person to remain on the property of another
after having been given notice, written or verbal, to leave by the owner or
person in charge.
(Prior Code, § 131.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.09 THROWING ADVERTISING ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave, or deposit, or cause to be
thrown, left, or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public
area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter.
(Prior Code, § 131.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.10 THROWING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES.
   It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw
upon the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid,
corrosive, or other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste
or urine, with intent to injure or harass the person, property, or animal.
(Prior Code, § 131.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.11 INJURY TO PLANTS AND TREES.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully and without authority cut, pull,
pluck, or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs, or trees
growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or willfully or
without authority to tear down, remove, cut, or otherwise injure or destroy any
gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or willfully injure or destroy
any stand, bench, seat, or other property situated upon such park or ground.
Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of
an offense.
(Prior Code, § 131.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.12 PUBLIC STREETS AND TREES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Willfully or wantonly cut, deface, or in any way injure any tree or
sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys, or public places
within the city;
      (2)   Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or
any wire to any live tree;
      (3)   Dig any hole, ditch, or trench in any public street, road, avenu,e
or alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to, or under
the supervision or control of the city;
      (4)   Take or remove any dirt, earth, or any substance from any street,
road, alley, or other public place in the city; or to cut, break, or otherwise
injure any pavement, curb, or gutter therein; or
      (5)   Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without
first securing permission from the City Inspector so to do.
   (B)   Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under
the supervision of the Street Superintendent or City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 131.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.13 TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any property other than public property.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. The property which is dedicated to public use and over
which the federal, state, or municipal government or any subdivision thereof
exercises control.
      TRESPASS. Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or
other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the
implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. TRESPASS
shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in
lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or
the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of
the premises. TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private
property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after
having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer. The
provisions of this definition shall not apply to persons, including employees,
whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in
lawful possession of such premises, nor shall the provisions of this sentence
apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such premises.
TRESPASS shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property
before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business
day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this
definition.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private property.
(Prior Code, § 131.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.14 PARKING ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to
place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another
without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge or by
authority of law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 131.14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.15 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city
utility personnel or a member of the Fire Department to open, turn on or off,
interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire
hydrant or stop cock belonging to the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant
by placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt, or other thing, or in any
other manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 131.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
Section
   
132.01   Disturbing the peace
   
132.02   Insulting signs; literature or language
   
132.03   Fireworks regulated
   
132.04   Storing or keeping explosives
   
132.05   Carrying weapons; exceptions
   
132.06   Reckless conduct
   
132.07   Discharging firearms; exceptions
   
132.08   Loud noise or music prohibited; amplified sound
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention code and provisions, see
Chapter 92
§ 132.01 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by
doing any of the acts set out in division (B) below.
   (B)   Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a
manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others:
      (1)   Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening,
violent, or insulting language or conduct;
      (2)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition;
      (3)   Engaging in a fistic encounter;
      (4)   Lewdly exposing one’s person, or private parts thereof, in any
public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be
offended or annoyed thereby;
      (5)   Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or
not at any other person or persons either in anger or otherwise;
      (6)   Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including
being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against
the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such
acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously;
      (7)   Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by
rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by profane, improper, or loud language,
or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing
distance thereof;
      (8)   Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises;
      (9)   Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for
religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent, or improper behavior, by
profane, improper, or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the
place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or
      (10)   Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably
disturb or alarm the public.
(Prior Code, § 132.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 INSULTING SIGNS; LITERATURE OR LANGUAGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within the city to
display any sign, emblem, badge, flag, or device, which in its common
acceptance is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the city, and
which is calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach
of the peace or an assault.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully use, utter, publish,
circulate, or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or insulting language
or literature where:
      (1)   A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a
breach of the peace or an assault; or
      (2)   The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated
to cause a breach of the peace or an assault.
(Prior Code, § 132.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 FIREWORKS REGULATED.
   (A)   Discharge of fireworks within city limits prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to fire, ignite, light, shoot, or explode, or cause to be
ignited, fired, or exploded, any fireworks, fire crackers, guns, torpedoes,
skyrockets, sparklers, or explosives of any nature or kind, within the city
limits. For the purpose of this section, FIREWORKS shall have the same meaning
as defined in 68 O.S. § 1622. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the possession or use of fireworks for public display by holders of
a permit for a public display issued by the city pursuant to the city’s Fire
Prevention Code.
   (B)   Sale of fireworks within city limits prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to sell fireworks within the city limits except by permit. A person
may be allowed to sell fireworks on specified dates after application and
meeting conditions of approval. Conditions include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Location:
         (a)   C-1 zoning;
         (b)   Minimum open area of 140 feet by 140 feet; and
         (c)   No traffic obstruction (must have adequate off-road, onsite
parking that does not interfere or block any rights-of-way).
      (2)   Application and documents:
         (a)   Submit application by designated date;
         (b)   Copy of photo ID;
         (c)   Certificate of inspection by Fire Marshal; and
         (d)   Proof of liability insurance.
(Prior Code, § 132.03) (Ord. 2000-462, passed 6-29-2000; Ord. 2022-576, passed
5-3-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Bottle rockets prohibited by state law, see 68 O.S. § 1624
   State fireworks licenses required, see 68 O.S. §§ 1621 et seq.
§ 132.04 STORING OR KEEPING EXPLOSIVES.
   It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any
nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or
substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed
five pounds where the same is securely kept.
(Prior Code, § 132.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.05 CARRYING WEAPONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his or her
person any pistol, revolver, dagger, Bowie knife, dirk knife, switch-blade
knife, spring-type knife, metal knuckle, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument, except when doing so in line of duty or as may be
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 132.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   State Firearms Act, 21 O.S. §§ 1289.1 et seq.
State Self Defense Act, 21 O.S. §§ 12901 et seq.
§ 132.06 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in
his or her possession any shotgun, rifle, or pistol, such actions consisting of
creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great
bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety
of another person.
(Prior Code, § 132.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.07 DISCHARGING FIREARMS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any species of firearm in the city except
when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of
oneself, of another person, or of property, or when otherwise authorized by law
or ordinance.
   (B)   It is unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun in the city.
(Prior Code, § 132.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.08 LOUD NOISE OR MUSIC PROHIBITED; AMPLIFIED SOUND.
   (A)   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any
excessive, disturbing, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace, or safety of others, within the limits of the city.
   (B)   Loud, excessive, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of
this section include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Sounding any home or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except
as a danger warning; creating any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of
any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   Using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 15 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in
which it is located; the term PLAINLY AUDIBLE means a person can hear the
content of the sound produced by the noise source including, but not limited
to, musical rhythms, spoken words, or vocal sounds;
      (3)   Using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud-speaker, sound
amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
from any building, structure, or other stationary source which is cast upon the
public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure;
      (4)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public
streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or any time
or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in
any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity;
      (5)   Keeping any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-
continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity;
      (6)   Blowing any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to
any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work
or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of property city
authorities;
      (7)   Discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom;
      (8)   Use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling, or other noise;
      (9)   Creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates,
and containers;
      (10)   (a)   Erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or
repair of any building other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector,
which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while
the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods of three
days or less while the emergency continues.
         (b)   If the Building Inspector should determine that the public
health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration,
or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.,and if he or she shall further determine that
loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he or she may
grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:
00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is
awarded or during the progress of the work;
      (11)   Creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is in use, or
adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital;
      (12)   Shouting and crying of itinerant vendors which disturbs the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood;
      (13)   Use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale;
      (14)   Operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or
fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden such noise;
      (15)   Operating or permitting the operation of any machinery or motor
vehicle which creates a noise exceeding 89 decibels at any adjoining property
line from June 1 in any year until the second Saturday in September of any
year, both dates inclusive; and
      (16)   This division (B) shall not be construed to be applicable to any
of the following:
         (a)   The operation of motor vehicles with proper mufflers and other
equipment licensed for operation on the highways of this state;
         (b)   The operation, pursuant to a resolution adopted by the council
in cases of emergency, where the welfare of persons or property may be
jeopardized by the strict enforcement of the provisions of this section; or
         (c)   The operation of any equipment owned or contracted for by the
state or the city.
   (C)   This section shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes,
bells, carillons, or other religious music.
(Prior Code, § 132.08) (Ord. 94-438, passed 11-1-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   City power to restrain and prohibit unnecessary noise, see 11 O.S. § 22-110
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE, AND MORALS
Section
   
133.01   Public intoxication and drinking prohibited
   
133.02   Possession, transportation of intoxicating beverages
   
133.03   Intoxicating liquors
   
133.04   Marijuana prohibited
   
133.05   Prostitution and lewd conduct
   
133.06   Disorderly house
   
133.07   Maintaining or leasing a disorderly house
   
133.08   Residents and visitors to disorderly house
   
133.09   Nudity; improper dress; indecent exposure
   
133.10   Obscenity regulations
   
133.11   Vagrancy defined for specific acts; offenses
   
133.12   Curfew for children
   
133.13   Sleeping in public
   
133.14   Begging prohibited
   
133.15   Gambling prohibited
   
133.16   Being about place where gambling is going on
   
133.17   Harmful deception
   
133.18   False or bogus checks
   
133.19   Swindling unlawful
§ 133.01 PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND DRINKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street,
alley, or other public place in the city in a state of intoxication. It is
unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor or
beverage, as defined in the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A O.S. §§
1-101 through 6-129, upon or in any street, alley, or other public place within
the city. It is unlawful to use, sell, or furnish to another any illegal drug
or narcotic in any place in the city except as legally prescribed by a
physician.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a STATE OF INTOXICATION means the
condition in which a person is under the influence of any intoxicating,
nonintoxicating, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquors, or of any narcotic or
drug, to such extent as to deprive the person of his or her full physical or
mental power, or in which a person is a danger to himself or herself or others.
(Prior Code, § 133.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.02 POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any intoxicating alcoholic beverage or nonintoxicating beverage
while such person is upon any public street, road, or highway or in any public
place within the city limits.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the age of
21 years to permit such person to be in possession of an intoxicating alcoholic
beverage.
   (C)   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any
moving vehicle upon a public highway, street, or alley any intoxicating
beverage, except in the original container, which shall not have been opened
and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed unless the
opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment.
      (b)   The REAR TRUNK OR COMPARTMENT shall include the spare tire
compartment in a station wagon or panel truck or any outside compartment which
is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is
in motion.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, INTOXICATING BEVERAGE shall be as
defined in the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37A O.S. §§ 1-101 through
6-129.
(Prior Code, § 133.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.03 INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   It is unlawful:
   (A)   For any person to barter, sell, give away, or otherwise furnish to
another any intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind
except as permitted by law;
   (B)   To have in possession or under control any intoxicating or
nonintoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law, or to transport
or in any manner convey from place to place in the city any intoxicating or
nonintoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law;
   (C)   To loiter in a place where intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor is
sold, bartered, given away, or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or
   (D)   To keep, maintain, aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place where
intoxicating or nonintoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away, or
otherwise furnished in violation of law.
(Prior Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.04 MARIJUANA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or
other public place while under the influence of marijuana;
      (2)   To use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley,
place of business, or other public place within the city;
      (3)   To use marijuana in any place within the city except as legally
prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state;
      (4)   To loiter about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished
illegally; or
      (5)   To sell or furnish illegally to another person marijuana.
   (B)   The term MARIJUANA shall have the meaning prescribed by 63 O.S. § 2-
101 for “marijuana.”
(Prior Code, § 133.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.05 PROSTITUTION AND LEWD CONDUCT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Be a prostitute;
      (2)   Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act
of prostitution;
      (3)   Engage in any act of prostitution;
      (4)   Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution or obscenity;
      (5)   Conduct a business or premises for prostitution;
      (6)   Accept or receive the proceeds of any act of prostitution; or
      (7)   Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of
prostitution in the limits of city.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LETTING PREMISES FOR OBSCENITY. The granting of the right of use or the
leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of
obscenity or allowing the continued use of the premises with that knowledge.
      LETTING PREMISES FOR PROSTITUTION. The granting of the right of use or
the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice
of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with that
knowledge.
      PROSTITUTION. The giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for
hire or money.
      SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTES. The soliciting, inviting, inducing,
directing, or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of
promoting prostitution.
(Prior Code, § 133.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.06 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   A DISORDERLY HOUSE means any structure or vehicle by which the peace,
comfort, health, welfare, or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of
the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts:
   (A)   The sale, distribution, possession, or use of any controlled dangerous
substance, the sale, distribution, possession, or use of which is declared
unlawful by state statute;
   (B)   The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of
this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession, or use of alcoholic
beverages including beer containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume;
   (C)   The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute
or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of
prostitution; or
   (D)   The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting
gambling.
(Prior Code, § 133.06)
§ 133.07 MAINTAINING OR LEASING A DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet, or assist in keeping
and maintaining a disorderly house.
   (B)   No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership, or corporation
having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, mobile home,
or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sub-lease, or otherwise
permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house,
and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent,
vehicle, mobile home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly
house, no persons, partnership, or corporation shall continue to grant
permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house.
(Prior Code, § 133.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.08 RESIDENTS AND VISITORS TO DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a
disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city
shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not
by circumstantial evidence.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to physicians or officers in the
discharge of their professional or official duties.
(Prior Code, § 133.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.09 NUDITY; IMPROPER DRESS; INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity;
   (B)   Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent, or
lewd dress; or
   (C)   Make an indecent public exposure of his or her person.
(Prior Code, § 133.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.10 OBSCENITY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC. The matter or performance may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement or for a
separate fee for each item or performance.
      DISSEMINATE. To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
      KNOWINGLY. Being aware of the character and the content of the material.
      MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written
material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial
representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment, or machines.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
      OBSCENE. To the average person applying contemporary community standards:
         (a)   The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest; i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity,
or excretion;
         (b)   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct regulated by 21 O.S.; and
         (c)   The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
      PERFORMANCE. Any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance, or other
exhibition performed before an audience.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
      PROMOTE. To cause, permit, procure, counsel, or assist.
      SERVICE TO PATRONS. The provision of services to paying guests in
establishments providing food and beverages, including, but not limited to,
hosting, hat checking, cooking, bar tending, serving, table setting and
clearing, waitering, and entertaining.
(Prior Code, § 133.10)
   (B)   Prohibited obscene conduct.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to:
         (a)   Knowingly disseminate, sell, offer for sale, publish, display,
distribute, make available to the public, or buy any obscene material;
         (b)   Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements, and other public sales efforts
that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal;
         (c)   Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
         (d)   Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to
public view:
            1.   His or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region, or pubic hair region;
            2.   Any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum anal region, or pubic
hair region;
            3.   Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof; or
            4.   Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
      (2)   (a)   Each complete or partial display or other material exhibition
of any motion picture film or other material shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense.
         (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
projectionist, assistant projectionist, usher, or cashier provided such person
has no financial interest in the motion picture theater so long as that person
is not acting as director or manager of the theater.
(Prior Code, § 133.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.11 VAGRANCY DEFINED FOR SPECIFIC ACTS; OFFENSES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a VAGRANT means any person who
loiters or remains in or wanders about, a public or private place for any of
the following purposes:
      (1)   For the purpose of gambling with cards, dice, or other gambling
paraphernalia;
      (2)   For the purpose of engaging in prostitution or soliciting
prostitution or soliciting for an act of lewdness;
      (3)   For the purpose of engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any
building, property, or automobile of another;
      (4)   For the purpose of injuring, destroying, molesting, or defacing any
property of another;
      (5)   For the purpose of assaulting any person;
      (6)   For the purpose of begging or soliciting alms, provided that this
section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious,
charitable, or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such
organizations; or
      (7)   For the purpose of selling, purchasing, trading, or otherwise
exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband.
(Prior Code, § 133.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.12 CURFEW FOR CHILDREN.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CUSTODIAN. Any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to
a minor.
      GUARDIAN. Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      PARENT. The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE.
         (a)   Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or place
to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business,
entertainment, or other lawful purpose.
         (b)   A PUBLIC PLACE shall include, but not be limited to, any store,
shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, café, theater, drug store, pool room,
shopping center, and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of
the general public.
         (c)   It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor to remain, wander, stroll, or play in any
public place on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in any
vehicle in, about or upon any public place in the city between the hours of 12:
00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian, or other
adult person having custody or control of such minor;
      (2)   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or
activity directed or permitted by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor; or
      (3)   Where the presence of such minor is connected with or required by
some legitimate employment, trade, profession, or occupation.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation operating or
having charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of
minors between the hours of curfew designated in division (B) above.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult
person having custody or control of any minor to suffer or permit or by
inefficient control to allow such person to be on any public place within the
city between the hours of curfew designated in division (B) above. The
provisions of this section do not apply if:
      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian, or other
adult person having the care, custody or control of the minor;
      (2)   The minor is on an emergency errand or specific business or
activity directed by his or her parent, guardian, custodian, or other adult
having the care and custody of the minor; or
      (3)   The parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a
missing person notification to the City Police Department.
   (E)   (1)   The Council may permit by resolution or motion procedures for
advance notice or registration with the city of special events or functions
sponsored by churches, schools, clubs, or other organizations which require
minors to be out at a later time.
      (2)   The Council may also prescribe the procedures for taking into
custody minors found in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 133.13) (Ord. 413, passed 3-5-1985; Ord. 93-431, passed 9-7-
1993)
§ 133.13 SLEEPING IN PUBLIC.
   It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and sunrise,
to sleep on any street, in any other public place, or on any property of
another without the express or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge
of such place. It is unlawful for a person to loiter on or about the premises
of any public or private school or other public building, or in or about a
depot of a public carrier.
(Prior Code, § 133.14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.14 BEGGING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to beg alms for any person, organization, or
agency except an organization or agency, public or private, whose purpose or
one of whose purposes is to aid persons in need.
(Prior Code, § 133.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.15 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or agent or
employee thereof, to do any of the following:
      (1)   To play, to open, or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on,
or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette,
craps, any banking, percentage, or other game played with dice, cards, or any
device, for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other thing of value;
      (2)   To set up, operate, or permit to be operated, any slot machine or
other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit, or any other things
of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or
loss to the party playing;
      (3)   To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or
      (4)   To knowingly permit his or her premises, houses, lot, or other
property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in
this section.
   (B)   It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play
any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the
element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks, or
any other representatives of value.
(Prior Code, § 133.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit gambling, see 11 O.S. § 22-108
§ 133.16 BEING ABOUT PLACE WHERE GAMBLING IS GOING ON.
   It is unlawful for any person to be about in the immediate vicinity where a
person or persons are gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot
machine or other device, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 133.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.17 HARMFUL DECEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by
impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in
or contributes to the loss, damage, harm, or injury of the person deceived or
of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver.
(Prior Code, § 133.18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.18 FALSE OR BOGUS CHECKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to
obtain or attempt to obtain from any person, firm, or corporation, any money,
property, or valuable thing of the value of an amount to be set by the City
Council from time to time or less by means of any false or bogus check or by
any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin.
   (B)   The term FALSE OR BOGUS CHECK shall include checks or orders given for
money or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the
maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof.
   (C)   The making, drawing, issuing, or delivering of a check, draft, or
order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence
of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with,
such bank or other depository.
   (D)   Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due
thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or order shall be
presented for payment within 180 days after same is delivered and accepted.
(Prior Code, § 133.19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.19 SWINDLING UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful to get money or property from any other person or persons or
businesses under false pretenses, deception, cheating, or by any other
fraudulent act.
(Prior Code, § 133.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
134.01   Assault and battery prohibited
§ 134.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSAULT. Any intentional, willful, or unlawful attempt or offer with
force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another.
      BATTERY. Any intentional, willful, or unlawful use of force or violence
upon the person of another, or by making any physical contact with another
without consent.
   (B)   It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within
the jurisdiction of the city. Any person committing an assault or an assault
and battery within the jurisdiction of the city shall be guilty of an offense.
(Prior Code, § 134.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
135.01   Resisting an officer
   
135.02   Refusing or failing to assist an officer
   
135.03   Assault or battery upon police or other law officer
   
135.04   Rescuing prisoners
   
135.05   Escape of prisoners
   
135.06   Impersonating an officer or employee
   
135.07   False alarms
   
135.08   False representation to an officer
   
135.09   Removal of barricades
   
135.10   Resisting public officials
   
135.11   Failure to appear
 
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 RESISTING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   It is unlawful to resist, oppose, or assault, or in any way interfere
with, the Police Chief or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the
officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his or her official
duties within the limits of the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to
assist such other person to flee, escape, or evade an officer seeking to make
an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of
or in front of an approaching officer.
   (C)   Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to,
or obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity, and
authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve
any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to
know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting
in his or her official capacity.
   (D)   The words OBSTRUCTION OF shall, in addition to their common meaning,
include:
      (1)   Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer
can restrain him or her and after notice is given that he or she is under
arrest;
      (2)   Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the
arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and
before he or she is under arrest; or
      (3)   Refusal by the arrested party to give his or her name and make his
or her identity known to the arresting officer.
(Prior Code, § 135.01) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.02 REFUSING OR FAILING TO ASSIST AN OFFICER.
   (A)   An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing
or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the
ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to
suppress a riot, affray, or unlawful assembly, may call upon person or persons
to assist him or her in making such arrest, executing such process or
suppressing such riot, affray, or unlawful assembly.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an
officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so.
(Prior Code, § 135.02) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.03 ASSAULT OR BATTERY UPON POLICE OR OTHER LAW OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly commit any assault, battery, or
assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the
law while in the performance of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 135.03) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.04 RESCUING PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty,
rescue, or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner or prisoners, from any
officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the
city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner
in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either before or after
conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement.
(Prior Code, § 135.04) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.05 ESCAPE OF PRISONERS.
   It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of
confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of
the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by
authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison, or custody.
(Prior Code, § 135.05) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.06 IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the
city, falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or employee of the
city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions, or
powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to
do so.
(Prior Code, § 135.06) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.07 FALSE ALARMS.
   It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in
any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the Fire Department or Police
Department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm
or reported fire, accident, or other emergency or knowingly to cause the Fire
Department or Police Department or its officers or employees to make a useless
run.
(Prior Code, § 135.07) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.08 FALSE REPRESENTATION TO AN OFFICER.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or any agent or
employee thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any
officer, employee or agency of the city government in any official application
to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency, or to
commit perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city.
(Prior Code, § 135.08) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.09 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any
barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off
any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk, or other area.
(Prior Code, § 135.09) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.10 RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
   It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to:
   (A)   Resist, oppose, or obstruct the Chief of Police, any other police
officer, the Municipal Judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in
the discharge of his or her official duties;
   (B)   Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such
officer or employee from the discharge of his or her official duties; or
   (C)   Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or
indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such
officer or employee is in the discharge of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, § 135.10) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.11 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person receiving a citation for the violation
of any ordinance of the city or for the commission or omission of any act
prohibited by law, to fail to appear before the Municipal Judge at the time and
place as directed in the citation.
(Prior Code, § 135.11) (Ord. 2003-476, passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure to appear, as per §
135.11, shall constitute a separate violation which shall be punishable
pursuant to §§
10.99 and
32.29.
(Prior Code, § 135.11) (Ord. 2003-476, passed 5-20-2003)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   MANUFACTURED HOUSING
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
153.   CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS; EASEMENTS
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Codes Adopted
   
150.01   International Building Code
   
150.02   Plumbing Code; regulations
   
150.03   Electrical Code
   
150.04   International Fire Code
   
150.05   Housing Code
Building Permit Procedures
   
150.20   Building permits required; paving, excavating; mobile home permits
also required
   
150.21   Applications; fee
   
150.22   Administration of subchapter
   
150.23   Examination and review of permit
   
150.24   Flood hazard area review
   
150.25   Building Official; responsibilities
   
150.26   Board of Appeals
Dilapidated Buildings
   
150.40   Dilapidated and unsecured buildings unlawful
   
150.41   Definitions
   
150.42   Report of dilapidated and unsecured buildings
   
150.43   Receipt of report; hearing and notice
   
150.44   Council action regarding dilapidated and unsecured buildings
   
150.45   Work done by employees or contract
   
150.46   Determination and assessment of costs
   
150.47   Lien on the property; civil remedy
   
150.48   Service of notice
   
150.49   Enforcement of personal liability
   
150.50   Municipal governing board duties
 
   
150.99   Penalty
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.01 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   The city hereby adopts, by reference, the International Building Code as the
Building Code for the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.01) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt Building Code by reference, see Charter §
18
Statutory reference:
   Building codes, adoption by cities, see 11 O.S. § 14-107, 74 O.S. § 324.8
§ 150.02 PLUMBING CODE; REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts, by reference, the International Plumbing Code as the
Plumbing Code for the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.02) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
Cross-reference:
   City waterworks, see
Chapter 51
   Sewers and sewage disposal, see
Chapter 52
Statutory reference:
   Duty of city to prescribe plumbing regulations, see 59 O.S. § 1015
   Plumbing and plumbing contractors, see 59 O.S. §§ 1001 et seq.
§ 150.03 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The city hereby adopts, by reference, the International Electrical Code as
the Electrical Code for the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.03) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.04 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The city hereby adopts, by reference, the International Fire Code as the
Fire Code for the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.04) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.05 HOUSING CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code known as the
Southern Standard Housing Code, recommended by the Southern Building Code
Congress, being particularly the latest edition thereof, of which at least one
copy has been and is now filed in the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein.
   (C)   The provisions of the Housing Code shall be controlling on all
dwellings and premises within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.40) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
150.99
Charter reference:
   Authority of Council to adopt codes and standards by reference, see Charter
§
18
BUILDING PERMIT PROCEDURES
§ 150.20 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCAVATING; MOBILE HOME PERMITS ALSO
REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall erect, enlarge, construct, relocate, substantially
improve, place, alter, move, or demolish any building, structure, mobile or
modular home, or other construction without first obtaining a separate building
permit for each such building or structure from the Building Official.
   (B)   No human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, shall be initiated until a
separate building permit has been obtained for each such operation
from the Building Official.
   (C)   No mobile or modular home shall be placed on improved or unimproved
real estate without first obtaining a separate building permit for each mobile
home from the Building Official.
   (D)   Ordinary repairs and maintenance of buildings and/or structures that
maintain the property in the original state, may be made without obtaining a
building permit unless the work is performed by a contractor. Contractors are
required to obtain a building permit for each project. Any and all capital
improvements that increase the value of the property will require a building
permit.
(Prior Code, § 150.20) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.21 APPLICATIONS; FEE.
   (A)   All applications for building permits shall be signed and in writing,
upon an official blank form supplied by the City Clerk or the Building
Official, and shall be submitted to either of the officials, along with the
required fee.
   (B)   Building permit fees shall be as determined by the City Council by
motion or resolution.
   (C)   Applications for building permits shall contain all applicable
information required on the building permit form, and shall be accompanied by
drawings of the proposed work (drawn to scale), showing floor plans, structural
details, computations, and such additional information as may be required of
the applicant by the Building Official, the City Council or city’s code of
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.21) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.22 ADMINISTRATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The Building Official of the city shall be responsible for the
administration of the building permit process within the community; however,
building permit application forms may be obtained from and submitted to the
office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 150.22) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.23 EXAMINATION AND REVIEW OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete building permit application and the
required fee, the Building Official shall immediately proceed with his or her
examination and review.
   (B)   The Building Official shall review the application to ensure that:
      (1)   The involved land is properly zoned for the proposed use;
      (2)   Applicable zoning district provisions (including floodway and
floodway fringe district provisions) have been met;
      (3)   Roadway access is available;
      (4)   Adequate and sanitary provisions have been made for utilities;
      (5)   All easements provided in the recorded plat, if any, are not
encroached upon; and
      (6)   All other floodplain regulations, if applicable, have been met and
the required information provided.
(Prior Code, § 150.23) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.24 FLOOD HAZARD AREA REVIEW.
   Building permit applications for development, location, demolition,
alteration, and the like, within a delineated flood hazard area, as shown on
the community’s official flood hazard boundary map, which is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out fully herein, shall be reviewed by the Building
Official to ensure that all of the following requirements are met.
   (A)   All building sites shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvement (including the placement of pre-fabricated buildings
and mobile homes) shall:
      (1)   Be designed, modified, and/or adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; all mobile homes to
be placed within Zone A on a community’s flood hazard boundary map shall be
anchored by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors; over-the-
top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with
two additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than
50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; frame ties shall be
provided at each corner of the home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side; all components of the anchoring system shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and additions to the mobile home
shall be similarly anchored;
      (2)   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage; and
      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages.
   (B)   All new and replacement water supply systems within flood-prone areas
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems.
   (C)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (D)   Onsite waste disposal systems within flood-prone areas shall be
located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during
flooding.
   (E)   The Building Official shall utilize all available 100-year flood
elevation data to review building permit applications, and shall require that:
      (1)   All new construction or substantial improvement of residential
structures within the flood hazard area shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the 100-year flood; and
      (2)   All new construction or substantial improvement of nonresidential
structures within the flood hazard area, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the 100-year flood.
(Prior Code, § 150.24) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.25 BUILDING OFFICIAL; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Building Official shall have the following additional responsibilities
in the review of building permit applications for development, location,
demolition, alteration, and the like, within a delineated flood hazard area.
   (A)   Permit applications shall be reviewed to ensure that all necessary
governmental agency permits required by state or federal law have been
obtained.
   (B)   In the case of permit applications for alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, the Building Official shall:
      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Flood Insurance
Coordinating Office prior to such work (and submit copies of such notification
to the Federal Flood Insurance Administrator); and
      (2)   Obtain written assurances from-the permit applicant that the flood-
carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse
will be maintained.
   (C)   For the purpose of determining flood insurance risk premium rates, the
Building Official shall maintain records of:
      (1)   The elevation of the lowest habitable floor of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structures contain a
basement; and
      (2)   Floodproofing certificates (including the specific elevation to
which the structure is floodproof).
(Prior Code, § 150.25) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.26 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Housing Appeals, which shall
consist of five members appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the
City Council. Of the initial appointments, one member shall be appointed to
serve one year, two members to serve two years, and two members to serve three
years.
   (B)   The Board of Housing Appeals shall act by majority vote of the members
present.
   (C)   Such Board shall have the power and be required to hold public
hearings in deciding appeals where it is alleged there is an error in law or
fact in any order or decision of the Building Official in the enforcement of
the Housing Code adopted by this chapter. Such Board shall perform such other
duties and functions as are prescribed in such Code.
(Prior Code, § 150.41) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
§ 150.40 DILAPIDATED AND UNSECURED BUILDINGS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of land situated
wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to allow any building
or structure thereon to become dilapidated or unsecured as defined in 11 O.S.
§§ 22-112 and 22-112.1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.55) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
150.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to order demolition of dilapidated buildings, see 11 O.S. § 22-112
   To require boarding up of dangerous structures where necessary, see 11 O.S.
§ 22-112.1
§ 150.41 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the terms DILAPIDATED BUILDING, OWNER, BOARDING
AND SECURING, BOARDED AND SECURED, and UNSECURED BUILDING shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in 11 O.S. §§ 22-112 and 22-112.l, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.56) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.42 REPORT OF DILAPIDATED AND UNSECURED BUILDINGS.
   Any officer or employee of the city who discovers a dilapidated or unsecured
building upon any premises within the city shall report the condition to the
City Manager if, as a result of the dilapidated
or unsecured building, the premises appear to be:
   (A)   Dilapidated within the meaning of 11 O.S. § 22-112, as amended; or
   (B)   Unsecured within the meaning of 11 O.S. § 22-112.1.
(Prior Code, § 150.57) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.43 RECEIPT OF REPORT; HEARING AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon receiving the report provided for in this chapter, or upon
receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source, the City Manager
shall place the matter upon the agenda of the City Council for hearing and
consideration at an appropriate date which will permit the giving of the
notices prescribed by state law.
   (B) All notices and procedures shall be in accordance with 11 O.S. §§ 22-112
and 22-112. 1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.58) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.44 COUNCIL ACTION REGARDING DILAPIDATED AND UNSECURED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   If the Council determines that the condition of the building
constitutes a detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefitted
by the removal of such conditions, the Council may cause the dilapidated
building to be torn down and removed in accordance with the procedures in 11
O.S. § 22-112, as amended.
   (B)   Whether or not the Council declares a building to be dilapidated, if
it determines that the building should be boarded and secured, the Council may
order the building boarded and secured in accordance with 11 O.S. § 22-112.1,
as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.59) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.45 WORK DONE BY EMPLOYEES OR CONTRACT.
   The work ordered to be performed under this chapter may be done by the
employees of this city under supervision of the City Manager or it may be let
by contract in accordance with 11 O.S. §§ 22-112 and 22-112.1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.60) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.46 DETERMINATION AND ASSESSMENTS OF COSTS.
   Upon the completion of the work ordered to be performed under this chapter,
the costs thereof shall be determined, assessed, and collected in accordance
with 11 O.S. §§ 22-112 and 22-112.1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.61) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.47 LIEN ON THE PROPERTY; CIVIL REMEDY.
   Upon a building being declared dilapidated and in need of being torn down
and removed, the city shall obtain a lien against the property in accordance
with 11 O.S. § 22-112, as amended, and if the building is to be boarded up and
secured, the city shall obtain a lien in accordance with 11 O.S. § 22-112.1, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.62) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.48 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   The service of all notices prescribed by this chapter shall be in accordance
with 11 O.S. §§ 22-112 and 22-112.1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.63) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.49 ENFORCEMENT OF PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   In addition to the city’s right to establish a lien to be collected through
the County Treasurer, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of
the amount owing and interest thereon in accordance with 11 O.S. §§ 22-112 and
22-112.1, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 150.64) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 150.50 MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BOARD DUTIES.
   The City Council may designate an administrative officer or administrative
body to carry out the duties of the Municipal Governing Board as specified in §
150.44. The property owner or mortgage holder may appeal to the City Council
from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body. Such
appeal must be by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
ten days after the administrative order is rendered.
(Prior Code, § 150.65) (Ord. 2022-577, passed 5-3-2022)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see 11 O.S. § 22-112.1(C)(8)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, causes, orders,
directs, aids, advises, or assists in any manner, in the violation of §§
150.20 through
150.25 shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall engage in any activity for
which a license, permit, certificate, or registration is required by this
chapter, without having a valid license, permit, certificate or registration as
required, or who shall fail to do anything as required by any code adopted by §
150.05 or by this chapter, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this
chapter, or of any code adopted by this chapter, or who shall violate any
lawful regulation or order made by any of the officers provided for in this
chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99. No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this chapter shall interfere with
the right of the city also to apply to the proper courts of the state for a
mandamus, an injunction, or other appropriate action against such person, firm,
or corporation.
   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
§§
150.40 through
150.50, including, without limitation, §
150.40, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
   (E)   All violations of the building code, zoning ordinances and building
permit procedures (Chapters
150 and
155): $100 fine for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 150.99) (Ord. 2019-561, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 592, passed 5-6-
2025)
CHAPTER 151: MANUFACTURED HOUSING
Section
   
151.01   Fees
   
151.02   Purpose
   
151.03   Policy
   
151.04   Regulations exclusive
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Residential use of mobile homes
   
151.07   Commercial use of mobile homes
   
151.08   Industrial use of mobile homes
   
151.09   Occupancy
   
151.10   Denial of permit; hearing
   
151.11   Violations; notice; suspension of permit
   
151.12   Appeal from denial of permit or license
   
151.13   Order following hearing
   
151.14   Placement requirements
   
151.15   Setbacks and clearances
   
151.16   Skirting
   
151.17   Tie-downs
   
151.18   Parking
   
151.19   Plumbing, heating, and electrical standards
   
151.20   Inspections
   
151.21   Structural condition
   
151.22   Accessory structures and additions
   
151.23   Storage of manufactured housing
   
151.24   Conflict of ordinances
   
151.25   Motor homes, RVs, travel trailers
   
151.26   Parks
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 FEES.
   (A)   The issuance of any certificate of occupancy or location permit shall
require a fee sufficient to cover the cost of the required physical
inspections. The fee will be determined by the City Manager of the city. The
City Manager is empowered to formulate such policies, procedures, and
guidelines deemed necessary in relation to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy or permit for location of manufactured housing within the city
limits.
   (B)   Within this section, MANUFACTURED HOUSING shall include any mobile
home, trailer house, or other manufactured residential dwelling fabricated in
an offsite manufacturing facility, designed to be a permanent residence, but
which is still transportable, whether or not the dwelling was manufactured in
compliance with 42 U.S.C. § 5401, the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for manufactured
homes, mobile homes, and recreational vehicles within the city limits and for
the location, development, and maintenance of manufactured home parks, mixed
parks, and recreational vehicle (RV) parks.
   (B)   The regulations set forth in this chapter are designed to promote
stable neighborhoods, avoid traffic congestion, and encourage the proper flow
of traffic, to prevent health and safety hazards, and to encourage the
economical and orderly development and location of manufactured homes, RV
storage, and camper type (recreational) vehicles and trailers.
   (C)   In conjunction with the other code chapters and city ordinances, the
regulations in this chapter specify the minimum lot sizes for each housing unit
in a park, and also require that parks provide open space.
   (D)   Additionally, these regulations help alleviate substandard housing
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 151.02) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.03 POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter is declared to be the policy of the city to eliminate and
prevent health and safety hazards and to promote the economical and orderly
development and operating of manufactured home lots, manufactured home parks,
and recreational vehicle (RV) parks and by providing for the standards and
regulations necessary to accomplish these purposes.
   (B)   It is also the purpose of this chapter to regulate manufactured homes
in parks and on individually owned lots in order to provide safe and sanitary
living conditions for the manufactured home occupants and for the surrounding
land uses. The regulations set forth in this chapter are designed to provide
stable neighborhoods of compatible land uses which are environmentally healthy
and aesthetically pleasing places to live.
(Prior Code, § 151.03) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.04 REGULATIONS EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter shall be used exclusively as the regulations governing
manufactured homes, manufactured home parks, and recreational trailer parks.
(Prior Code, § 151.04) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING LINE. A line usually fixed and parallel to the lot limit, beyond
which a dwelling unit or building cannot extend under the terms of city zoning
ordinances. It is the position on a lot or space behind which the dwelling unit
or building must be located (offsets).
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The city’s representative who is duly appointed to
enforce the municipal codes in and for the city.
   COMMUNITY/NEIGHBORHOOD SEWAGE SYSTEM. A community/neighborhood sewage system
shall mean any such system designed to be used by residents and visitors of the
community or neighborhood it serves. COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEMS within the city
are private systems, owned and maintained by a resident/owner for the benefit
of the community, neighborhood, or subdivision.
   DUMP STATION. A wastewater disposal facility, approved by the Department of
Environmental Quality (DEQ), or other regulating authority, into which
recreational vehicle (RV) wastewater is emptied and properly disposed.
   DWELLING UNIT. A manufactured home, recreational vehicle (RV), travel
trailer, or mobile home which is designed for permanent or occasional
residential purposes.
   HAULER WITH LIVING QUARTERS. Any vehicle or portable structure built on a
chassis and designed or used to transport motor sport RV type vehicles which
contain an area suitable for use as living quarters. These vehicles are also
known as TOY HAULERS.
   HEALTH OFFICIAL. The Code Enforcement Officer of the city(or an authorized
representative), or the authorized representative of the Cotton County Health
Department, the State Department of Health, or the Department of Environmental
Quality (DEQ).
   LIVESTOCK TRAILER WITH LIVING QUARTERS. Any vehicle or portable structure
built on a chassis and designed or used to transport livestock and which
contains an area suitable for use as living
quarters.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit constructed to be towed on its own
chassis and capable of connection to utilities for year-round occupancy
fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an offsite manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with
transport features removed, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in
compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. The term manufactured home park shall mean any tract
of land developed exclusively for manufactured housing units with three or more
mobile home or manufactured home spaces (lots) are located. Residents of a
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK do not usually own the lot or space whereon their
dwelling unit is sited. All current existing MOBILE HOME AND/OR MANUFACTURED
HOME PARKS located with the city are included in this definition.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE/LOT. The plot of ground within a manufactured home
park designated and designed for the accommodation of one manufactured homes or
a lot(s) approved and zoned R-2, Mixed Residential.
   MIXED USE PARK. A manufactured home and RV park designed to provide separate
areas with lots and spaces for use by permanent and temporary dwelling units.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure of vehicular portable design, designed or
manufactured for human occupancy, built on a chassis, designed to be moved from
one site to another, and to be used with or without a permanent foundation,
whether or not the wheels have been attached thereto or removed, and which was
built prior to the enacting of the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., or before June 15, 1976.
   MODULAR HOME. A factory fabricated, or offsite built house so constructed so
that it can be transported to a permanent location and assembled or set on a
foundation, but not built on a transport chassis. MODULAR HOMES may consist of
a single unit or multiple units and sub-structures that will be site assembled
into a single dwelling.
   MOTOR HOME. An RV that is self-propelled and is required to have a vehicle
license plate for operation on the highways.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILER. Any vehicle having the basic characteristics
of either a manufactured home or recreational vehicle (RV), but which is used
for purposes other than residential.
   PARK. Manufactured home parks, RV parks, and mixed use parks.
   PERSON. An individual, individuals, firm, association, corporation, joint
venture, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability
partnerships, or any combination of the above.
   PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOME. Manufactured homes that have previous owners or
those that are not currently occupied or owned by the original owner(s).
   PUBLIC WATER or SEWER SYSTEM. The water and sewer system operated by the
city for the benefit of the city residents and businesses.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) or MOTOR HOME or TRAVEL TRAILER. The terms
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) or MOTOR HOME or TRAVEL TRAILER are interchangeable
terms, and shall mean all vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation use, including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles (RV), travel
trailers, fifth wheels, tent camper trailers, pop-up campers, haulers with
living quarters, and motor homes.
   RV PARK. A tract of land that provides spaces for three or more recreational
vehicles (RVs), motor homes, or travel trailers, that are occupied for dwelling
or sleeping purposes on a temporary basis. The residents of an RV park usually
do not own the land whereon their dwelling unit is parked. The owner of the
park does not ordinarily own the RVs, motor homes, or travel trailers located
within the park.
   RV SPACE. The space within an RV park, or mixed park, specifically designed
and built for the accommodation of one RV, motor home, or travel trailer. All
such spaces must meet the minimum state standards for RV SPACES.
   WATER CONNECTION. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within a mobile home or trailer.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city as amended.
(Prior Code, § 151.05) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.06 RESIDENTIAL USE OF MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   The city shall allow the use, occupancy, or location of manufactured
homes only in areas zoned for mixed residential and such other areas as
approved by the City Council, provided that owners have
obtained the proper permits and inspection(s) as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Manufactured homes are designed as dwelling units for humans.
Consequently, when a manufactured home becomes uninhabitable for humans, it
will be removed from the city and properly disposed of. Temporarily vacant
manufactured homes may not be used for storage, animal shelter, warehouse,
shop, manufacturing, retail sales, restaurant, hotel/motel, or any other
purpose other than its original design and purpose. Existing manufactured homes
that are being used for storage will be allowed to remain as storage units.
Existing units may not be replaced at a location and shall be maintained by the
owner while being used for storage. Existing units that have become
deteriorated, have been damaged, or otherwise fall to ruin, shall be removed by
the owner and the lot cleaned.
(Prior Code, § 151.06) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 COMMERCIAL USE OF MOBILE HOMES.
   Builders, subdividers, exhibitors, and others who desire to use manufactured
homes temporarily at specific locations for field offices, demonstrations of
equipment, or exhibitions may do so only upon application by the owner for a
temporary license (permit). Other commercial uses shall not be allowed. The
license shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed six months. The city
can either issue the license or deny the application within 15 working days
from the date of application.
(Prior Code, § 151.07) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 INDUSTRIAL USE OF MOBILE HOMES.
   In order to help promote the development of industry in the city,
manufactured homes may be permitted and used as temporary office space or
laboratories not exceeding a period of 12 months or until new facilities or
expanded facilities are completed, whichever comes first. There will be no
charge for the permit and will apply to industries, retail businesses, and
others planning to locate in any industrial or business zoned district.
(Prior Code, § 151.08) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   All applications for permits and occupancy shall be made upon standard
forms provided by the city and shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Location and legal description of the manufactured home park, RV
park, or manufactured home lot;
      (3)   Complete plans and specifications of the proposed manufactured home
lot showing, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Area and dimensions of the tract of land;
         (b)   Number, location, and size spaces to be occupied;
         (c)   Location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
         (d)   Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and
sewage disposal; and
         (e)   Location and details of electrical systems and electrical
supply.
      (4)   Such further information as may be required by the City Manager,
Planning Commission, the Code Enforcement Officer, and other appropriate city
departments to enable them to determine if the
proposed lot for placement will comply with other codes.
   (B)   Prior to occupancy, the applicant shall cause to have certified such
completion as to plans; and the procedures for application and issuance of a
license shall be followed.
   (C)   A manufactured home may only be occupied after a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the city Code Enforcement Officer.
   (D)   Any manufactured home moved into the city must meet certain criteria.
The unit must be structurally sound, inhabitable, and not showing excessive
signs of deterioration or damage. All other requirements in this chapter
pertaining to set up and utility services shall be followed prior to issuance
of a certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   Public utilities shall be used for all occupied manufactured homes
where service is available. The use of bottled gasses for fuel is expressly
prohibited within the city limits unless in a designated RV park or campsite.
Generators shall not be used except in the case of a power outage and must not
back feed into the city’s power supply.
(Prior Code, § 151.09) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 DENIAL OF PERMIT; HEARING.
   Any person whose application for a permit has been denied may request a
hearing per the requirements of §
151.12.
(Prior Code, § 151.10) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.11 VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A) Whenever, upon inspection of any manufactured home or manufactured home
lot, a city official finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this chapter, he or she shall then give notice in
writing to the licensee that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period of time as specified in such notice, the permit or
license shall be suspended.
   (B)   The notice shall be in writing; include a statement of the reasons for
its issuance; allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it
requires; and be served upon the licensee or his or her agent. Such notice or
order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or his or
her agent when a copy of the notice has been sent by registered or certified
mail to his or her last-known address, or when he or she has been served with
such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state. The
notice shall also contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   At the end of such period of time, the official shall re-inspect
manufactured home or manufactured home lot assisted by such city departments as
may be required; and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected,
he or she shall immediately suspend the license and give notice in writing of
such suspension to the licensee. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, the
licensee shall cease operation, except the filing of an appeal for a hearing
shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension.
   (D)   Only in an emergency shall the filing of an appeal for a hearing not
operate as a stay of the notice and suspension. Whenever the city official
finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the
public health, he or she may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency, including the suspension of the
license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the enforcing agency shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, § 151.11) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.12 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF PERMIT OR LICENSE.
   Any person affected by the refusal of the city to issue a permit or license
under the provisions of this chapter or by any notice which has been issued in
connection with enforcement of any provision of this chapter by city official
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the City
Council, provided that such person shall file within ten calendar days after
the day the notice was served, in the office of the City Clerk, a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds thereof. Upon receipt of such petition, the City Clerk shall set a time
and place for such hearing before the City Council and shall give the
petitioner written notice of the hearing. At such hearing, the petitioner shall
be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such denial or notice
should be modified or withdrawn.
(Prior Code, § 151.12) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.13 ORDER FOLLOWING HEARING.
   After the hearing provided for in this code, the City Council shall make
findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue
an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the denial or the
notice. The determination by the City Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 151.13) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.14 PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Manufactured homes shall be placed upon an adequate foundation and use
anchoring facilities to secure the manufactured home against any accidental
movement per §
151.17.
   (B)   The section of the stand supporting the wheels of the manufactured
home may be built below the adjacent grade, thus lowering the mobile home, but
must maintain a level of 14 inches above grade.
(Prior Code, § 151.14) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.15 SETBACKS AND CLEARANCES.
   (A) The minimum setback and clearance requirements for manufactured homes or
trailers are the following.
      (1)   All manufactured homes or trailers, not located in parks, shall be
located at least 25 feet from the property boundary line abutting upon a public
street or highway and at least 15 feet from other boundary lines of the
development in which it is located.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between the stand and
the abutting internal drive, a common parking area, or other common areas.
      (3)   No manufactured home or trailer shall be located closer than 20
feet to any permanent building or other pre-existing structure.
      (4)   No manufactured home or trailer, located in a park, shall be
located closer than 20 feet from any other manufactured home or trailer, except
manufactured homes or trailers may be located no closer than ten feet when
placed rear side to rear side: no manufactured home or trailer shall be closer
than five feet to any space boundary line except where expressly approved by
the City Council upon the filing of a notice of appeal and hearing as set forth
in this chapter.
      (5)   The height of the manufactured home frame above ground elevation,
measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not be greater than three feet; for
travel trailers it shall not be greater than two feet.
   (B)   All manufactured homes wherever located shall abide by the setback and
clearance requirements of the city zoning ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 151.15) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.16 SKIRTING.
   (A) Fire-resistant skirting concealing the underside of the manufactured
home should be used on all manufactured homes. The skirting shall be of a
compatible material with the manufactured home structure, brick, stucco, cinder
block, or poured concrete.
   (B)   A hinged opening shall be provided for access to the underside of the
manufactured home.
(Prior Code, § 151.16) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.17 TIE-DOWNS.
   (A)   Each manufactured home owner shall ensure the stability of his or her
manufactured home with over-the-top tie-downs or a combination of over-the-top
tie-downs and frame ties anchored to cast-in-place concrete dead men eyelets
imbedded in concrete, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other approved
devices within seven days after placement. This requirement shall not include
manufactured homes on display for sale in a properly zoned manufactured home
sales lot. The number of tie-down straps or frame ties shall meet either of the
following requirements:
 
32 to 50     32 to 50     50 to 60     50 to 60     60 to 80 feet 60 to 80 feet
feet long;   feet long;   feet long;   feet long;   long; no. of  long; no. of
no. of frame no. of over- no. of frame no. of over- over-the-top  over-the-top
ties         the-top ties ties         the-top ties frame ties    ties
4            3            5            3            6             3
 
   (B)   Manufactured homes with factory-installed over-the-top tie-downs shall
be securely-anchored as recommended by the manufacturer. However, in no case
shall the factory over-the-top tie-downs be less than the above list
requirements.
   (C)   Trailers as defined and regulated by this chapter used for permanent
occupancy shall have a minimum of two over-the-top tie-downs.
(Prior Code, § 151.17) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.18 PARKING.
   (A)   Every manufactured home shall be required to have at least one off-
street parking space on the lot upon which the manufactured home is to be
located or as specified in the city zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Off-street parking shall be hard-surfaced with all-weather materials
allowed for drive construction.
(Prior Code, § 151.18) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.19 PLUMBING, HEATING, AND ELECTRICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   No manufactured home shall be permitted for placement and occupancy
unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant that it meets or can meet the
requirements of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Standards for
Mobile Homes, Article A119.1, or the requirements of any state-administered
code or city code ensuring equal or better construction and plumbing, heating,
and electrical installations.
   (B)   Additional minimum standards are detailed in the certificate of
occupancy inspection form.
(Prior Code, § 151.19) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.20 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The appropriate city officials are hereby authorized and directed to
make such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
   (B)   All construction, alteration, expansion, repair, or connection of all
utilities and lines on lots shall be inspected by the city, provided that no
annual inspection will be conducted on owner-occupied manufactured home lots.
(Prior Code, § 151.20) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.21 STRUCTURAL CONDITION.
   (A)   The applicant for each manufactured home to be placed in the city must
demonstrate that the manufactured home has or can meet the provisions of the
Standard for Mobile Homes, ANSI A119.1 or any state-administered code or city
code ensuring equal or better construction, plumbing, heating, or electrical
installation and the applicable provisions of this code and regulations. If the
manufactured home is found to be unfit for human occupancy and to be a
dangerous safety and health hazard, as judged by the City Manager, the Code
Enforcement Officer of the city, any city or county health officer, then in
such event the manufactured home shall not be allowed a permit and, if
occupied, shall be vacated and removed from the premises. It shall then not be
used for occupancy either on a temporary or a permanent basis in the city.
   (B)   No person shall join two manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, or
a combination thereof with a structure, or other like units or structures to
make a single dwelling unit. Porches and patios are permitted, provided the
owner obtains a building permit prior to construction.
   (C)   All manufactured homes must have runners, base pads, and other
adequate stabilization and shall be tied down and properly anchored in
accordance with §
151.17 of this chapter. Skirting shall be provided as required by the Oklahoma
Codes.
 
   (D)   All manufactured homes, whether located on a residential lot or in a
park, shall be attached to the sewer system of the city or to a DEQ approved
private sewer system. All sewer lines shall be buried below surface level at
required minimum depth under state building codes. Sewer lines may not cross or
run parallel to treated water lines unless the two are separated by at least
five feet.
(Prior Code, § 151.21) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.22 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND ADDITIONS.
   (A)   Accessory structures are dependent upon the manufactured home and
shall not be used as complete independent living units with permanent
provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation.
   (B)   All structural additions to manufactured homes other than those which
are built into the unit to trailer spaces, to manufactured home parks, to
trailer parks, or to manufactured home lots, estimated at more than $100 in
cost when completed shall be erected only after a building permit is obtained.
No permit shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies, awnings, or
antennas. No construction or addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile
home shall be permitted unless of the same general type of construction or
materials as the manufactured home affected. Such additions and accessory
structures shall conform to the applicable provisions of this code and to this
chapter. The building permit shall specify whether such structural addition may
remain permanently, must be removed when the manufactured home is removed, or
must be removed within a specified length of time after the manufactured home
is removed.
   (C)   Accessory structures shall not obstruct required opening for light and
ventilation of the manufactured home or trailer and shall not prevent
inspection of their equipment and utility connections.
(Prior Code, § 151.22) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.23 STORAGE OF MANUFACTURED HOUSING.
   Trailers, manufactured homes, mobile housing, and RVs shall not be salvaged,
scrapped, junked out, nor allowed to accumulate in residential areas nor
commercial areas of the city for which specific zoning and approval has not
been granted. Storage in such areas shall be allowed only upon proper
permitting of a facility designated as approved by the city for such purposes
and in such areas as shall have been designated for same by the appropriate
planning and zoning authorities for the city.
(Prior Code, § 151.23) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   In any circumstance where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance, the provision which, in
the judgment of the Health Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Planning Commission, establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety to the people shall prevail.
   (B)   In any circumstance where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance, which established a lower
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail and such other
provision is hereby declared to be repealed.
(Prior Code, § 151.24) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
§ 151.25 MOTOR HOMES, RVs, TRAVEL TRAILERS.
   Due to the number of residents that now own some type of RV, travel trailer,
or motor home, the City Council finds it necessary to establish the following
set of regulations to ensure that the parking, storage, and maintenance of
these vehicles is consistent with other established ordinances in the various
neighborhoods and that the regulations are consistent city wide.
   (A)   Parking.
      (1)   Motor homes, travel trailers, and other RVs are not designed, nor
intended by the manufacturer, to be occupied on a permanent basis. These
vehicles are intended for temporary housing while traveling and camping.
However, permanent residence shall be permitted on the same basis as
manufactured homes, provided all provisions of this chapter are followed.
      (2)   Motor homes, travel trailers, and other RVs shall be allowed to
park on the street near a residence, in the driveway forward of the front build
line for a period not to exceed 48 hours to facilitate loading, unloading, and
cleaning in preparation for a trip or when returning from a trip. Such parked
units may not impede traffic or block views of adjacent traffic.
      (3)   Motor homes, travel trailers, and other RVs shall not be parked
forward of the build line at any residence for any reason for a period
exceeding 48 hours. (Exception: An exception is granted for residents on a
corner lot. An RV parked parallel to the alley on a corner lot(s) may exceed
the build line of the residence where the home is turned facing the adjacent
street).
      (4)   Maintenance shall not be performed on any vehicle of this type
while parked in front of the build line.
      (5)   Parking shall be allowed in back yards and side yards, provided
such parking does not violate any subdivision regulations or covenants. Covered
parking shall only be allowed as approved in the zoning ordinances.
      (6)   Permanent connections to city utility services; water, sewer, and
electric shall be permitted provided the provisions of this chapter are
complied with and all permits have been obtained. Any vehicles found connected
in violation of this section shall be cause for service termination after
proper notice to cease and desist has been delivered to the resident. Temporary
connections will only be allowed in designated RV parks or mobile home parks
with RV spaces unless approved, in advance, on a individual basis by the City
Manager or his or her appointee.
      (7)   Individuals who persist in the connection of utility services to
these vehicles shall be cause for the city to have the vehicle towed and
impounded at the owner’s expense.
      (8)   Vehicles in this section may be used for an extended period as
construction offices, temporary commercial offices, labs, and for other
purposes, and may be connected to city utility services for the required period
of time necessary to facilitate the construction of permanent structures. Any
vehicle used under this provision, for periods exceeding more than six months
shall be approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Storage.
      (1)   Motor homes, travel trailers, and other RVs shall not be connected
to city utility services when stored at any location in the city limits. A
permit may be obtained from City Hall allowing for electrical connection to be
made to maintain a chargeable/rechargeable system that is built-in to the unit.
Permits will be at no cost, however, at no time can this unit be occupied while
stored at a residence.
      (2)   Vehicles in this section may be stored at a residence, provided
that they are behind the front build line and such storage complies with all
subdivision regulations and covenants.
      (3)   Stored vehicles in this section may not be positioned so as to
interfere with alleys or access to backyards, or in any other way impede
firefighting capabilities or restrict access of other residents.
      (4)   (a)   Stored vehicles in this section that are found in disrepair,
deteriorating due to age and/or weather damage, or have not been tagged shall
be deemed a nuisance.
         (b)   The owner will be notified to remediate the condition
immediately. Once notified, the city will work with the owner and establish a
time line for the remediation. Under no circumstances shall the remediation
exceed four months (120 days).
         (c)   If the owner fails to resolve the nuisance, the city will remove
the offending vehicle, and assure that it is properly disposed of, at the
owner’s expense.
      (5)   Offsite storage of motor homes, travel trailers, other RVs, boats,
miscellaneous equipment, and other mobile equipment and vehicles will be
allowed in areas designated and zoned for that purpose.
      (6)   Such storage sites will be located in zones designated as C-1 and/
or areas approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 151.25) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019; Ord. 2020-564, passed
1-16-2020) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.26 PARKS.
   This section shall articulate the policies, standards, and requirements for
locating and developing manufactured home parks, mixed use parks, and RV parks
within the city. The regulations set forth herein shall provide for stable
neighborhoods of compatible land uses which are environmentally healthy and
aesthetically pleasing places to live.
   (A)   Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
maintain, establish, or operate a manufactured home park, mixed use park, or RV
park (parks) within the corporate limits of the city, without applying for and
receiving a permit to develop such park. Applications for manufactured home
parks, RV parks, and mixed use parks shall be in compliance with all applicable
zoning ordinances.
   (B)   Building zones. Parks developed under this section shall only be
allowed in building zones designated R-2. If a developer desires to locate a
park in an otherwise designated area, the developer shall make application with
the Planning and Zoning Commission for the area to be re-zoned.
   (C)   City sewer services. All parks shall provide connection to city sewer
services or to an ODEQ approved private sewer system.
   (D)   City water system. All parks shall provide connection to the city
water system.
   (E)   Manufactured home parks.
      (1)   Manufactured home parks shall be designed so that home density does
not exceed eight homes per acre (Note: Determined by minimum 125 feet by 40
feet lot for a maximum singlewide home 80 feet by 18 feet plus offsets.) Parks
smaller, or larger, than one acre shall maintain the same ratio.
      (2)   All manufactured home parks must be located in areas zoned R-2,
Mixed Residential, as set forth in the zoning ordinances. Developers may
request other zoned areas be re-zoned per the zoning ordinances.
      (3)   Manufactured home parks shall be designed and laid out to assure
proper drainage from each lot/space and the complete park area.
      (4)   Homes in a park shall be at least 25 feet from the property
boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least 15 feet
from other boundary fines of the park in which it is located.
      (5)   The minimum lot size shall be sufficient to allow a minimum clear
space of 15 feet behind the home for utility services and fire access. Each
manufactured home shall not be closer to any adjacent manufactured home than 20
feet. Each such home shall have a driveway at least 12 feet wide, paved with
four inches of concrete or two and one half inches asphaltic concrete on a six-
inch compacted base.
      (6)   The height of the manufactured home frame above the existing ground
elevation, measured at 90º to the frame, shall not be greater than three feet.
      (7)   Each lot/space may have one outside storage building not to exceed
12 by 16 feet.
      (8)   Each lot/space may have a carport not more than 20 feet wide, and
such carport must be erected behind the front build line, and not closer than
five feet from the manufactured home. A carport erected beside the manufactured
home will increase the 20-foot minimum spacing by the carport width.
      (9)   Streets inside the park shall have a minimum width of 24 feet and
shall consist of a minimum of two and one-half inches of asphaltic concrete on
a six-inch compacted base or four inches of concrete on a six-inch compacted
base. Streets will display proper signage identifying named streets in the park
as assigned by the city.
      (10)   Each lot/space shall be assigned a street number to identify
street address of the manufactured home.
      (11)   Parks shall provide storm shelters adequate to protect all
residents of the parks. Shelters may be located at each lot/space or in common
areas accessible by all residents and visitors.
   (F)   RV parks.
      (1)   Designated RV parks shall provide temporary parking spaces for
motor homes, travel trailers, tents, and all other RV type vehicles. Permanent
occupancy is not permitted in RV parks.
      (2)   Parks so designed shall provide basic utility connections for
water, electric, and sewer.
      (3)   Sewer service shall be connected to city sewer mains where they are
available or connected to a private system rated for the largest number of
parking spaces in the park. Private systems shall comply with regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Health (OSDH) and the State Department
of Environmental Quality (ODEQ).
      (4)   Parks shall be constructed in compliance with all state and city
regulations, laws, ordinances, and codes.
      (5)   RV parks may contain common structures for offices, restrooms,
laundromats, convenience stores, and other facilities inherent to their
activities.
      (6)   RV parks shall only be located in areas zoned R-2, Mixed
Residential.
      (7)   Parks shall provide a minimum space of 30 feet by 60 feet for RV
vehicle parking. Smaller lots designed for tent camping may be 20 feet by 20
feet. Parks that provide tent spaces must also provide restroom facilities.
      (8)   Each parking space shall include one parking space for automobile
parking.
   (G)   Mixed use parks.
      (1)   Mixed use parks shall be segregated between manufactured homes and
RVs.
      (2)   RV sections of a mixed use park shall be arranged to ensure
adequate street access for RVs coming and going in the park.
      (3)   All of the standards for each park as shown above shall be met in
the development of the mixed use park.
   (H)   Modification(s) of parks.
      (1)   If additional land is purchased to expand an existing park, or if
an existing park is expanded or altered by adding hookups and/or lots, then the
manager/operator/owner of the park must comply with all city ordinances and
state building codes.
      (2)   If the park is permanently reduced in size by removal of hookups
and/or lots, the manager/operator/owner shall notify the Code Enforcement
Officer for the purpose of inspection to ensure removal of all products,
including utilities, sewage disposal system and by-products, and overall clean-
up and restoration of the premises complies with city codes.
      (3)   Every person holding or owning a park shall notify the City Clerk
in writing within three business days after having sold, transferred, given
away, or otherwise disposed of, any interest in or control of the park, and
provide the name and contact information of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such park.
(Prior Code, § 151.26) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in §
10.99. Each day’s failure to comply shall constitute a separate violation. Each
violation per day of an individual provision of this chapter shall be
considered a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate fine per
day. The imposition of any such fine shall not bar any other relief or
penalties otherwise applicable.
(Prior Code, § 151.99) (Ord. 2019-562, passed 9-3-2019)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Findings, purpose, methods
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   General provisions
   
152.04   Administration
   
152.05   Variance procedures
   
152.06   Fee schedule
   
152.07   Certification
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.20   General standards
   
152.21   Specific standards
   
152.22   Standards for subdivisions
   
152.23   Floodways
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, METHODS.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has in 82 O.S.
§§ 1601 through 1618, as amended, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City Council hereby adopts this chapter, to become effective
immediately.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation, which could result in loss of life and property, creates health and
safety hazards, may disrupt commerce and governmental services, and results in
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are primarily created by the cumulative effect
of backwater in the East Cache Creek watershed. The flooding from backwater
normally is the result of unusual rains in the upper Cache Creek watershed,
which causes an increase in lake levels at Lake Ellsworth and Lake Lawtonka.
During unusual rain events, the City of Lawton is required to open flood gates
at both lakes to assure the integrity of the lakes which, from time to time,
results in flooding downstream in the Walters area. Areas inside the city
limits are in the floodplain and have residential and nonresidential structures
that are either abandoned or still occupied and existed prior to floodplain
management practices by the state and the city. These structures were
inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in the floodplain;
      (6)   Providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in
such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
floodplain area.
   (D)   Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish these
purposes, this chapter shall use the following methods:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit construction and development in the floodplain
that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 152.01) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not
limited to, garages and storage sheds.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or 1% chance flood. Established as 977 feet above mean sea level.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BFE. Base flood elevation (977 feet above mean sea level).
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS. The Board established by the City Charter, Article 2,
§ 7, and appointed by the Council, to hear complaints and arguments relating to
city ordinances and recommend or deny variances to the City Council.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Floodplain Administrator
which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with
this chapter.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built, in the case of a building
in Zone A, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not
to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the
magnitude of the base flood, in the case of Zone A, ELEVATED BUILDING also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood
waters.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of this chapter.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FIRM. Flood insurance rate map.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. An official map of the city on which FEMA has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the city.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA for the city,
which contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as
well as the floodway width, section area, and mean velocity. (A study has not
been completed by FEMA.)
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. A person accredited by the OWRB and designated by
the City Council to administer and implement laws, ordinances, and regulations
relating to the management of the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source as shown on the FEMA flood insurance rate map for the
city.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS or FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS.
Zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose regulations and ordinances (such as floodplain,
grading and erosion control regulations and ordinances), this chapter, and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
ordinances, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose
of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within the city subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane
tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT BOARD. The Walters City Council.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. A FLOODWAY is located within areas of special flood hazard established
in § 152.03(B). A FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of flood waters that carry debris and potential projectiles.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on the city flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management ordinance adopted by the City Council and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of this chapter adopted by the City Council.
   OWRB. The Oklahoma Water Resources Board.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage,”
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the city to a person from the terms of these
regulations when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by these regulations.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Prior Code, § 152.02) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 152.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Lands to which these regulations apply. This chapter shall apply to
all areas of special flood hazard within the incorporated jurisdiction of the
city.
   (B)   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard are identified by FEMA in a flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) for the flood areas inside the city limits. FIRM maps and flood
boundaries may be amended from time to time by FEMA, or a successor agency.
Such revisions or new flood inundation map(s), are hereby adopted and declared
to be part of this chapter.
   (C)   Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain
development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered,
or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of these
regulations and other applicable city ordinances.
   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions; however, where this chapter and any other regulations, easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   (F)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter,
all provisions shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (G)   Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions,
greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by human-
made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on
the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 152.03) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 152.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Council will by
resolution designate the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement
the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations in C.F.R. Title 44 pertaining to floodplain
management.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. Duties
and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Becoming accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601
through 1618, as amended;
      (2)   Reviewing permit applications to determine whether the proposed
building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
      (3)   Reviewing, approving, or denying all applications for floodplain
development permits required by this chapter;
      (4)   Reviewing proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those local, federal, or state governmental agencies
from which prior approval are required;
      (5)   Making the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions);
      (6)   Notifying, in riverine situations, adjacent communities, and the
OWRB prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to FEMA;
      (7)   Assuring that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
      (8)   Shall require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the
base flood elevation on a FEMA elevation certificate, as well as other data as
required in order to administer the provisions of §§
152.20 through
152.23;
      (9)   When a floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) be permitted within Zone AE as delineated
on the city FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by
more than one foot at any point within Zone A in the city;
      (10)   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures
in the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and
manufactured homes have been substantially damaged, and enforce the substantial
improvement requirement;
      (11)   Maintaining a record of all actions involving an appeal from a
decision of the City Board of Adjustments; and
      (12)   Maintaining and holding open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Permit procedures.
      (1)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be
presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the
Administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn
to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and
         (b)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the
Floodplain Administrator or the City Floodplain Management Board shall be based
on all of the provisions of these regulations and the following relevant
factors:
         (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (b)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (c)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (d)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (e)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (f)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems;
         (g)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
         (h)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (i)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
         (j)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
for that area.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator or City Council, as applicable, may
approve certain development in Zone A delineated on the city’s FIRM which may
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot,
provided that the applicant for the development permit in that case first
complies with 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 152.04) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 152.05 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   The City Board of Adjustments may grant variances for uses which do
not satisfy the requirements of 82 O.S. §§ 1601 et seq., the State Floodplain
Management Act, or this chapter if the applicant for the variance presents
adequate proof that:
         (a)   Compliance with these regulations will result in an arbitrary
and unreasonable taking of property without sufficient benefit or advantage to
the people; and
         (b)   Satisfies the pertinent provisions of this section; however, no
variance shall be granted where the effect of the variance will be to permit
the continuance of a condition which unreasonably creates flooding hazards.
      (2)   Any variance so granted shall not be construed as to relieve any
person who receives it from any liability imposed by the State Floodplain
Management Act or by other laws of the state.
      (3)   In no case shall variances be effective for a period longer than 20
years.
      (4)   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the City
Board of Adjustments, accompanied by a filing fee in an amount to be set by the
City Council from time to time.
      (5)   (a)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided the relevant factors in §
152.04(C), and this section has been fully considered.
         (b)   As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance shall also increase.
      (6)   Any person seeking a variance to build a structure below the base
flood elevation will be issued a notice signed by the Chairperson of the City
Board of Adjustments which states that:
         (a)   The cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower than
the base flood elevation; and
         (b)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
      (7)   At such time as the City Board of Adjustments deems the petition
ready for notification to the public, the Board of Adjustments shall schedule a
hearing and direct the applicant to publish notice thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
      (8)   (a)   The City Board of Adjustments shall conduct the hearing and
make determinations in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
section.
         (b)   The Board of Adjustments shall exercise wide discretion in
weighing the equities involved and the advantages and disadvantages to the
applicant and to the public at large when determining whether the variance
shall be recommended to the City Council for approval.
      (9)   Variances shall only be recommended based upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations, or ordinances; and
         (d)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (10)   Upon consideration of the factors stated in this section and the
intent of this chapter, the Board of Adjustments may attach such conditions to
the recommendation of a variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes
and objectives stated in §
152.01(C).
      (11)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and a copy of any
variance recommended by the Board of Adjustments and shall be sent by the
Floodplain Administrator to the OWRB and FEMA within 15 days after the City
Council approves and issues the variance.
   (B)   Special provisions.
      (1)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of these regulations.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result
      (3)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent us, provided that:
         (a)   The criteria of divisions (A)(5), (A)(9), (B)(2), and (B)(3)
above are met; and
         (b)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Prior Code, § 152.05) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 152.06 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The following amounts are subject to change at the discretion of the City
Council from time to time.
   (A)   Floodplain development permit: $25.
   (B)   Construction permit: per ordinance.
   (C)   Request for variance: $25.
   (D)   Floodplain violation: $195 fine.
(Prior Code, § 152.06) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
§ 152.07 CERTIFICATION.
   It is hereby found and declared by the City Council that severe flooding has
occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within
the future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal
injury or death, and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction
of property within its jurisdiction; in order to effectively comply with
minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance Program, and
in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary
that this chapter become effective immediately.
(Prior Code, § 152.07) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.20 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 152.20) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.21 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are
required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A) is
satisfied (elevation certificate).
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two feet
above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect,
or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator
that the standard of this division (B) is satisfied.
   (C)   Enclosures.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
waters.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   All manufactured homes to be placed anywhere within the community
in flood Zone A on the city FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least
two feet above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored on a permanent foundation to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
      (2)   This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The manufactured home shall
be installed by a licensed installer according to state law, and compliance
herewith shall be certified in writing to the Floodplain Administrator by said
installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
Zone A on the city’s FIRM either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
152.04(C), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in division (D) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or its jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
   (F)   Accessory structure. Accessory structures to be placed on sites within
Zone A on the city’s FIRM shall comply with the following.
      (1)   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
      (2)   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage.
      (3)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living,
cooking, or restroom use.
      (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated two feet above the BFE and meet NEC and the Plumbing and Mechanical
Codes.
      (5)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters.
      (6)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential
and constructed with flood resistance materials.
      (7)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      (8)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
      (9)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE.
      (10)   The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to
adjacent and nearby structures.
(Prior Code, § 152.21) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.22 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   The applicant for a development permit for any subdivision located in
Zone A which is 51 or more lots or greater than five acres shall generate the
base flood elevation data for that subdivision.
   (B)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
   (C)   All subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Prior Code, § 152.22) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.23 FLOODWAYS.
   The following provisions shall apply to floodways.
   (A)   Encroachments, including, but not limited to, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited within the
adopted floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the city during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The City Floodplain Management Board may permit encroachments within
the adopted floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations,
provided that the applicant for the development permit complies with all of 44
C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Prior Code, § 152.23) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
   (B)   A structure or other development without the elevation certificate or
other certifications required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation
until such time as that documentation is provided.
   (C)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined for
each violation in an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time.
   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or the City
Attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 152.99) (Ord. 12-1692, passed 6-5-2012)
CHAPTER 153: CLOSING PUBLIC WAYS; EASEMENTS
Section
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Application
   
153.03   Fees
   
153.04   Investigation by manager
   
153.05   Determination of date and franchise holders
   
153.06   Notice
   
153.07   Costs and expenses
   
153.08   Passage of closing ordinance
   
153.09   Reopening
   
153.10   Rights of utilities
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLOSE. A legislative act of the governing body of the city or town
discontinuing the public use of a public way or easement without affecting
title to real property.
   EASEMENT. Rights in real property as set forth in 60 O.S. § 49.
   MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Walters, Oklahoma, or his or her
designated representative.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. The city, state, or federal government or any of their
agencies or political subdivision.
   PUBLIC WAY. A street, avenue, boulevard, alley, lane, or thoroughfare open
for public use.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Vacating plats and public ways, see 11 O.S. §§ 42-101 through 42-115
§ 153.02 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to have a public way or easement closed within the
corporate limits of the city shall:
   (A)   Submit a written application to the City Manager on a form prescribed
by the Manager and containing such information as prescribed therein;
   (B)   Submit an ownership list of all owners of record of property within
300 feet of that portion of the public way or easement to be closed. The
ownership list shall be taken from the current year’s tax rolls of the County
Treasurer;
   (C)   Submit an accurate description of the public way or easement sought to
be closed; and
   (D)   Submit a map which reflects the public way or easement sought to be
closed and the property lines for each owner appearing on the ownership list.
(Prior Code, § 153.02) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.03 FEES.
   All applicants, except in the case of public agency, shall submit with their
application a fee in an amount to be set by the City Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 153.03) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.04 INVESTIGATION BY MANAGER.
   (A)   After the application has been submitted along with all requested
information, the Manager shall make an investigation to determine the
desirability of closing such public way or easement.
   (B)   Upon completion of the investigation, the Manager shall make such
recommendations as he or she deems appropriate to the Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.04) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.05 DETERMINATION OF DATE AND FRANCHISE HOLDERS.
   If the Council determines that an ordinance closing a public way or easement
should be considered, it shall designate the date upon which such ordinance
shall be considered and determine those holders of a franchise and others
having a special right or privilege granted by ordinance or legislative
enactment to use the public way or easement.
(Prior Code, § 153.05) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.06 NOTICE.
   (A)   Not less than 30 days’ written notice shall be given prior to the
proposed enactment of an ordinance closing a public way or easement to those
property owners whose names appear on the ownership list and any holders of a
franchise and others determined by the Council to have a special right or
privilege granted by ordinance or legislative enactment to use the public way
or easement. The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the party
and will be deemed to have been given from the date it is mailed.
   (B)   Notice of the consideration of the proposed ordinance shall be given
by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city,
not less than ten days prior to the consideration of such ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 153.06) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.07 COSTS AND EXPENSES.
   In addition to the fee required in §
153.03, the applicant shall pay all costs and expenses related to the closing,
including, without limitation, all costs of publication and preparation and
mailing of notices incurred by the city. The Manager may require reimbursement
by the applicant prior to the matter being considered by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.07) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.08 PASSAGE OF CLOSING ORDINANCE.
   Upon consideration of an ordinance closing a public way or easement, the
Council may pass such ordinance in the same manner as other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 153.08) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.09 REOPENING.
   The city shall retain the absolute right to reopen a public way or easement
without expense to the municipality and may reopen by its own motion.
(Prior Code, § 153.09) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
§ 153.10 RIGHTS OF UTILITIES.
   The closing of a public way or easement shall not affect the right to
maintain, repair, reconstruct, operate, or remove utility, public service
corporation, or transmission company facilities of service therein, nor shall
such closing affect private ways existing by operation of law unless released
in writing executed by the owners thereof.
(Prior Code, § 153.10) (Ord. 418, passed 7-18-1989)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
154.01   Adoption
   
154.02   Approval of plats
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 ADOPTION.
   The subdivision regulations for the city, as prepared by the Association of
South Central Oklahoma Governments (ASCOG) and the City Planning Commission,
and as adopted by Ord. 416, on September 6, 1988, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference, along with any amendments thereto. A copy of
the subdivision regulations shall be on file in the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 154.01) (Ord. 416, passed 9-6-1988)
Statutory reference:
   Powers to adopt subdivision regulations, see 11 O.S. §§ 45-101 et seq.
§ 154.02 APPROVAL OF PLATS.
   Final approval for all subdivision plats or replats shall be obtained from
the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the adopted subdivision
regulations for the community.
(Prior Code, § 154.02) (Ord. 391, passed 3-7-1978) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, causes, orders, directs,
aids, advises, or assists in any manner in the violation of this chapter, or of
the city subdivision or floodplain regulations, or any code adopted herein,
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 154.99) (Ord. 391, passed 3-7-1978; Ord. 416, passed 9-6-1988)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
   
155.01   Adoption
   
155.02   Airport zoning
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 ADOPTION.
   The publication entitled a “Zoning Ordinance for the City of Walters,
Oklahoma,” prepared by the City Planning Commission, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference for the use of the city, and shall be in
effect within the corporate limits of the municipality from and after the
effective date of Ordinance 567.
(Prior Code, § 155.01) (Ord. 567, passed 5-5-2020) Penalty, see §
155.99
Statutory reference:
   State laws applicable to zoning, see 11 O.S. §§ 43-101, 44-101 and 45-101 et
seq.
§ 155.02 AIRPORT ZONING.
   The publication entitled “Ord. 2011-527, Walters Municipal Airport Zoning
Ordinance” is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference for the use
of the city the same as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 155.02) (Ord. 2011-527, passed 11-1-2011)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of the
zoning ordinance adopted by this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in any sum not to exceed $500 plus
court costs and fees in accordance with §
10.99, including amendments. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   All violations of the building code, zoning ordinances and building
permit procedures (Chapters
150 and
155): $100 fine for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 155.99) (Ord. 567, passed 5-5-2020; Ord. 592, passed 5-6-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   MISCELLANEOUS
      
IV.   STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
V.   ZONING MAP
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
375           7-3-1973    Annexing portion of Section 25
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexing portion of Section 24, Calfy Brothers
387           3-16-1976   Building Center, owners
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
395           8-15-1978   Annexing portion of Section 26, Heritage addition
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
397           3-4-1980    Annexing portion of Nicholson Subdivision
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Sell property known as Lincoln Park to Iona
398           4-21-1980   Waltermire
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annex portion of Section 19 for sewage treatment
402           4-7-1981    plant
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexing portion of Section 26, Walters Industrial
411           7-17-1984   Development, National Guard Armory, Carroll
                          Automotive and portion of Highway 5
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
417           9-6-1988    Annexing
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
91-422        6-11-1991   Annexing
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
94-433        2-15-1994   Annexing
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
94-435        3-1-1994    De-annexing
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
94-436        4-27-1994   Annexing
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
96-445        5-7-1996    Annexation
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
2002-469      7-16-2002   Annexing portion of Section 25
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
2007-498      7-3-2007    Annexing Kishketon Part 4
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexing a portion of Section 26 as described in the
2009-512      9-1-2009    ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexing a portion of Section 26 as described in the
2009-513      9-1-2009    ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexing a portion of Section 26 as described in the
2010-518      10-5-2010   ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
2011-526      10-4-2011   Annexation
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexes two tracts of land, one beginning near the
                          northeast corner of the northeast quarter, and the
2013-535      7-16-2013   other beginning near the northeast corner of the
                          northeast quarter
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table I)
                          Annexing a tract of land commonly known as Sultan
582           11-16-2023  Park, as described in the ordinance, permanently into
                          the city
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed  Description
                             Cable television; grantee is Rapid Acquisition
2006-495      12-19-2006     Co., LLC
                             (Prior Code, TSO Table II)
                            
TABLE III: MISCELLANEOUS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
373           8-1-1972    Accepting beneficial interest in trust
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
Res. 458      9-21-1976   Election proclamation amending sales tax ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
401           8-5-1980    Providing issuance of waterworks bonds
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for electric,
420           11-20-1990  sewer, and garbage
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for sewer and
2005-487      11-15-2005  water
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
2006-493      2-7-2006    Fixing rate to be charged by WPWA for garbage
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
2006-494      7-18-2006   Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for water
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for sewer,
2007-497      2-16-2007   garbage, electric service, and building permits
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Providing new fee structure for admission to and use
2008-501      5-20-2008   of the city swimming pool
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Providing new fee structure for copy and fax fees to
2008-502      6-3-2008    be charged when service provided by the city and the
                          public library
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for electric and
2009-509      8-4-2009    sewer services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for trash and
2009-510      8-4-2009    sanitation services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for trash and
2010-515      7-20-2010   sanitation, sewer, and water services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for trash and
2010-517      9-7-2010    sanitation services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for electric
2011-521      4-5-2011    service
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for trash and
2011-523      5-17-2011   sanitation, sewer, mercury vapor security lights, and
                          water services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for water
2015-547      10-20-2015  services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for special
2016-552      4-5-2016    electric service rate consumers of electricity
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for special
2016-553      9-20-2016   electric service rate consumers of electricity
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for sewer and
2017-554      3-7-2017    water services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for water
2020-569      6-2-2020    services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing the rates to be charged by WPWA for water
2020-570      6-2-2020    services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                          Fixing rates to be charged by WPWA for trash and
2020-571      8-4-2020    sanitation services
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table III)
                         
 
TABLE IV: STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
419           11-7-1989   Closing portion of two alleys
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
                          Closing utility easement of alley located in Block 1,
97-447        10-7-1997   Part 2, Kishketon Estates
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
                          Closing streets, avenues and easements in the tracts
2007-499      10-2-2007   of land as described in the ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
                          Closing Second Street north of Boston, located
2008-505      11-18-2008  between Lot 24 of Block 35 and Lot 17 of Block 36
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
                          Closing a portion of certain easements in Lot 13,
2011-525      9-20-2011   Block 3, Heritage addition, as described in the
                          ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table IV)
                         
 
TABLE V: ZONING MAP
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
377           11-20-1973  Interim zoning ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
382           5-7-1974    Dividing city into zones; zoning regulations
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
386           3-2-1976    Establish zoning specifications and map
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
390           9-20-1977   Adopting zoning ordinance
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
                          Changing zoning classification for part of Section 24
99-452        5-4-1999    from A-1 Agricultural to C-1 General Commercial
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
                          Changing zoning classification for part of Section 24
99-453        6-15-1999   from A-1 Agricultural to C-1 General Commercial
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V)
                          Changing zoning classification for Lots 3, 4, 5, and
99-454        6-15-1999   6 in Block 17 of Walter Heights Addition from R-
                          2 Residential to C-1 General Commercial
                          (Prior Code, TSO Table V )
                         
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Oklahoma Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OKLAHOMA STATUTES
 
O.S. Cite Code Section
O.S. Cite                     Code Section
2 O.S. 7-21 et seq.           111.02
2 O.S. 7-401 et seq.          111.02
11 O.S. 8-105                 30.023
11 O.S. 13-101 et seq.        30.001
11 O.S. 14-101 et seq.        Ch. 10
11 O.S. 14-107                150.01
11 O.S. 14-108                10.01
11 O.S. 14-109                10.01
11 O.S. 14-111                10.99
11 O.S. 16-112                33.005
11 O.S. 22-101 et seq.        Ch. 10
11 O.S. 22-108                133.15
11 O.S. 22-110                132.08
11 O.S. 22-111                93.025;
                              93.027
11 O.S. 22-112                150.40-
                              150.49
11 O.S. 22-112.1              150.40—
                              150.49
11 O.S. 22-112.1(C)(8)        150.50
11 O.S. 22-131                30.007
11 O.S. 26-104                94.043
11 O.S. 26-109                94.044
11 O.S. 27-101                32.01
11 O.S. 27-101 to 27-131      32.01
11 O.S. 27-102                32.01
11 O.S. 27-104                10.99
11 O.S. 27-119                10.99
11 O.S. 27-126                32.29
11 O.S. 29-201 to 29-205      31.20
11 O.S. 31-101 et seq.        94.016
11 O.S. 34-101 et seq.        31.45
11 O.S. 34-102                31.47
11 O.S. 42-101—42-115       153.01
11 O.S. 43-101                155.01
11 O.S. 44-101                155.01
                              31.01;
11 O.S. 45-101 et seq.        154.01;
                              155.01
11 O.S. 48-101 et seq.        30.070
11 O.S. 49-122                30.056
20 O.S. 1313.2—1313.3       32.31
20 O.S. 1313.2—1313.4       32.29
21 O.S.                       133.10
21 O.S. 1289.1 et seq.        132.05
21 O.S. 1704                  131.01
21 O.S. 1706                  131.01
21 O.S. 1290.1 et seq.        132.05
22 O.S. 979a                  32.29
22 O.S. 1115.1—1115.5       32.25
25 O.S. 301 et seq.           30.002
                              110.02;
37A 1-101 et seq.             110.11;
                              110.31;
                              133.02
37A O.S. 1-101—6-129        133.01;
                              133.02
37A O.S. 1-103                110.25
37A O.S. 1-101 et seq.        110.01;
                              110.25
37A O.S. 2-121                110.30
37A O.S. 3-125                110.28
37A O.S. 4-104                110.05;
                              110.26
37A O.S. 6-101                110.02;
                              110.29
37A O.S. 6-102                110.30
37A O.S. 6-120                110.29
37 O.S. 537.A.1               110.07
37 O.S. 537.A.2               110.09
37 O.S. 537.A.8               110.10
37 O.S. 538.E                 110.08
37 O.S. 554.1                 110.05
37A O.S. 6-101                75.25
42 O.S. 91                    94.001
47 O.S.                       93.050
47 O.S. 1-101 et seq.         70.04;
                              77.38
47 O.S. 1-101 to 1-186        70.03
47 O.S. 1-114A                70.03
47 O.S. 1-125                 70.03
47 O.S. 1-136.3               70.03
47 O.S. Article VI, Chapter 7 70.35
47 O.S. 4-310                 75.07
47 O.S. 6-101 to 6-117        75.19
47 O.S. 6-204                 70.34
47 O.S. 6-206                 70.34
47 O.S. 6-303                 75.19
47 O.S. 6-305                 75.21
47 O.S. 7-204                 70.35
47 O.S. 7-503                 70.35
47 O.S. 7-606                 70.35
47 O.S. 10-101 et seq.        70.04;
                              70.27
47 O.S. 11-104                70.20
47 O.S. 11-106                70.25;
                              70.26
47 O.S. 11-201 et seq.        71.01
47 O.S. 11-202                71.05
47 O.S. 11-203                71.06
47 O.S. 11-204                71.07;
                              75.43
47 O.S. 11-205                71.08
47 O.S. 11-206                71.09
47 O.S. 11-207                71.10
47 O.S. 11-301                75.02
47 O.S. 11-303                75.04
47 O.S. 11-304                75.03
47 O.S. 11-305                75.04
47 O.S. 11-307                75.08
47 O.S. 11-309                71.13
47 O.S. 11-401                75.39
47 O.S. 11-402                75.40
47 O.S. 11-403                75.48
47 O.S. 11-404                75.49
47 O.S. 11-405                70.26
47 O.S. 11-501 to 11-507      73.01
47 O.S. 11-601                74.20;
                              74.24
47 O.S. 11-604                74.25
47 O.S. 11-605                74.26
47 O.S. 11-606                74.27
47 O.S. 11-705                75.13
47 O.S. 11-801                74.03
47 O.S. 11-803                74.01
47 O.S. 11-805                77.37
47 O.S. 11-1003               76.10
47 O.S. 11-1004               76.22
47 O.S. 11-1102               75.16
                              77.25;
47 O.S. 11-1103               77.26;
                              77.36
47 O.S. 11-1105               75.31
47 O.S. 11-1108               75.09
47 O.S. 11-1110               93.039
47 O.S. 11-1201 to 11-1208    77.01
47 O.S. 12-201 et seq.        72.03
47 O.S. 12-218                70.26
47 O.S. 12-601—12-606       77.32
47 O.S. 12-608                77.31
                              77.27—
                              77.30;
47 O.S. 12-609                77.30;
                              77.33;
                              77.34
47 O.S. 13-102                72.06
47 O.S. 13-103                72.06
47 O.S. 14-101 et seq.        72.05
47 O.S. 14-107                75.38
47 O.S. 14-118                75.38
                              70.15;
                              71.01;
                              74.01;
                              75.11;
47 O.S. 15-102                75.28;
                              75.44;
                              75.46;
                              75.47;
                              76.03;
                              77.01
47 O.S. 15-104                71.02
47 O.S. 15-105                71.01
47 O.S. 15-106                71.01
47 O.S. 15-108                75.46
47 O.S. 15-112                76.25
47 O.S. 15-112(D)             76.99
47 O.S. 15-112(D)(4)          76.99
47 O.S. 15-112(D)(5)          76.99
47 O.S. 16-103                70.22
47 O.S. 1101 et seq.          76.25
47 O.S. 1112 et seq.          75.20
47 O.S. 1135.1 et seq.        76.25
50 O.S. 12                    93.004
50 O.S. 14                    93.005
50 O.S. 15                    93.005
50 O.S. 16                    93.006;
                              93.008
50 O.S. 17                    93.009
51 O.S.                       30.035
51 O.S. 121 et seq.           30.035
59 O.S. 1001 et seq.          150.02
59 O.S. 1015                  150.02
60 O.S. 49                    153.01
61 O.S. 101 et seq.           33.038
63 O.S. 1-1011                93.011
63 O.S. 1-1011 et seq.        111.01;
                              114.62
63 O.S. 1-1401 et seq.        114.62
63 O.S. 2-101                 133.04
63 O.S. 420A et seq.          114.03
63 O.S. 421A                  114.03
63 O.S. 421A                  114.03
68 O.S. 205                   32.097;
                              33.018
68 O.S. 217                   33.014;
                              33.093
68 O.S. 220                   33.015;
                              33.094
68 O.S. 227                   33.016;
                              33.095
68 O.S. 1352                  33.002
68 O.S. 1401                  33.100
68 O.S. 1408                  33.091
68 O.S. 1621 et seq.          132.03
68 O.S. 1622                  132.03
68 O.S. 1624                  132.03
68 O.S. 2601 et seq.          33.065
68 O.S. 2701                  33.001
68 O.S. 6001—               33.008
74 O.S. 324.8                 150.01
75 O.S. 309 to 317            32.10
82 O.S. 1601 et seq.          152.05
82 O.S. 1601—               152.01;
                              152.04
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
 
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
11.01              11.01
11.02              11.02
11.03              11.03
30.001             30.001
30.002             30.002
30.003             30.003
30.004             30.004
30.005             30.005
30.006             30.006
30.007             30.007
30.020             30.020
30.021             30.021
30.022             30.022
30.023             30.023
30.024             30.024
30.035             30.035
30.036             30.036
30.037             30.037
30.038             30.038
30.039             30.039
30.040             30.040
30.055             30.055
30.056             30.056
30.070             30.070
30.071             30.071
30.072             30.072
30.073             30.073
30.074             30.074
30.075             30.075
30.076             30.076
30.077             30.077
30.078             30.078
30.079             30.079
30.080             30.080
30.081             30.081
30.082             30.082
30.083             30.083
30.084             30.084
30.085             30.085
30.086             30.086
30.087             30.087
30.088             30.088
30.089             30.089
30.090             30.090
30.091             30.091
30.092             30.092
30.093             30.093
31.01              31.01
31.02              31.02
31.03              31.03
31.04              31.04
31.05              31.05
31.06              31.06
31.20              31.20
31.21              31.21
31.22              31.22
31.23              31.23
31.24              31.24
31.25              31.25
31.26              31.26
31.27              31.27
31.28              31.28
31.29              31.29
31.30              31.30
31.31              31.31
31.32              31.32
31.33              31.33
31.34              31.34
31.45              31.45
31.46              31.46
32.01              32.01
32.02              32.02
32.03              32.03
32.04              32.04
32.05              32.05
32.06              32.06
32.07              32.07
32.08              32.08
32.09              32.09
32.10              32.10
32.11              32.11
32.12              32.12
32.13              32.13
32.14              32.14
32.15              32.15
32.16              32.16
32.17              32.17
32.18              32.18
32.19              32.19
32.20              32.20
32.21              32.21
32.22              32.22
32.23              32.23
32.24              32.24
32.25              32.25
32.26              32.26
32.27              32.27
32.28              32.28
32.29              32.29
32.30              32.30
32.31              32.31
32.32              32.32
33.001             33.001
33.002             33.002
33.003             33.002
33.004             33.003
33.005             33.004
33.006             33.005
33.007             33.006
33.008             33.007
33.009             33.008
33.009             33.999
33.010             33.009
33.011             33.010
33.012             33.011
33.013             33.012
33.014             33.013
33.015             33.014
33.016             33.015
33.017             33.016
33.018             33.017;
                   33.999
33.019             33.018
33.020             33.019
33.021             33.020
33.035             33.035
33.036             33.036
33.037             33.037
33.038             33.038
33.039             33.039
33.050             33.050
33.051             33.051
33.065             33.065
33.066             33.066
33.067             33.067
33.068             33.068
33.069             33.069
33.070             33.070
33.085             33.085
33.086             33.086
33.087             33.087
33.088             33.088
33.089             33.089
33.090             33.090
33.091             33.091
33.092             33.092
33.093             33.093
33.094             33.094
33.095             33.095
33.096             33.096;
                   33.999
33.097             33.097
33.098             33.098
33.099             33.099
33.100             33.100
33.101             33.101
33.102             33.102
33.103             33.103
33.104             33.104
33.999             33.999
Ch. 50, Appendix A 50.45—
                   50.47
50.01              50.01
50.02              50.99
50.03              50.02
50.04              50.03
50.05              50.04
50.06              50.05
50.07              50.06
50.08              50.07
50.09              50.08
50.10              50.09
50.11              50.10
50.12              50.11
50.13              50.12
50.14              50.13
50.15              50.25—
                   50.34
50.99              50.99
51.01              51.01
51.02              51.02
51.03              51.03
51.04              51.04
51.05              51.05
51.06              51.06
51.07              51.07
51.08              51.08
51.09              51.09
51.10              51.10
51.11              51.11
51.99              51.99
52.01              52.01
52.02              52.02
52.03              52.03
52.04              52.04
53.01              53.01
53.02              53.02
53.03              53.03
54.01              54.01
54.02              54.02
54.03              54.03
54.04              54.04
54.05              54.05
54.06              54.06
54.07              54.07
54.99              54.99
70.01              70.01
70.02              70.02
70.03              70.03
70.04              70.04
70.15              74.20
70.16              74.21
70.17              74.22
70.18              74.23
70.19              74.24
70.20              74.25
70.21              74.26
70.22              74.27
70.23              74.28
70.35              73.01
70.36              73.02
70.37              73.03
70.38              73.04
70.39              73.05
70.40              73.06
70.41              73.07
70.42              73.08
70.43              73.09
70.44              73.10
70.99              70.99
71.01              70.15
71.02              70.16
71.03              70.17
71.04              70.18
71.05              70.19
71.06              70.20
71.07              70.21
71.08              70.22
71.09              70.23
71.10              70.24
71.11              70.25
71.12              70.26
71.13              70.27
71.13              70.99
71.14              70.28
71.15              70.29
71.16              70.30
71.17              70.31
71.18              70.32
71.19              70.33
71.20              70.34
71.21              70.35;
                   70.99
72.01              72.01
72.02              72.02
72.03              72.03
72.04              72.04
72.05              72.05
72.06              72.06
73.01              74.01
73.02              74.02
73.03              74.03
73.04              74.04
73.05              74.05
74.01              75.01
74.02              75.02
74.03              75.03
74.04              75.04
74.05              75.04
74.06              75.05
74.07              75.06
74.08              75.07
74.09              75.08
74.10              75.09
74.11              75.10
74.12              75.11
74.13              75.11
74.14              75.11
74.15              75.12
74.16              75.13
74.17              75.14
74.18              75.15
74.19              75.16
74.20              75.17
74.21              75.18
74.22              75.19
74.23              75.19
74.23              75.99
74.24              75.20
74.25              75.21
74.26              75.22;
                   75.99
74.27              75.23
74.28              75.24
74.29              75.25
74.30              75.25
74.31              75.26
74.32              75.27
74.33              75.28
74.34              75.29
74.35              75.30
74.36              75.31
74.37              75.32
74.38              75.33
74.39              75.34
74.40              75.35
74.41              75.36
74.42              75.37
74.43              75.38
74.44              75.39
74.45              75.40
74.46              75.41
74.47              75.42
74.48              75.43
74.49              75.44
74.50              75.45
74.51              75.46
74.52              75.47
74.53              75.48
74.54              75.49
74.55              75.50
74.56              75.51
74.57              75.52
74.58              75.53
74.59              75.54
74.60              75.55
74.61              75.56
74.62              75.57;
                   75.99
74.63              75.58;
                   75.99
74.99              75.99
75.01              71.01
75.02              71.02
75.03              71.03
75.04              71.04
75.05              71.05
75.06              71.06
75.07              71.07
75.08              71.08
75.09              71.09
75.10              71.10
75.11              71.11
75.12              71.11
75.13              71.12
75.14              71.13
76.01              76.01
76.02              76.02
76.03              76.03
76.04              76.04
76.05              76.05
76.06              76.06
76.07              76.06
76.08              76.07
76.09              76.08
76.10              76.09
76.11              76.10
76.12              76.11
76.13              76.12
76.14              76.13
76.15              76.14
76.16              76.15
76.17              76.16
76.18              76.17
76.19              76.18
76.20              76.19
76.21              76.20
76.22              76.21
76.23              76.22
76.24              76.23
76.25              76.24
76.26              76.25;
                   76.99
76.40              76.40
76.41              76.41
76.42              76.42
76.43              76.43
76.44              76.44
76.45              76.45
76.46              76.46
76.47              76.47
77.01              77.01
77.02              77.02
77.03              77.03
77.04              77.04
77.05              77.05
77.06              77.06
77.07              77.07
77.08              77.08
77.09              77.09
77.10              77.10
77.11              77.11
77.25              77.25
77.26              77.26
77.27              77.27
77.28              77.28
77.29              77.29
77.30              77.30
77.31              77.31
77.32              77.32
77.33              77.33
77.34              77.34
77.35              77.35
77.36              77.36
77.37              77.37
77.38              77.38
78.01              70.50
78.02              70.51
78.03              70.52
78.04              70.53
78.05              70.54
78.06              70.55
78.07              70.56
78.08              70.57
78.09              70.58
78.10              70.59
78.11              70.60
78.12              70.61
78.13              70.62
78.14              70.63
79.01              77.50
79.02              77.51
79.03              77.52
79.04              77.53
79.05              77.54
79.99              77.99
90.01              90.01
90.02              90.02
90.03              90.03
90.04              90.04
90.05              90.05
90.06              90.06
90.07              90.07
90.08              90.08
90.09              90.09
90.10              90.10
90.11              90.11
90.12              90.12
90.13              90.13
90.14              90.14
90.15              90.15
90.16              90.16
90.17              90.17
90.18              90.18
90.19              90.19
90.20              90.20
90.21              90.21
90.22              90.22
90.23              90.23
90.24              90.24
90.25              90.25
90.40              90.40
90.41              90.41
90.42              90.42
90.99              90.99
91.01              91.01
91.02              91.02
91.03              91.03
91.04              91.04
91.05              91.05
91.06              91.06
91.07              91.07
91.08              91.08
91.09              91.09
91.10              91.10;
                   91.99
91.11              91.11;
                   91.99
91.12              91.12
91.13              91.13
91.14              91.14;
                   91.99
91.99              91.99
92.01              92.01
92.02              92.02
92.03              92.03
92.04              92.04
92.05              92.05
92.06              92.06
92.07              92.07
92.08              92.08
92.09              92.09
92.99              92.99
93.001             93.001
93.002             93.002
93.003             93.003
93.004             93.004
93.005             93.005
93.006             93.006
93.007             93.007
93.008             93.008
93.009             93.009
93.010             93.010
93.011             93.011
93.012             93.012
93.013             93.013
93.025             93.025
93.026             93.026
93.027             93.027
93.028             93.028
93.029             93.029
93.030             93.030
93.031             93.031
93.032             93.032
93.033             93.033
93.034             93.034
93.035             93.035
93.0357            93.052
93.036             93.035
93.037             93.035
93.038             93.036
93.039             93.037
93.040             93.038
93.041             93.039
93.055             93.050
93.056             93.051
93.058             93.053
93.059             93.054
93.060             93.055
93.061             93.056
93.062             93.057
93.063             93.058
93.064             93.059
93.075             93.070
93.076             93.071
93.077             93.072
93.999             94.001
94.001             94.015
94.002             94.016
94.003             94.017
94.004             94.018
94.005             94.019
94.006             94.020
94.007             94.021
94.008             94.022
94.009             94.023
94.020             94.035
94.021             94.036
94.022             94.037
94.023             94.038
94.024             94.039
94.025             94.040
94.026             94.041
94.027             94.042
94.028             94.043
94.029             94.044
94.030             94.044
94.031             94.044
94.032             94.045
94.033             94.046
94.034             94.046
94.045             94.060
94.046             94.061
94.047             94.062
94.048             94.063
94.049             94.064
94.050             94.065
94.051             94.066
94.052             94.066
94.053             94.066
94.054             94.066
94.055             94.067
94.056             94.068
94.057             94.069
94.058             94.069
94.059             94.069
94.060             94.069
94.061             94.069
94.062             94.069
94.075             51.25
94.076             51.26
94.077             51.27
94.078             51.28
94.079             51.29
94.080             51.30
94.081             51.31
94.095             94.001
94.096             94.001
94.110             94.080
94.111             94.081
94.112             94.082
94.113             94.080
94.114             94.080
94.115             94.080
94.116             94.083
94.117             94.084;
                   94.999
94.130             94.095
94.131             94.096
94.132             94.097
94.133             94.999
94.145             94.004
94.146             94.004
94.147             94.004
94.160             94.002
94.170             94.003
94.999             94.999
95.01              95.01
95.01              95.99
95.02              95.02
95.03              95.03
95.04              95.04
95.05              95.05
95.06              95.06
95.07              95.07
95.08              95.08;
                   95.99
110.01             110.01
110.02             110.02
110.03             110.03
110.04             110.04
110.05             110.05
110.06             110.06
110.07             110.07
110.08             110.08
110.09             110.09
110.10             110.10
110.11             110.11
110.12             110.12
110.25             110.25
110.26             110.26
110.27             110.27
110.28             110.28
110.29             110.29
110.30             110.30
110.31             110.31
110.99             110.99
111.01             111.01;
                   111.99
111.02             111.02
111.03             111.03
111.04             111.04
112.01             112.01
112.02             112.02
112.03             112.03
112.04             112.04
112.05             112.05
112.06             112.06
112.07             112.07
112.08             112.08
112.09             112.09
112.10             112.10
112.11             112.11
112.12             112.12
112.13             112.13
112.14             112.14
112.15             112.15
112.16             112.16
112.17             112.17
112.18             112.18
112.19             112.19
112.20             112.20
112.99             112.99
113.01             113.01
114.01             114.01
114.02             114.02;
                   114.99
114.03             114.03
114.10             114.30
114.11             114.31
114.12             114.32
114.13             114.33
114.14             114.34
114.15             114.35
114.20             114.04
114.21             114.05
114.22             114.06
114.23             114.07
114.24             114.08
114.25             114.09
114.26             114.10
114.27             114.11
114.28             114.12
114.29             114.13
114.30             114.14
114.31             114.15
114.32             114.16
114.33             114.17
114.40             114.50
114.41             114.51
114.42             114.52
114.43             114.53
114.44             114.54
114.45             114.55
114.46             114.56
114.47             114.57
114.48             114.58
114.49             114.59
114.50             114.60
114.51             114.61
114.52             114.62
114.53             114.63
114.54             114.64
114.55             114.65
114.56             114.66
114.57             114.67;
                   114.99
114.58             114.68
114.99             114.99
130.01             130.01
130.02             130.02
131.01             131.01
131.02             131.02
131.03             131.03
131.04             131.04
131.05             131.05
131.06             131.06
131.07             131.07
131.08             131.08
131.09             131.09
131.10             131.10
131.11             131.11
131.12             131.12
131.13             131.13
131.14             131.14
131.15             131.15
132.01             132.01
132.02             132.02
132.03             132.03
132.04             132.04
132.05             132.05
132.06             132.06
132.07             132.07
132.08             132.08
133.01             133.01
133.02             133.02
133.03             133.03
133.04             133.04
133.05             133.05
133.06             133.06
133.07             133.07
133.08             133.08
133.09             133.09
133.10             133.10
133.11             133.10
133.12             133.11
133.13             133.12
133.14             133.13
133.15             133.14
133.16             133.15
133.17             133.16
133.18             133.17
133.19             133.18
133.20             133.19
134.01             134.01
135.01             135.01
135.02             135.02
135.03             135.03
135.04             135.04
135.05             135.05
135.06             135.06
135.07             135.07
135.08             135.08
135.09             135.09
135.10             135.10
135.11             135.11;
                   135.99
150.01             150.01
150.02             150.02
150.03             150.03
150.04             150.04
150.20             150.20
150.21             150.21
150.22             150.22
150.23             150.23
150.24             150.24
150.25             150.25
150.40             150.05
150.41             150.26
150.55             150.40
150.56             150.41
150.57             150.42
150.58             150.43
150.59             150.44
150.60             150.45
150.61             150.46
150.62             150.47
150.63             150.48
150.64             150.49
150.65             150.50
150.99             150.99
151.01             151.01
151.02             151.02
151.03             151.03
151.04             151.04
151.05             151.05
151.06             151.06
151.07             151.07
151.08             151.08
151.09             151.09
151.10             151.10
151.11             151.11
151.12             151.12
151.13             151.13
151.14             151.14
151.15             151.15
151.16             151.16
151.17             151.17
151.18             151.18
151.19             151.19
151.20             151.20
151.21             151.21
151.22             151.22
151.23             151.23
151.24             151.24
151.25             151.25
151.26             151.26
151.99             151.99
152.01             152.01
152.02             152.02
152.03             152.03
152.04             152.04
152.05             152.05
152.06             152.06
152.07             152.07
152.20             152.20
152.21             152.21
152.22             152.22
152.23             152.23
152.99             152.99
153.01             153.01
153.02             153.02
153.03             153.03
153.04             153.04
153.05             153.05
153.06             153.06
153.07             153.07
153.08             153.08
153.09             153.09
153.10             153.10
154.01             154.01
154.02             154.02
154.99             154.99
155.01             155.01
155.02             155.02
155.99             155.99
SO Table I         TSO Table I
SO Table II        TSO Table II
SO Table III       TSO Table III
SO Table IV        TSO Table IV
SO Table V         TSO Table V
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
458      9-21-1976   TSO Table III
65-655   1-16-1996   11.02
                     Charter §§
98-664   1-6-1998    32,
                     33
                     Charter §§
99-670   1-5-1999    34,
                     33
                     Charter §§
715      12-6-2005   6,
                     33
                     Charter §§
-        12-5-2006   6,
                     33,
                     34
                     Charter §§
779      7-20-2012   33-
                     33
785      11-6-2012   50.25-
                     50.34
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Sextion
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Sextion
373      8-1-1972    TSO Table III
375      7-3-1973    TSO Table I
                     33.001—
376      10-23-1973  33.020;
                     33.999
377      11-20-1973  TSO Table V
                     90.40—
378      2-5-1974    90.42;
                     90.99
382      5-7-1974    TSO Table V
                     90.02;
                     90.03;
                     90.06;
381      6-25-1974   90.07;
                     90.16—
                     90.25;
                     90.99
383      12-3-1974   30.056
386      3-2-1976    TSO Table V
387      3-16-1976   TSO Table I
388      7-21-1976   33.006;
                     33.007
                     91.01—
389      1-4-1977    91.14;
                     91.99
390      9-20-1977   TSO Table V
391      3-7-1978    154.02;
                     154.99
393      7-31-1978   32.20
395      8-15-1978   TSO Table I
397      3-4-1980    TSO Table I
398      4-21-1980   TSO Table I
399      5-27-1980   33.006;
                     33.007
400      5-27-1980   50.13
401      8-5-1980    TSO Table III
402      4-7-1981    TSO Table I
403      8-18-1981   94.015-
                     94.023
410      1-3-1983    70.35
411      7-17-1984   TSO Table I
413      3-5-1985    133.12
414      10-7-1986   90.05
416      9-6-1988    154.01;
                     154.99
417      9-6-1988    TSO Table I
418      7-18-1989   153.01—
                     153.10
419      11-7-1989   TSO Table IV
420      11-20-1990  TSO Table III
91-422   6-11-1991   TSO Table I
92-423   2-4-1992    94.001
96-424   1-19-1993   32.29;
                     32.31
                     91.01—
93-425   3-2-1993    91.14;
                     91.99
93-426   5-18-1993   33.065-
                     33.070
93-427   6-4-1993    54.01—
                     54.07
93-431   9-7-1993    133.12
94-433   2-15-1994   TSO Table I
94-434   3-1-1994    31.04
94-435   3-1-1994    TSO Table I
94-436   4-27-1994   TSO Table I
94-437   5-17-1994   94.035—
                     94.046
94-438   11-1-1994   132.08
442      7-18-1995   30.023
                     110.01—
95-443   11-21-1995  110.11;
                     110.25—
                     110.31
                     32.01;
                     32.04;
                     32.07;
                     32.08;
96-444   4-2-1996    32.11;
                     32.16;
                     32.22;
                     32.26;
                     32.29;
                     32.31
96-445   5-7-1996    TSO Table I
96-446   11-5-1996   94.035
97-447   10-7-1997   TSO Table IV
97-449   10-7-1997   90.05
97-450   10-7-1997   95.07
                     112.01—
98-451   11-17-1998  112.20;
                     112.99
99-453   6-15-1999   TSO Table V
99-454   6-15-1999   TSO Table V
99-455   9-21-1999   76.18
99-456   10-19-1999  31.05
99-457   12-7-1999   90.03
2000-459 4-18-2000   32.29
2000-460 6-6-2000    90.19
2000-461 6-6-2000    77.10
2000-462 6-29-2000   132.03
                     33.085—
2001-463 6-5-2001    33.104;
                     33.999
2001-468 12-18-2001  94.080—
                     94.082
2002-469 7-16-2002   TSO Table I
2002-472 9-3-2002    94.021
2002-473 9-17-2002   94.021
                     32.29;
2003-476 5-20-2003   135.11;
                     135.99
2003-475 6-3-2003    95.08;
                     95.99
                     94.095—
2003-480 11-14-2003  94.097;
                     94.999
2004-481 1-6-2004    77.38
2004-477 5-20-2004   91.99
                     94.080;
2004-482 6-18-2004   94.083;
                     94.999
                     90.02;
2004-483 7-6-2004    90.06;
                     90.99
2004-484 12-7-2004   32.27;
                     32.29
2005-485 5-17-2005   94.084;
                     94.999
2005-486 6-21-2005   94.004;
                     94.999
2005-487 11-15-2005  TSO Table III
2005-489 11-15-2005  76.25;
                     76.99
2005-490 12-6-2005   90.99
2006-493 2-7-2006    TSO Table III
2006-494 7-18-2006   TSO Table III
2006-495 12-19-2006  TSO Table II
                     90.02;
2007-496 1-2-2007    90.04;
                     90.06;
                     90.99
2007-497 2-16-2007   TSO Table III
2007-498 7-3-2007    TSO Table I
2007-499 10-2-2007   TSO Table IV
2008-501 5-20-2008   TSO Table III
2008-502 6-3-2008    TSO Table III
2008-503 8-19-2008   94.002
2008-504 9-16-2008   30.024
2008-505 11-18-2008  TSO Table IV
2008-506 11-18-2008  110.12
2008-507 12-16-2008  54.99
2009-508 8-4-2009    30.007
2009-509 8-4-2009    TSO Table III
2009-510 8-4-2009    TSO Table III
2009-511 8-4-2009    32.32
2009-512 9-1-2009    TSO Table I
2009-513 9-1-2009    TSO Table I
2009-514 11-17-2009  31.33
2010-515 7-20-2010   TSO Table III
2010-516 8-3-2010    30.005
2010-517 9-7-2010    TSO Table III
2010-518 10-5-2010   TSO Table I
2011-521 4-5-2011    TSO Table III
2011-522 4-19-2011   94.004
2011-523 5-17-2011   TSO Table III
                     94.080;
2011-524 9-6-2011    94.083;
                     94.999
2011-525 9-20-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-526 10-4-2011   TSO Table I
2011-527 11-1-2011   155.02
2011-529 12-20-2011  94.095
                     77.50—
2012-530 2-21-2012   77.54;
                     77.99
                     152.01—
                     152.07;
12-1692  6-5-2012    152.20—
                     152.23;
                     152.99
2012-533 11-6-2012   50.47
2013-534 4-16-2013   51.11;
                     51.99
2013-535 7-16-2013   TSO Table I
2013-536 9-3-2013    75.56;
                     75.99
2013-537 10-15-2013  53.03
2013-538 12-17-2013  53.03
2014-539 3-18-2014   31.34
2014-540 7-1-2014    11.02
2015-545 7-1-2014    11.03
2014-541 8-19-2014   50.11
2014-543 12-15-2014  53.03
2015-544 4-21-2015   94.003
2015-547 10-20-2015  TSO Table III
2015-548 12-1-2015   75.58;
                     75.99
2015-549 12-1-2015   75.57;
                     75.99
2015-550 12-15-2015  32.04
2015-551 12-15-2015  113.01
2016-552 4-5-2016    TSO Table III
2016-553 9-20-2016   TSO Table III
2017-554 3-7-2017    TSO Table III
556      9-18-2018   30.002
2019-559 7-2-2019    113.01
                     93.001—
                     93.013;
                     93.025—
                     93.039;
2019-560 9-3-2019    93.050—
                     93.059;
                     93.070—
                     93.072;
                     93.999
                     150.01—
                     150.05;
                     150.20—
2019-561 9-3-2019    150.26;
                     150.40—
                     150.50;
                     150.99
                     151.01—
2019-562 9-3-2019    151.26;
                     151.99
                     114.01—
                     114.17;
                     114.30—
2020-563 1-16-2020   114.35;
                     114.50—
                     114.68;
                     114.99
2020-565 2-4-2020    50.45;
                     50.46
567      5-5-2020    155.01;
                     155.99
568      5-5-2020    32.29
2020-566 5-5-2020    30.005
2020-569 6-2-2020    TSO Table III
2020-570 6-2-2020    TSO Table III
2020-571 8-4-2020    TSO Table III
2022-576 5-3-2022    132.03
2023-579 4-4-2023    31.47;
                     31.48
2023-580 4-4-2023    11.02;
                     11.03
2023-581 9-5-2023    113.01
582      11-16-2023  TSO Table I
2024-583 2-6-2024    32.32
2024-584 7-2-2024    Adopting Ordinance
586      8-6-2024    53.03
587      9-3-2024    131.07
588      11-5-2024   94.024
591      3-4-2025    31.49
                     93.999,
592      5-6-2025    150.99,
                     155.99
593      7-1-2025    50.29
                    
 
